
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/06365/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 October 2018                        |On 15 February 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                RAJAN CHALISE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, instructed by Paul John Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge B  Lloyd  promulgated  on  21  February  2018
    allowing Mr Chalise's appeal under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") against a decision  made
    on 31 March 2017 to revoke a residence card issued to him on 31  August
    2013.

 2. The respondent arrived in the United Kingdom with Entry Clearance as  a
    Tier 4 Student Migrant in September 2009. His leave  in  that  capacity
    was extended until 7 October 2013.

 3. In December 2010 the appellant met his former partner,  Ms  K,  an  EEA
    national who had been working in the United Kingdom since 5 July  2010,
    and they moved in  together  after  a  month  or  two.   In  2013,  the
    respondent applied for, and was on 31 October 2013 granted, a residence
    card as confirmation of his right of residence as the  extended  family
    member of an EEA national. That card was valid until 31 August 2018 and
    had been issued to him as the Secretary of  State  had  been  satisfied
    that he was in a durable  partnership  with  Ms  K  and  that  she  was
    exercising Treaty Rights.

 4. In September 2016, the respondent's relationship with Ms K broke  down,
    and she returned to France.

 5. On 31 March 2017 the Secretary of State revoked the residence  card  as
    the respondent had on 4 October 2016 informed him that the relationship
    with Ms K had broken down, and she was no longer living in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He concluded  that,  pursuant  to  reg  24  (3)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016, he entitled to revoke  the  residence  cards  as  the
    respondent had ceased to have a right to reside under those Regulations
    as Ms K was no longer living in the United Kingdom.  That concession by
    the respondent was made in context of  an  application  for  a  further
    residence card made on 4 October 2016.

 6. On appeal, the respondent accepted (as is recorded  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision at [10] ) that he could not meet  the  requirements
    under the EEA Regulations to obtain a retained right of residence,  but
    argued that he is entitled to confirmation of his  right  of  permanent
    residence on the basis that  this  was  provided  for  under  Directive
    2004/38/EC ("the Directive").

 7. The case as put to the First-tier Tribunal was that Ms K had  exercised
    Treaty Rights from 5 July 2010 to 2 September 2016; and, the respondent
    and Ms K had been living together for five years before it  broke  down
    in September 2016. It was argued  that  they  had  been  in  a  genuine
    relationship for over five years.

 8. It was submitted that once someone is recognised under the Directive as
    falling within article 3.2 and granted residence, then as can  be  seen
    from article 8, that person is to be treated as a family member and  on
    that basis, taking account also  of  recital  15,  the  respondent  had
    acquired permanent residence.

 9. The judge accepted those arguments and concluded  that  the  respondent
    was entitled to confirmation of his right of permanent residence.

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred as:

      a) On a proper construction of reg 7 (3) of the  EEA  Regulations  the
         respondent had become a family member only from the date  of  issue
         of the residence card on 31 August 2013, and;

      b) On that basis, could not have acquired 5 years continuous residence
         in accordance with the EEA  Regulations  as  the  relationship  had
         broken down; and,

      c) Time spent prior to the issue of a  residence  card  could  not  be
         taken into account.

11.  On  4  June  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies   granted
    permission.

    The Law

12. The EEA Regulations provide:

    7.-(1) In these Regulations, "family member" means, in  relation  to  a
    person ("A")-

         (a)A's spouse or civil partner;

         (b)A's direct descendants, or the direct descendants of A's  spouse
         or civil partner who are either-

             (i)aged under 21; or

             (ii)dependants of A, or of A's spouse or civil partner;

         (c) dependent direct relatives in A's ascending line, or in that of
         A's spouse or civil partner.

    (2) Where A is a student residing in the United Kingdom otherwise  than
    under regulation 13 (initial right of residence), a  person  is  not  a
    family member of A under paragraph (1)(b) or (c) unless-

         (a)in the case of paragraph (1)(b), the  person  is  the  dependent
         child of A or of A's spouse or civil partner; or

         (b)A also falls within one of the  other  categories  of  qualified
         person mentioned in regulation 6(1).

    (3) A person ("B") who is an extended family member and has been issued
    with an EEA family permit, a registration certificate  or  a  residence
    card must be treated as a family member of A, provided-

         (a)B continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation  8(2),  (3),
    (4) or (5); and

         (b)the EEA family permit,  registration  certificate  or  residence
    card remains in force.

    (4) A must be an EEA  national  unless  regulation  9  applies  (family
    members of British citizens)

13. The Directive provides in its recitals:

    (6)In order to maintain the unity of the family in a broader sense  and
    without prejudice to the prohibition of discrimination  on  grounds  of
    nationality, the situation of those persons who are not included in the
    definition of family members under this Directive, and who therefore do
    not enjoy an automatic right of entry and residence in the host  Member
    State, should be examined by the host Member State on the basis of  its
    own  national  legislation,  in  order  to  decide  whether  entry  and
    residence could be granted to such persons, taking  into  consideration
    their relationship with the Union citizen or any  other  circumstances,
    such as their financial or physical dependence on the Union citizen.

    (15) Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event  of  the
    death  of  the  Union  citizen,  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage   or
    termination of a registered partnership. With  due  regard  for  family
    life and human dignity, and in  certain  conditions  to  guard  against
    abuse, measures should therefore  be  taken  to  ensure  that  in  such
    circumstances family members already residing within the  territory  of
    the host Member State retain their right of residence exclusively on  a
    personal basis.

14. The Directive also provides:

    Article 2 definitions

    For the purposes of this directive...

    "Family member means

      a) The spouse

      b) The partner with whom the Union citizen has contracted a registered
         partnership, on the basis of the legislation of a Member State,  if
         the  legislation  of  the  host  Member  State  treats   registered
         partnerships as equivalent to marriage and in accordance  with  the
         conditions laid down in the relevant legislation of the host Member
         State

      c) The direct  descendants  who  are  under  the  age  of  21  or  are
         dependants and those of the spouse defined in point (b);

      d) dependent direct relatives in the ascending line and those  of  the
         spouse or partner as defined in point (b)


    Article 3 Beneficiaries


    1. This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who move to or
    reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a national,
    and to their family members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who
    accompany or join them.


    2. Without prejudice to any right to free movement and residence the
    persons concerned may have in their own right, the host Member State
    shall, in accordance with its national legislation, facilitate entry
    and residence for the following persons:


         (a)  any other family members, irrespective of their nationality,
    not falling
             under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in the
             country from which they have come, are dependants or members
             of the household of the Union citizen having the primary right
             of residence, or where serious health grounds strictly require
             the personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;
          b) the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
             relationship, duly attested.
    The host Member State shall undertake an extensive examination of the
    personal circumstances and shall justify any denial of entry or
    residence to these people




    Article 8: Administrative formalities for Union citizens


    1. Without prejudice to Article 5(5), for periods of  residence  longer
    than three months, the host Member State may require Union citizens  to
    register with the relevant authorities.
    ...
    5. For the registration certificate to be issued to family  members  of
    Union citizens, who are themselves Union citizens,  Member  States  may
    require the following documents to be presented:

    ...

      e) in cases falling under Article 3(2)(b), proof of the existence of a
         durable relationship with the Union citizen

    Art 10 issue of residence cards

    1. The right of residence of family members of a Union citizen who  are
    not nationals of a Member State shall be evidenced by the issuing of  a
    document called "Residence card of a family member of a Union  citizen"
    no later than six months  from  the  date  on  which  they  submit  the
    application. A certificate of application for the residence card  shall
    be issued immediately.

    2. For the residence card to be issued,  Member  States  shall  require
    presentation of the following documents:

    ...
    (f) in cases falling under Article 3(2)(b), proof of the existence of a
    durable relationship with the Union citizen.

15. The first issue which we must consider is whether,  as  the  respondent
    now submits, he meets reg. 15 (b) simply as he had lived in  accordance
    with the regulations, it not being necessary for him  to  have  been  a
    family member for the whole 5 year period.  Two points are made: first,
    that as it was accepted that the respondent was a family member from 31
    August 2013, he remains a family member until the issue  of  revocation
    is finally determined; and, he was in a relationship for longer than  a
    five-year period.

16. We can dispose of the first point easily.  Family member is defined  in
    reg 7 (3) is a status which lasts  only  for  as  long  as  the  person
    concerned continues to satisfy the conditions (in this  case)  in  reg.
    8(5) that he is the partner and in  a  durable  relationship  with  the
    relevant EEA national.  On the respondent's own evidence  that  is  not
    the case here.

17. The second point made is, in effect, that the grant of a residence card
    has the effect of permitting time spent in a durable relationship prior
    to the grant to be considered as time  spent  in  accordance  with  the
    regulations and so counts towards the acquisition of a permanent  right
    of residence.

18. In Macastena v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  1558,  Mr  Macastena  argued  that
    since the Secretary of State knew of his durable relationship with  his
    partner and has never contested that it existed for  some  time  before
    his marriage, that was sufficient for that durable relationship  to  be
    added to his time as a spouse for the purpose of acquiring a  permanent
    right of residence.  The Court of Appeal held [17]:

    That cannot be right. An extended family member can only be issued with
    a residence card on the basis of his durable relationship with  an  EEA
    national if  the  Secretary  of  State  has  undertaken  "an  extensive
    examination of the personal circumstances of the applicant".  That  has
    never happened and can only happen after an application for a residence
    card is made. Merely notifying the Secretary of State that one is in  a
    durable relationship is nowhere near enough either to  constitute  such
    extensive examination or to require such examination to be  undertaken.
    FTT Judge Clark was with respect wrong to think that time  spent  in  a
    durable relationship with Ms L could just be added to time spent as her
    spouse, provided that the First Tier Tribunal itself was satisfied that
    there had been a durable relationship before the marriage.

19. There is an important distinction to be  made  between  this  case  and
    Macastena:  here,  there  had  been  a  full  examination  of  all  the
    circumstances, and the Secretary of State had issued a residence  card.
    There is  merit  in  Mr  Sharma's  submission  that  Macastena  is  not
    authority for the Secretary of State's position that time  spent  in  a
    durable relationship prior to issue  of  a  residence  card  cannot  be
    counted towards acquisition of permanent residence.

20. Mr Sharma goes further and  submits  that  the  decision  endorses  his
    submission that time spent prior to the issue of a residence  card  can
    be taken into account relying on what Longmore LJ said at [15]:

    It may well be that, if Mr Macastena had applied for (and  received)  a
    residence card as an extended family  member  pursuant  to  regulations
    17(4) and (5) of the 2006 regulations  on  the  basis  of  his  durable
    relationship with Ms L, the time of  that  durable  relationship  could
    count towards an acquisition of permanent right of residence,  just  as
    time spent with a retained right of residence after his divorce did  so
    count. But Mr Macastena never made such an application.  All  that  had
    happened before he left for Kosovo to get married to Ms L was  that  he
    had entered the United Kingdom unlawfully on 3rd July 2005 and  he  had
    unlawfully remained here. It is true that Mr Macastena's solicitors, in
    the light of his wish to marry Ms L in August 2008, on 29th  July  2008
    notified the Secretary of State of his unlawful presence in the  United
    Kingdom and informed her that he  had  been  living  with  Ms  L  since
    September 2007. They did not, however, ask for a residence card on that
    basis; they asked and were granted a Visa Disclaimer form  so  that  Mr
    Macastena (with Ms L) could return to Kosovo and get married there.  It
    was only after the marriage that Mr Macastena was issued first with  an
    EEA Family Permit as Ms L's spouse (enabling him  to  re-enter  on  5th
    September 2008) and in due course with a residence card as  the  spouse
    (family member as per the 2006 regulations) of an EEA national  working
    in the United Kingdom.

21. This passage is obiter as it considers a hypothetical set of facts  but
    in any event, we do not accept that it assists Mr Sharma's  case  which
    relies  on  reading  the  reference  to  the  "time  of  that   durable
    relationship" as including time spent prior to the issue of a residence
    card.  The phrasing is ambiguous.

22. Paragraph [15] of Macastena must be seen in the context of the  factual
    matrix: Mr Macastena married his durable  partner  after  having  lived
    with her, and (as can be seen from paragraph [6], was only 5 days short
    of completing 5 years continuous residence as a spouse which would have
    allowed him enhanced protection under the EEA  Regulations.  Viewed  in
    that context, we consider that all the  judge  meant  was  that  had  a
    residence card as a durable partner been obtained, Mr  Macastena  would
    have obtained that benefit.  We do not  accept  that  Longmore  LJ  was
    indicating that a grant of a residence card which operates to  grant  a
    right of residence could operate to validate residence  prior  to  that
    date.

23. There is, in addition, a practical problem to such  an  interpretation:
    how far back would it go? A marriage or the birth  of  a  child  has  a
    readily identifiable date, but when a relationship became "durable"  is
    entirely fact-sensitive. Merely because it is possible to  say  that  a
    relationship is durable now does not mean  it  can  be  said  with  any
    degree of certainty when it became durable.

24. Accordingly, we conclude that the EEA Regulations do  not  permit  time
    spent in a durable partnership prior to a grant of a residence card  to
    be considered as residence in accordance with those regulations.

25. That is not however determinative. We accept that the  EEA  Regulations
    must be interpreted in the light of EU law; the right of appeal in this
    case is expressed  in  terms  of  whether  the  decision  breaches  the
    appellants rights under the EU Treaties. We therefore turn next to  the
    position under EU law.

26. It is established law that the usual canons of statutory interpretation
    used in English Law are not applicable  to  the  law  of  the  European
    Union. Equally, a court of a member state is not assessing  a  question
    of foreign law. How then is a court to interpret European Law?

27. As can be seen from CILFIT [1982] EUECJ 283/81 the  starting  point  is
    the usual meaning of the words. As the  CJEU  has  observed  in  BCE  v
    Germany [2005] ECR I-10595 (Case 220/03) at [20]:
      Although an interpretation of a provision of an Agreement 'in the
      light' of its legal context is possible in principle to resolve a
      drafting ambiguity, such an interpretation cannot have the result of
      depriving the clear and precise wording of that provision of all
      effectiveness.

    To do otherwise would  be  to  detract  from  the  principal  of  legal
    certainty.

28. This  principle  is  subject  to  two  observations  about  "clear  and
    precise":

29. EU Legislation is drafted  in  several  languages,  each  of  which  is
    equally authentic (CILFIT at [18]); and, even if the different language
    versions are in agreement, EU law uses terminology which is  particular
    to it, and legal concepts do not necessarily have the same  meaning  in
    EU law and in the law of the member states (CILFIT at [19]) as the  law
    of the European Union constitutes a new legal  order  of  international
    law (Van Gend end Loos [1963] ECR 3415 Case 26/62;

30. If there are differences in language, then the case  law  of  the  CJEU
    suggests that regard should be had to the intention of the  author  and
    in light of the objectives the measure sought to achieve - see  Stauder
    [1969] ECR 419 (case 29/69). In the case of the latter,  care  must  be
    taken to consider if the words in question have an  autonomous  meaning
    given to them in EU law.

31. If, however, the meaning is not clear and precise, regard must  be  had
    to the context and purpose of the legislation as in Elgafaji [2009] ECR
    I-92 (Case 465/07). Faced with an  apparent  contradiction  within  the
    terms of Article 15 (c), the CJEU interpreted it in such a  way  as  to
    give it an autonomous meaning which gave it  effect,  illustrating  the
    premise that the creator of the legislation is acting  rationally,  and
    that the provision was introduced to  have  effect  in  a  logical  and
    rational scheme. A provision of EU law cannot be redundant. It  follows
    that where several interpretations of a provision  are  possible,  that
    which best ensures effectiveness and consistency with  primary  EU  law
    should be followed.

32. It is evident also from the case law of the ECJ that in interpreting  a
    provision, regard may be had to the travaux pr�paratoires if  they  are
    available. This, in the context of immigration, can be seen in Teixeira
    [2010] ECR I-1107 at [58].

33.  The  method  of  interpretation  which  is  generally  seen  as   most
    characteristic of the ECJ is a purposive  or  "teleological"  approach.
    That is most easily seen in the interpretation of TFEU provisions  such
    as Article 21 in, for example, Zambrano and the extensive case  law  on
    the meaning of "worker" within Article 45  and  its  predecessors.  The
    teleological approach  to  interpretation  may,  as  the  circumstances
    require, give rise to three closely linked questions:

      a) Which interpretation, having had  regard  to  the  context  of  the
         provision, best preserves its effectiveness?


      b) If the provision is ambiguous, which interpretation  best  achieves
         the objective it pursues?


      c) What consequences would flow from each interpretation?


34. Teleological interpretation is, however, subject to  the  proviso  that
    exceptions are to be interpreted strictly (see Commission v UK [2010] I-
    03491 at [39]) although a broader interpretation may be adopted if that
    is required to give effect to the objectives.

35. It is to be noted also that the words which are to be construed are the
    operative part of the instrument in question; the preamble  may  be  an
    aid to the interpretation as in Toshiba Europa  GmBH  v  Katun  Germany
    GmBH [2001] ECR I-7945 where at  [36]  -[37]  recourse  was  had  to  a
    recital because a literal interpretation of Directive 84/450 as amended
    would result in a contradiction with Directive 89/104 but it is  not  a
    legal   Rule   -   see   Casa   Fleischhandel   v   Bundesantalte   fur
    Landwirtschaftliche Marktordnung [1989] ECR 2789  at  [31]:  "Whilst  a
    recital in  the  preamble  to  a  regulation  may  cast  light  on  the
    interpretation to be given  to  a  legal  rule,  it  cannot  in  itself
    constitute such a rule."

36. It follows that the approach to interpreting  a  provision  of  EU  law
    requires a systematic approach, looking at the words in the context  of
    the structure of EU law as a whole and asking:
      i) Is the meaning of the provision defined in EU Law?

     ii) If not, can the words be given their usual, ordinary meaning?

    iii) If not, what are the possible different interpretations?

     iv) What is the objective of the provision?

      v) Which interpretation best preserves its effectiveness?

     vi) Which interpretation best achieves the objective?

    vii) What are the consequences of the different interpretations?


37. The Directive draws a distinction between family members as defined  in
    Article 2 and beneficiaries identified in Article 3.  This  distinction
    between rights accruing to workers and their  spouses/children  on  the
    one hand, and other  members  of  the  family  whose  entry  is  to  be
    facilitated dates back to regulation 15/1961.

38. It is not in doubt that the respondent is a beneficiary within  article
    3.2 (b), nor is it in doubt that beneficiaries are to be  in  a  better
    position than other non-EEA nationals. Equally, the requirement is  not
    just to facilitate their entry but also their residence. That  much  is
    clear from Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755 at [34].

39. Mr Sharma submits that once a person's entry into and  residence  in  a
    member state has been facilitated, then they ought to be treated  as  a
    family member as defined within the Directive.  Mr Sharma's submissions
    have two strands: the inclusion of durable partners within  articles  8
    (f) and 10 (f) of the directive,  and  the  recitals  set  out  in  the
    preamble to the Directive. He argues also that as reg 7(3) of  the  EEA
    Regulations confers family member status on the respondent, that he  is
    entitled to be treated as a beneficiary. This adds little to his  case,
    given that the respondent clearly does so on an ordinary reading of the
    Directive.

40. The first point to be made is  that  article  2  which  defines  family
    members is clear; it does not include beneficiaries. It could have been
    defined to include those within article 3 (2)(a) or  (b)  but  it  does
    not. Article 3 maintains the distinction , setting out  at  sub-article
    3(1) those to whom the Directive applies which clearly  excludes  those
    falling within article 3(2). There are therefore no rights conferred on
    the respondent by the Directive - see Advocate-General Bobek's  opinion
    in Banger [2018] EUECJ C-89/17 at [51-[52]:
    51.  The Court has already clarified the content of the specific
    'facilitation regime' of Article 3(2) of the directive applicable to
    extended family members, in Rahman. (26) That judgment emphasised three
    dimensions of that regime: the absence of an automatic right of entry
    and residence (i); the obligation to enact a facilitation regime
    according to national law for which Member States enjoy a margin of
    discretion (ii); and the fact that that discretion is not unlimited
    (iii).
    52.      First, Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 does not confer a
    right of entry or residence on extended family members. There is a
    distinction made between family members as defined in Article 2(2) of
    the directive, who have a right of entry and residence, and those
    mentioned in Article 3(2), whose entry and residence 'has only to be
    facilitated'. (27) Hence, Directive 2004/38 does not oblige Member
    States to grant every application for entry or residence under
    Article 3(2). (28) Moreover, and in contrast to the rights to which EU
    citizens and the members of their families are entitled,
    Article 3(2)'is not sufficiently precise to enable an applicant for
    entry or residence to rely directly on that provision in order to
    invoke criteria which should in his view be applied when assessing his
    application'. (29)

41. We do not accept that either article 8(5)(f) or  article  10(2)(f)  are
    capable of showing that once an individual has succeeded  in  obtaining
    entry under the facilitation guaranteed by article 3(2), he or she then
    has the rights conferred by the Directive.  That would be  contrary  to
    the clear words and definitions set out in articles 2 and 3.  It  would
    also be contrary to the jurisprudence of the CJEU noted in A-G  Bobek's
    opinion. We consider that articles 8 and 10 are simply  administrative;
    they address how documentation is to be issued, not with the  conferral
    of rights.

42. Returning to the principles of interpretation set out at above,  we  do
    not consider that the recitals relied upon by the respondent assist him
    either.

43. To summarise, we conclude that the respondent is not  conferred  rights
    under the Directive and is unable to benefit from any rights under  it.
    Further, the rights retained under article 13 relate to the termination
    of a marriage, not a durable partnership.

44. That, however, is not the end of the case.  We pause to recall that the
    respondent's former partner was exercising Treaty Rights in  this  case
    pursuant to Article 21 TFEU. We recall also that within the category of
    beneficiaries, those in durable partnerships  are  treated  separately.
    Since Netherlands v Reed [1986] EUECJ C-59/85 a route has  existed  for
    the partners of EEA national  workers  to  gain  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the partners of UK national workers were entitled  to  leave
    to enter on that basis, and hence, that was a  social  advantage  which
    had to be applied to EEA workers.

45. Under domestic immigration law, the respondent would not have  a  right
    to remain in his current circumstances.  Further  it  is  difficult  to
    envisage how an EEA national would be  dissuaded  from  exercising  her
    freedom of movement to work in another member state if she thought that
    if she entered into a durable partnership with a  non-EEA  national  in
    that country and that partnership came to an end, the non-EEA  national
    would not be able to remain. That is not,  however,  to  say  that  the
    respondent did not obtain a derived right  while  the  partnership  was
    subsisting.

46. The lead cases in O. and B. [2014] EUECJC-456/12, Coman [2018] EUECJ C-
    673/19 and Banger are concerned with entry and initial  residence.  The
    do not address the content of any rights, derived or  otherwise,  which
    may accrue to the non-EEA partner once that has been achieved.

47. The facts in all of these cases differ from this appeal in that the EEA
    national in question was returning to his home member state. That is an
    action which falls outside the scope of EU law; rights for  family  and
    partners of such persons could only therefore be derived rights.

48. It is argued for the respondent that the Directive should  be  read  so
    that the respondent is conferred the right he  seeks,  that  is  either
    permanent residence or the right to a retained right of  residence  and
    that this flows from the reasoning in Banger.

49. It is to be observed that the first question put to the CJEU in  Banger
    was this:

    '(1)      Do the principles contained in the [the judgment of  7 July
    1992, Singh (C-370/90, EU:C:1992:296)], operate  so  as  to  require  a
    Member State to issue or, alternatively, facilitate the provision of  a
    residence authorisation [emphasis added]  to  the  non-Union  unmarried
    partner of an EU citizen who, having exercised his [FEU]  Treaty  right
    of freedom of movement to work in a second Member State,  returns  with
    such partner to the Member State of his nationality?

50. The CJEU held in Banger at [30] to [35]:
    30   In that regard, it must be stated that  point  (b)  of  the  first
    subparagraph of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38 relates  specifically
    to the partner with whom the Union citizen has a  durable  relationship
    that is duly attested. That provision provides  that  the  host  Member
    State must, in accordance with  its  national  legislation,  facilitate
    entry and residence for that partner.
    31      According to the Court's case-law, Article 3(2) of  Directive
    2004/38 does not require the Member States to accord a right  of  entry
    and residence to third-country nationals envisaged in  that  provision,
    but imposes an obligation on those Member States to  confer  a  certain
    advantage on applications  submitted  by  the  third-country  nationals
    envisaged in that article, compared with  applications  for  entry  and
    residence of other nationals of third countries (see, to  that  effect,
    judgment  of  5 September   2012,   Rahman   and   Others,   C-83/11,
    EU:C:2012:519, paragraph 21).
    32      As the Advocate General observed in points 46 and 47  of  his
    Opinion, the case-law cited in paragraph 29 above is equally applicable
    as regards the partner with  whom  the  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
    relationship that is duly attested, within the meaning of point (b)  of
    the  first  subparagraph  of  Article  3(2)   of   Directive   2004/38.
    Consequently, a third-country national having such a relationship  with
    a Union citizen who has exercised his right of freedom of movement  and
    returns to the Member State of which he is national in order to  reside
    there, must not, when that Union citizen returns to that Member  State,
    be the subject of less favourable  treatment  than  that  provided  for
    under that directive for a  third-country  national  having  a  durable
    relationship that is duly attested with a Union citizen exercising  his
    right of freedom of movement in Member States other than that of  which
    he is a national.
    33      In  a  situation  such  as  that  in  question  in  the  main
    proceedings, Directive  2004/38,  including  point  (b)  of  the  first
    subparagraph of Article 3(2) thereof, must be  applied  by  analogy  as
    regards the conditions in which  the  entry  and  residence  of  third-
    country nationals envisaged by that directive must be facilitated.
    34      That conclusion cannot be called in  question  by  the  United
    Kingdom Government's argument according to which, in  paragraph 63  of
    the judgment of 12 March 2014, O. and B. (C-456/12, EU:C:2014:135), the
    grant of a derived right of residence in the Member State of origin was
    confined solely to third-country nationals who are a 'family member' as
    defined in Article 2(2) of Directive 2004/38. As the Advocate  General
    observed in point 35 of his Opinion, although  in  that  judgment  the
    Court held that a third-country national who does not have  the  status
    of a family member may not enjoy, in the host Member State,  a  derived
    right of residence under Directive 2004/38 or Article 21(1) TFEU, that
    judgment does not, however, exclude  the  obligation  for  that  Member
    State to facilitate the entry and  residence  of  such  a  national  in
    accordance with Article 3(2) of that directive.
    35      In the light of the foregoing considerations, the answer to the
    first  and  second  questions  is  that  Article 21(1)  TFEU  must  be
    interpreted as requiring the Member State of which a Union citizen is a
    national to facilitate the provision of a  residence  authorisation  to
    the unregistered partner, a third-country national with whom that Union
    citizen has a durable relationship that is  duly  attested,  where  the
    Union citizen, having exercised his right of  freedom  of  movement  to
    work in a second Member State, in accordance with the  conditions  laid
    down in Directive 2004/38, returns with his partner to the Member State
    of which he is a national in order to reside there.

51. We pause to note that at [33] and [35] the  CJEU  held  that  what  was
    conferred was facilitation, not a right.

52. The respondent was not denied a right; rather, his right to reside  was
    facilitated whereas Ms Banger  was  denied  a  right  to  reside.   The
    differential treatment was as between a returning UK  citizen  who  had
    exercised Treaty rights and an EEA national entering to  excise  Treaty
    rights. In the latter case, the entry of a  durable  partner  would  be
    facilitated. What the respondent seeks, in effect, is to be treated  as
    though he were a family member. This would blur, if not eliminate,  the
    distinction between those in durable partnerships  and  those  who  are
    spouses.

53.  We do not consider that Coman assists the respondent either.  That  is
    because under the law of the host member state, the couple were spouses
    and so family members. The observation at [56] that the  derived  right
    of residence granted should be no stricter than that  provided  for  in
    article 7 of the Directive  is  not  relevant  here,  as  there  is  no
    differential treatment between countries.

54. For these reasons, we do not accept that  the  respondent  fell  to  be
    treated as a family member under the Directive, and so is not  entitled
    to either a permanent right of residence  or  to  the  benefit  of  the
    provisions relating to retained rights.  Equally, we are not  satisfied
    that he is entitled to any derived rights flowing from  article  21  or
    otherwise.

55. It follows from this that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law  and  must  be  set  aside.   We
    remake it, in line with our findings, and dismiss the appeal.

56. We observe that the real difficulty the respondent faces is that  those
    who are married are treated differently from those who are  not.  There
    are significant protections for those whose marriages breakdown but not
    for those in durable relationships of whatever length.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside

 2. We remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 11 February 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
