
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal Number: EA/06715/2019         |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2021                     |On 04 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                 abdul majid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, counsel, instructed by No 12 Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Pakistani national who was born on 14 January  1989.
    He appeals, with permission granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb,
    against a decision which was issued  by  FtT  Judge  I  D  Boyes  ("the
    judge") on 13 February 2020.  By that decision, the judge dismissed the
    appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  revoke  his
    residence card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK.



Background

 2. The appellant entered the UK as a student  in  2011.   He  was  granted
    further leave in that capacity until September 2014.  Applications  for
    further leave to  remain  were  refused,  however,  and  the  appellant
    applied for a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside  in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse of an EEA national.   The  appellant's
    wife is Tayba Naz Khan Bhatti, a French national.   The  appellant  was
    issued with a residence card as the family member of a qualified person
    on 3 March 2017.

 3. In 2018, the appellant's wife wrote to the respondent.  She stated that
    the relationship had broken down and that she had decided to return  to
    France permanently.  On 19 April 2018, she  signed  a  statement  which
    stated materially as follows:

         I, Tayba Naz Khan Bhatti born on 12 November 1992,  now  living  in
         France confirm that my relationship with Abdul  Majid  born  on  14
         January 1989 living in [address supplied] no longer subsists,  that
         I do not live with them and that I do not intend to live with  them
         as my spouse or partner in the future.

         My passport number [supplied] and my ex-partner passport number  is
         [supplied].  Majid Home Office reference number is  [supplied]  and
         case number [supplied].

         I give my permission for the Home Office  to  use  the  information
         referred to above.

         I fully understand that by giving my  permission,  the  information
         will become known to Abdul Majid.

 4. The appellant's wife gave an address in South West Paris at the top  of
    this statement.

 5. On 30 October 2018, the respondent decided to  revoke  the  appellant's
    residence card.  She did so on the basis that the appellant's wife  was
    no longer exercising Treaty Rights in the UK.  The respondent therefore
    concluded that the appellant had ceased to have a right to reside under
    the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  and  that  revocation   was
    appropriate under regulation 24(3).

 6. In a letter to Immigration Enforcement on 19 July 2019,  the  appellant
    stated that he was still officially married to his wife;  that  he  was
    contesting the divorce proceedings which were afoot at Uxbridge  Family
    Court; and that there was a parallel case at the Family Court  in  Bury
    St Edmunds, in which the appellant maintained that he was the victim of
    domestic violence during his marriage to Ms Bhatti.  He maintained that
    he had retained the right to reside in the United Kingdom.

The Respondent's Decision

 7. On 26 November 2019, the respondent decide to remove the appellant from
    the United Kingdom.  She considered that removal  directions  could  be
    given under regulations 23(6)(a) and 32(2) because the appellant was  a
    person who had ceased to have a right to reside under the  Regulations.
    The specific statement of reasons for that conclusion was as follows:

         You were issued with an EEA residence card on 3 March 2017  as  the
         spouse of  a  French  national.   On  30  October  2018,  your  EEA
         residence card was revoked as your spouse had  confirmed  that  the
         marriage had broken down and that she had  left  the  UK.   Further
         checks have confirmed that your spouse is still outside of  the  UK
         and as such you cannot benefit from  the  EEA  Regulations  as  the
         spouse of an EEA national.  It is considered that your rights under
         the (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 have ceased.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed against this decision, contending  that  he  had
    retained the right to reside; that the decision  was  contrary  to  the
    Directive; and that it was also in breach of his rights under the ECHR.

 9. The appeal was initially to be heard on 24 January  2020,  at  Newport.
    The appellant's then solicitors wrote to the Tribunal two  days  before
    the hearing, stating that he was unwell  and  seeking  an  adjournment.
    The hearing was adjourned to 11 February 2020.  Four days  before  that
    hearing, the appellant's solicitors wrote again.  Having mentioned  the
    previous adjournment, the letter continued as follows:

         The matter was relisted for 11 February  2020.   Unfortunately,  we
         have been placed in the same position in  that  the  appellant  had
         been unable to attend the office because  of  continued  back  pain
         which was understand [sic] from him was partly due to  the  illness
         he suffered before, of which he was tested for [sic].  We have been
         provided with a letter from his GP (attached) together with various
         tests undertaken by [sic] Appellant for your attention.

         We have still been unable to take [sic] prepare a bundle  or  fully
         take instructions as a result of the appellant  continued  lay  off
         [sic] and unfortunately, we  have  been  left  with  no  choice  to
         request for another adjournment of the hearing.

10. Appended to that letter was a document  which  described  itself  as  a
    Private Medical Certificate.  This certified  that  the  appellant  had
    been suffering from back pain and would be unable  to  attend  work  or
    school from 24 January 2020 until 7 February 2020 (four days before the
    hearing).  The certificate contained notes for  Employers,  Educational
    Establishments and Courts.  The latter note stated that "I have advised
    that any statement I provide regarding this illness does not excuse any
    failure to attend court as this can only be at  the  direction  of  the
    Court.".  The certificate was  stamped  by  Dr  Saluja  of  the  Saluja
    Clinic. There were also some further medical documents appended to  the
    adjournment application, showing that the appellant had been prescribed
    antibiotics and other drugs at the end of January 2020 and that he  had
    provided a stool sample for investigation on 23 January 2020.

11. The adjournment application was  refused  by  a  Tribunal  Case  Worker
    ("TCW") on 10 February 2020.  The TCW noted that the reason  given  was
    the same as before; that there was no time estimate  within  which  the
    problem would be resolved;  and  that  the  medical  evidence  did  not
    support the application.  He gave permission for either party  to  rely
    on written submissions "as an alternative to attending in person".

12. The adjournment application was not renewed for paper consideration  by
    a judge.  On 11 February 2020, therefore, the appeal remained listed to
    be heard at Columbus House in Newport.

13. Before the judge, the  respondent  was  represented  by  counsel  -  Mr
    Olphert.  The appellant was not present or represented  when  the  case
    was called on.  Mr Olphert asked the judge to proceed in the absence of
    the appellant and his representatives.  The judge  caused  a  telephone
    call to be made to the appellant's solicitors.  What  was  said  during
    that telephone call is set out in a statement made  by  the  caseworker
    who received it.  She states that she had instructed Mr Alam of counsel
    to represent the appellant.   He  had  been  instructed  to  renew  the
    adjournment application in court.  She received the telephone call from
    the Tribunal at around 10am and stated that counsel was en  route  from
    High Wycombe.  At 10.30, she received a telephone  call  from  counsel,
    who stated that the hearing had already taken place (without  him)  and
    that notice of the decision would be  sent  out  in  due  course.   Her
    statement is supported by an attendance note dated  11  February  2020.
    This shows that a telephone call was received at 10am from the Tribunal
    at Newport.  The Tribunal was  concerned  that  no  representative  had
    attended.  The case worker checked the position and  'informed  counsel
    is Arman Alam and is on his way - he should be there shortly'.

14. The judge decided to proceed in the absence  of  the  appellant  or  Mr
    Alam.  The judge noted the following in his decision:

         [10] There was an application at the hearing by the Home Office  to
         proceed in the appellant's absence bearing in mind that it  was  in
         in the interests of justice to do so and  that  the  appellant  was
         fully cognisant of the date  and  had  instructed  solicitors.   No
         solicitor and/or representative had attended for the  appellant  by
         the time the case has [sic] called on at 10.15 hours.

         [11] Having taken into account the fact that this matter  has  been
         ongoing since October 2018 and the fact that as far  back  as  July
         2019  the  appellant  was  in   correspondence   with   immigration
         enforcement and asserting the  grounds  upon  which  he  sought  to
         advance his appeal I was satisfied that it was in the  interest  of
         justice to proceed. The Home Office is entitled to a decision in  a
         reasonable amount of time no less than  [sic]  appellant  is.   The
         issues in the  case  were  simple  and  the  appellant  had  had  a
         considerable period of time, since 19 July 19, to properly  advance
         his case, collect his evidence and make a written submission and/or
         witness statement to the court.

         [12] Following the conclusion of the hearing  and  after  the  Home
         Office representative had left the court building  I  was  informed
         that  somebody  had  attended  to  represent  Mr  Majeed.   It  was
         explained that the hearing had already concluded and that Mr  Majid
         had not attended.  There was no application to re-open the case.

15. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal, finding that  the  appellant's
    wife had left for France; that it had  not  been  shown  that  she  was
    exercising Treaty Rights at the commencement  of  divorce  proceedings;
    and that there was actually no evidence  to  show  that  she  had  ever
    exercised Treaty Rights: [21].  There was  no  evidence  to  show  that
    there had ever been any domestic violence suffered by the appellant.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

16. There is a single ground of appeal, which is that it was unfair in  all
    the circumstances for the judge  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant and, in particular, his counsel, since confirmation had  been
    provided to the Tribunal at around 10am that counsel was on his way  to
    the hearing centre.

17. Permission was granted by Judge Grubb  on  19  June  2020.   He  noted,
    amongst other things, that the assertions in the grounds would need  to
    be established by evidence.

18. No evidence was provided within the 14 days permitted by Judge  Grubb's
    decision.  On 2 September 2020, therefore, the respondent responded  to
    the grounds under rule 24 of  the  UT  Rules,  noting  the  absence  of
    evidence and submitting that it was fair for the judge to proceed as he
    did.

19. It was only on 9 November 2020 that the  appellant's  solicitors  filed
    the statement and the attendance note from the caseworker, as described
    above.  That caused Judge Pitt to issue directions  requiring,  amongst
    other things, a response from the respondent to what was  said  in  the
    statement.

20. A further response under rule 24 was provided on 11 January 2021.   The
    respondent submitted that there was still  no  statement  from  counsel
    explaining, amongst other things,  why  he  had  not  applied  for  the
    hearing to be re-opened.  There was, in any event, no prospect  of  his
    securing an adjournment on the basis of the evidence supplied.  Nor was
    there any prospect of  the  appeal  succeeding  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before the judge.

Submissions

21. Mr Ahmed based his submissions on the case worker's witness  statement.
    He accepted that there was still no statement from counsel.  He did not
    know why that was so, but he had spoken to Mr Alam, who  had  confirmed
    that he could produce a statement if necessary.  If that was thought to
    be necessary, Mr Ahmed sought an adjournment of the  hearing  for  that
    purpose.  His principal submission was that it was not necessary, since
    the accepted facts spoke for themselves.  The judge  had  proceeded  in
    the absence of the appellant and  his  counsel,  despite  the  Tribunal
    having been told that counsel was on his way.  The judge had  seemingly
    concluded his entire list by 1030 and  had  released  counsel  for  the
    respondent.

22. I asked Mr  Ahmed  to  address  me  on  the  materiality  of  any  such
    unfairness.  He submitted that the appellant had been unwell  and  that
    the just course, had counsel attended, would have been to  adjourn  the
    appeal.  It was notable, he submitted,  that  the  appellant  lived  in
    Hayes, that he suffered from back pain, and that  he  was  required  to
    travel to South Wales for the hearing.

23. I asked Mr Ahmed to address me on relief.  He submitted that the appeal
    should be remitted, so as to give the appellant further time  in  which
    to obtain evidence.  Minds had  been  focused,  he  submitted,  on  the
    question of whether there was a legal error in the decision of the  FtT
    and no thought had been given to the evidence which might be needed  to
    support the underlying appeal.  He had seen that evidence in conference
    with the appellant, however, and stated that there was  evidence  which
    could properly be adduced in answer to the respondent's refusal.

24. Mr Melvin relied on the second rule 24 response.  He was  surprised  to
    hear that there was additional material upon which reliance  might  yet
    be placed, since there had been no application to adduce that  material
    under rule 15(2A).  He invited me to refuse Mr Ahmed's  application  to
    adjourn so that he could obtain a statement  from  counsel;  there  had
    been ample time, he submitted, to obtain  that  document.   The  proper
    course, in Mr Melvin's submission was to find that the  judge  had  not
    erred in law.  If I was not with him in that respect, he invited me  to
    proceed directly to remake the decision on the appeal by dismissing it.



25. In a brief response, Mr Ahmed submitted that the  caseworker's  witness
    statement was not challenged and that there had been a clear procedural
    impropriety.

Analysis

26. There has been a tendency - particularly in the  respondent's  rule  24
    responses, to elide the rather separate questions of whether the  judge
    erred in law in proceedings as he  did;  whether  any  such  error  was
    material to the outcome of the appeal; and whether  the  appellant  can
    conceivably hope to succeed in this appeal on the basis of the evidence
    now available.  I propose to consider these questions separately.  I do
    so on the basis of what is already  before  me.   I  indicated  at  the
    hearing that I was not prepared to adjourn to allow the appellant  more
    time to obtain a statement from Mr Alam of counsel; there has obviously
    been more than ample opportunity to do  so  and  it  is  fair  to  both
    parties to proceed.

27. The first question, it seems to me, is whether the judge's decision was
    tainted by procedural  irregularity  in  deciding  to  proceed  in  the
    absence of the appellant himself.  To put  that  question  in  the  way
    required by the authorities, what I must consider  is  whether  it  was
    fair for the  judge  to  proceed  in  the  appellant's  absence:     SH
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.   I consider the  answer  to
    this question to be entirely  straightforward.   The  medical  evidence
    adduced by the appellant in an effort to show that he could not  attend
    the hearing (or provide his solicitors with instructions to prepare for
    that hearing) was wholly inadequate.  As the Tribunal Caseworker  noted
    in refusing the adjournment application on the papers, the note from Dr
    Saluja specifically stated that it did not excuse attendance at  court.



28. There is a further and more fundamental point  about  that  note,  with
    respect to the TCW.  It only related to the period  up  to  7  February
    2020 and the hearing was on 11 February 2020.  There was,  in  reality,
    no basis whatsoever for concluding that the appellant  was  other  than
    fit to attend the Tribunal.  Had  the  sole  question  before  me  been
    whether it was fair to proceed in the appellant's  absence,  my  answer
    would have been that it obviously was.

29. Logically, the second question is whether it was fair to proceed in the
    absence of counsel.  In answering that question, I take full account of
    what is said by the caseworker and by the judge. I have reproduced what
    was said by both above.

30. I assume (as I think Judge Grubb did when he granted  permission)  that
    there was some error in communication between  the  staff  at  Columbus
    House and the judge.  It seems from [10]-[12] of the  judge's  decision
    that he was not told that Mr Alam was en route.  I note that his Record
    of Proceedings states that he had been told that a representative  'was
    at court - nobody here at all - clerk has checked'.

31. Had the judge been told that counsel was en route  at  1015,  there  is
    obviously no conceivable way that he  would  have  proceeded  with  the
    hearing in his absence.  The timings which I have mentioned  above  are
    relevant.  It seems that the matter was called on promptly at 1000  and
    that the judge was merely told that there was no attendance  by  or  on
    behalf of the appellant.  What I surmise is that the usher checked  the
    waiting area and gave the judge perfectly accurate information but that
    the staff at the  Tribunal  had  made  additional  enquiries  with  the
    solicitors, the results of which were not  accurately  communicated  to
    the judge before he decided to proceed in counsel's absence.   Had  the
    judge been told a little after 10am that counsel was  on  his  way,  he
    would not have acceded to the request by counsel for the respondent  to
    proceed in his absence.  I doubt, frankly, that that request would even
    have been made if counsel for the respondent was aware that counsel for
    the appellant was said to be on  his  way.   In  the  circumstances,  I
    conclude that there was a procedural error in this case but it was  not
    (as far as I can tell) an error on the part of the  judge,  who  simply
    proceeded on the basis that there was no one in  attendance.   It  was,
    instead, an error on the part of the FtT,  in  failing  to  notify  the
    judge of the correct position, as had been clarified by the  caseworker
    in a telephone call minutes earlier.  Was it fair  to  proceed  in  the
    absence of the appellant's counsel, therefore?  I conclude that it  was
    not.

32. Thus far, I have no real doubt that the judge was not at fault.   I  am
    decidedly less comfortable  about  what  happened  at  1030.   In  this
    respect, there  is  a  perfect  match  between  the  statement  of  the
    caseworker and [12] of the judge's  decision.   He  was  informed  that
    counsel had attended but he seemingly did nothing other than to send  a
    message that the  hearing  was  already  concluded.   As  a  matter  of
    fairness, the appropriate course (particularly at  that  point  in  the
    court day) was surely to hear counsel for  the  appellant.   The  judge
    said that counsel for the respondent had left the  hearing  centre  but
    that is a minor point in the age of the mobile telephone.  The list had
    concluded less than half an hour after it began.  It was not as  though
    counsel for the respondent could not be contacted, and it seems that no
    thought was given to whether he should be asked to return  to  Columbus
    House for 11am, for example.  No authority needs to be cited for any of
    this; it is simply inimical to justice  that  a  judge  should  send  a
    message to counsel who has attended court slightly late to say that his
    case has been concluded; that the court day has finished at  1030;  and
    that his instructing solicitors should simply  await  the  (inevitable)
    decision.

33. Then comes the rather more difficult question of  materiality.   I  say
    that this is rather more difficult because of repeated notes of caution
    being sounded in the superior courts about the  extent  to  which  this
    question should ever be considered where there has  been  a  procedural
    failing resulting in an unfair  hearing.   The  most  recent  and  most
    memorable statement on the subject is probably what Lord Wilson  quoted
    Lord Reed as saying during argument in Serafin v Malkiewicz [2020] UKSC
    23; [2020] 1 WLR 2455: "a judgment which results from an  unfair  trial
    is written in water": [49].  There can be no doubt  that  I  should  be
    extremely cautious before concluding that the judge came to the correct
    conclusion  (or  could  not  have  come  to  a  different   conclusion)
    notwithstanding the errors I have set out above.

34. What would, or could, have happened if the judge had heard Mr Alam?  We
    know that he would have made an application for the adjournment of  the
    hearing.  We know that the medical evidence which was before the TCW to
    support that application was wholly inadequate.  We know that at  least
    one of the inadequacies with that evidence was identified  by  the  TCW
    when he refused the application on paper.  We know that  no  additional
    evidence had been submitted after the TCW's  decision  to  support  the
    application which Mr Alam had been instructed to make.  We know that no
    other basis for an adjournment was  to  be  advanced;  the  application
    rested on the inadequate medical evidence.

35. There was, in truth, no proper basis to conclude that the appellant had
    been hampered by ill health in preparing for  the  appeal  in  the  two
    months which had passed since the respondent's decision.  Equally, as I
    have explained above, there was no proper basis upon which to  conclude
    that the appellant was unable to attend the hearing.  Mr Ahmed  was  in
    some difficulty explaining how a judge of the FtT,  properly  directing
    himself to the over-riding objective and the facts of this case,  could
    have seen fit to adjourn the case.  Despite the caution  which  I  must
    have in concluding that procedural errors of the types described  above
    were immaterial to the outcome, I do not accept that  any  judge  would
    have adjourned this appeal on the basis of the evidence adduced.

36. Had Mr Alam been heard by the judge, therefore, I come to the clear and
    firm conclusion that the appeal would have proceeded in the appellant's
    absence, and on the basis of the evidence before the FtT.  There is  no
    suggestion, whether in the grounds of appeal or in Mr Ahmed's realistic
    and measured submissions, that there is anything wrong with the judge's
    decision on the substance of the appeal.  Nor could  there  have  been.
    The appellant's wife has evidently left the  country.   That  is  clear
    from her statement and from the checks  conducted  by  the  respondent.
    She has no intention of returning and there is no proper  basis  for  a
    submission that  she  continues  to  exercise  Treaty  Rights  in  this
    country.  She is not a qualified person and  the  appellant  ceased  to
    have a right to reside as her family member.

37. The appellant has maintained throughout, however, that he has  retained
    the right to reside in the United Kingdom under regulation 10.  On  the
    evidence before the FtT, and indeed the evidence as  it  stands  before
    me, that submission was bound to fail.  It  is  only  regulation  10(5)
    which might apply to the appellant.  Considering  the  requirements  of
    that provision:

      i) There is no evidence to  show  that  the  appellant's  wife  was  a
         qualified person or that she had permanent residence at the date on
         which divorce proceedings were initiated;

     ii) There is no evidence, therefore, to show  that  the  appellant  was
         residing in the UK in accordance with the Regulations at that date.
         (It is to be recalled, in this connection, that the Residence  Card
         is merely declaratory; it does not confer a right to reside.)

    iii) There is no evidence to show that the marriage had  lasted  for  at
         least  three  years  prior  to  the  date  on  which  the   divorce
         proceedings were initiated;

     iv) There is no suggestion that there are any children of the union;

      v) There is no evidence to show that the continued right of  residence
         is warranted by particularly difficult  circumstances,  whether  by
         reason of domestic violence or otherwise, since the  appellant  has
         failed to produce any evidence  of  the  matters  asserted  in  the
         letter he wrote to Immigration Enforcement in July 2019;

     vi) There is no evidence to show that the appellant would have  been  a
         qualified person if he had been an EEA national.

38. In the circumstances, I consider that the FtT erred procedurally in the
    way in which it proceeded in the absence of counsel.  Had counsel  been
    heard, however, the only appropriate course would have been to  proceed
    with the appeal, and to dismiss it.  In the  circumstances,  I  dismiss
    the appeal on the basis that the errors of procedure were immaterial to
    the outcome.

39. I should add this.  Had I concluded that the error was material, in the
    sense that a different result might properly have been reached  on  the
    evidence before the FtT, I would have proceeded directly to remake  the
    decision on the appeal.  I recognise,  of  course,  that  it  might  be
    suggested that 7.2(a) of  the  Practise  Statement  suggests  that  the
    proper course would be remittal where there has been serious procedural
    impropriety in the FtT.  The PS is not a straitjacket, however, and the
    default position remains that 'remaking, rather than remitting' will be
    the normal course of action.

40. Despite Mr Ahmed's plea to the contrary, I see no proper basis to remit
    this appeal to the FtT.  There  is,  and  there  never  has  been,  any
    demonstrable evidential foundation for a submission that the  appellant
    has retained a right to  reside.   Mr  Ahmed  said  that  he  had  seen
    relevant  evidence  in  conference  but  there  has  never   been   any
    application to adduce further material under  rule  15(2A).   Mr  Ahmed
    said that the focus had been on whether the FtT erred in law.  If  that
    is so, it is unacceptable; it was plainly incumbent  on  the  appellant
    and his solicitors to give the Tribunal and the  respondent  notice  of
    any further material upon  which  reliance  might  be  placed.   Had  I
    decided to set aside the FtT's  decision,  therefore,  the  decision  I
    would have made would have been to  proceed  with  the  appeal  and  to
    dismiss it for the reasons I have given at [37] above.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  FtT,
dismissing the appeal, shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                               21 April 2021

