
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06425/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 March 2019                             |On 16 April 2019              |
|(judgment delivered extempore)               |                              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                Sumbul Fayyaz
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Turnbull
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of  Sumbul  Fayyaz,  a  Pakistani  citizen  born  in
    September 1985.  She appeals against a decision  by  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to issue her with  a  residence  card  as  an  extended
    family member who has been dependent in the UK  upon  an  EEA  national
    sponsor and continues to be so.  The date of the  decision  is  16  May
    2016.

2.   There had been a previous application for a residence card on the  same
    basis in 2014.  That application was refused in November 2014  and  her
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Mozolowski on 24 April 2015.  Her application to appeal  that  decision
    to the Upper Tribunal was refused and a judicial review application was
    refused.  I assume that that was a Cart challenge, although  I  do  not
    think that I have a copy of those papers before me but nothing turns on
    that.

3.   The application that  led  to  the  current  proceedings  was  made  in
    November 2015.  There was a delay in her  appeal  against  the  refusal
    being heard because of the litigation surrounding the issue of  whether
    or not  extended  family  members  had  a  right  of  appeal.   It  was
    eventually resolved that they did have a right of appeal under the 2006
    Regulations and her appeal was heard before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Talbot on 7 January 2019.  He dismissed that appeal for reasons set out
    in a decision dated 24 January 2019.

4.   The appellant was granted  permission  to  appeal.   The  grounds  upon
    which permission was granted do not actually  address  the  fundamental
    issue in this case which is that although  it  was  accepted  by  Judge
    Mozolowski that the appellant and Mr Shahbaz,  her  sponsor,  had  been
    living in the same household since January 2014; it  was  not  accepted
    that Mr Shahbaz was exercising  treaty  rights  at  that  time.   Judge
    Mozolowski found that Mr Shabaz had not been exercising  treaty  rights
    until May that year.

5.   Judge Talbot very properly set out the oral  evidence  that  he  heard.
    Both the appellant and her sponsor, Mr Shahbaz, confirmed there was  no
    further evidence lodged that went to that decision by Judge Mozolowski.
     The judge set out the requirements in  Devaseelan  where  a  judge  is
    considering previous decisions by a Tribunal and the extent to which he
    is required to take those into account.  The  previous  findings  of  a
    judge are, in the absence of any evidence that goes to those  findings,
    to be considered settled and clear.

6.   The findings of Judge Mozolowski were clear and settled, that  she  had
    not been dependent on her sponsor whilst  her  sponsor  was  exercising
    treaty rights.  Both had given evidence that there was nothing in their
    evidence that was significantly different  from  that  which  they  had
    previously claimed, and Judge Talbot  therefore  stated  in  the  final
    paragraph of his decision that he found that the  evidence  before  him
    does not establish either that the appellant was financially  dependent
    on Mr Shahbaz in Pakistan, or that she has  been  either  part  of  his
    household or financially dependent on him ever since her arrival in the
    UK.  That of course is part of his household or  financially  dependent
    on him as an EEA national exercising treaty rights.

7.   Although the decision is short and succinct,  there  was  no  need  for
    Judge Talbot to refer to the disagreement that the appellant  has  over
    the Secretary  of  State's  assertion  that  she  has  submitted  false
    documents.  She may well have a sustainable argument that the documents
    were not false and there may well be evidence in her documentation that
    can support  that  contention,  but  that  is  not  the  issue  in  the
    proceedings either before me or before Judge Talbot.  Judge Talbot made
    a proper, reasoned and correct decision  that  there  was  no  evidence
    before him to dislodge or undermine the findings  of  Judge  Mozolowski
    which were that the  appellant  was  not  either  living  in  the  same
    household or  financially  dependent  upon  her  uncle  whilst  he  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  For those reasons the decision  by
    Judge Talbot does not disclose an error of law and I dismiss the appeal
    of Miss Fayyaz.

    Conclusion


    There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    the appeal is dismissed.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 13th April 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker


