
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06195/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 March 2018                     |On 23 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                OUSMAN MORONG
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

      1. The appellant has appealed against a decision made on the papers on
         9 November 2017 in which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  his
         appeal against a decision dated 19 June 2017 that he did not have a
         right to reside under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

      2. The First-tier Tribunal considered evidence, inter alia, confirming
         that the appellant was employed between 5 December 2017 to  20  May
         2017.  The latter date  was  two  days  before  the  appellant  was
         convicted and sentenced to 26 weeks imprisonment.

      3. The First-tier Tribunal was not satisfied that  the  appellant  was
         exercising Treaty rights in the UK but Mr McVeety accepted this was
         based upon a material mistake of  fact.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
         believed the appellant to be a serving prisoner as at the  date  of
         its decision, due to be released in 2018.  The appellant  explained
         that he was released from  prison  on  18  August  2017  and  began
         working with the same employer he had before he went to prison,  as
         a warehouse operative / fork lift driver, and he  continues  to  be
         employed in this manner.   Mr McVeety accepted that the appellant's
         claims are entirely supported by  his  release  date  notification,
         licence and wage slips.

      4. The appellant explained that he was confused about the process  and
         provided all the updated evidence to  confirm  he  was  re-employed
         having been released from prison to the 'caseworker'  dealing  with
         his reporting conditions.  Mr McVeety noted there was  support  for
         this in the case file.

      5. It therefore follows  that  due  to  no  fault  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, documents relating to the proceedings were not sent to or
         received by the First-tier Tribunal at the appropriate time.  In my
         judgment it is in the interests of justice to set aside the  First-
         tier  Tribunal  decision  pursuant  to  rule  43  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   The  appellant  entirely
         misunderstood  the  process  and   was   unrepresented.    He   had
         documentation directly relevant to the issues to be determined  and
         thought that he had provided them to the right body but  they  were
         not sent to or received by the First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier
         Tribunal proceeded under a mistake of fact that played  a  material
         role in the decision and this caused unfairness.  In addition,  the
         condition at rule 43(2)(b) is met.

    Decision

      6. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and direct that
         the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order  for  it
         to re-make the decision in light of all the up to date information.

    Directions

         (1)      The  hearing  shall  be  relisted  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  The appellant has requested an oral hearing  before
             the First-tier Tribunal and given an undertaking that he  will
             pay the relevant fee upon request.

         (2)      The appellant shall file and serve updated evidence of his
             employment to the First-tier Tribunal and the SSHD  within  28
             days.

         (3)      Within 14 days of receipt of this  information,  the  SSHD
             shall file and serve an updated position statement.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
22 March 2018
