
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal Number: EA/06710/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 January 2021                            |On 17 March 2021               |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                KLODIAN GJANA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Evolent Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. By a decision promulgated on 29 September 2020,  Judge  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal Coker set aside the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Head promulgated on 15 April 2020. I now remake the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The sole issue in dispute is whether the appellant's marriage  to  Mrs
      Kyro  ("the  sponsor")  was  a  marriage  of  convenience  under   the
      Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2016   ("the
      Regulations").

Background

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 7 December 1990.


   4. The sponsor is a citizen of Greece born on 20 February 1978.


   5. The appellant and sponsor claim to have met over Facebook in May 2017.


   6. In September 2017 the appellant entered the UK unlawfully.


   7. In October 2018 the sponsor entered the UK.


   8. The sponsor and appellant claim that they met in person for the  first
      time when the sponsor arrived in the UK and that since then they  have
      lived together.


   9. On 10 July 2019 the sponsor and appellant married.


  10. On 17 July 2019 the appellant applied for a residence card to  confirm
      that he was a family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
      rights in the UK.


  11. On 12 November 2019  the  respondent  interviewed  the  appellant  and
      sponsor.


  12. On 3 December 2019 the appellant's application for  a  residence  card
      was refused. The sole reason given for refusing  the  application  was
      that there were inconsistencies in the answers given at  the  marriage
      interview and consequently there were reasonable  grounds  to  suspect
      that the marriage was entered into for the sole purpose  of  obtaining
      an immigration advantage.

Legal Framework

  13. If the appellant is a family member of the sponsor he is entitled to a
      residence card pursuant to Regulation 18 of the Regulations.


  14. Regulation 7 provides that  a  family  member  means,  inter  alia,  a
      spouse.


  15. Regulation 2 provides that a spouse does not  include  a  party  to  a
      marriage of convenience. Regulation 2 also states that a  marriage  of
      convenience includes a marriage entered into for the purpose of  using
      the Regulations to circumvent immigration rules  applying  to  non-EEA
      nationals or  other  criteria  that  the  party  to  the  marriage  of
      convenience would otherwise have to meet in order to enjoy a right  to
      reside under the Regulations.


  16. The Supreme Court in Sadovska & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2017] UKSC 54 explained:

           29. For this purpose, "marriage of convenience" is  a  term  of
           art. Although it is  defined  in  the  Directive  and  the  2009
           Communication as a marriage the sole purpose of which is to gain
           rights of entry to and residence in the European Union, the 2014
           Handbook suggests a more flexible approach, in which  this  must
           be the predominant purpose. It is not enough that the marriage
           may bring incidental immigration and other benefits if  this  is
           not its predominant purpose. Furthermore,  except  in  cases  of
           deceit by the non-EU national,  this  must  be  the  purpose  of
           them both. Clearly, a non-EU national may be  guilty  of  abuse
           when the EU national is not, because she believes that it  is  a
           genuine relationship.

  17. The burden of proof is on the respondent and the standard of proof  is
      the balance of probabilities.


  18. My role is not to  review  the  lawfulness  of  the  decision  of  the
      respondent but rather it is to assess for myself whether, on the basis
      of the evidence that is before me, the respondent has  discharged  the
      burden of demonstrating that, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  the
      appellant and sponsor entered into a marriage of convenience.


Summary of the Evidence


  19. The respondent relies on the interview record sheet of the  interviews
      of the appellant and sponsor which took place on 12 November 2019.


  20. The appellant relies, inter alia, on the  witness  statements  of  the
      appellant  and  sponsor,  both  dated  13  March  2020;  a  number  of
      photographs; a tenancy agreement; a  council  tax  bill  showing  both
      their names; and various documents relating to employment and  income.
      This evidence was before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Head.


  21. Upper Tribunal Judge Coker gave the parties leave to rely  on  further
      evidence. However, no further evidence was submitted by either party.


  22. The appellant and sponsor did not  make  themselves  available  to  be
      cross-examined. I asked Mr Ahmed why the appellant  and  sponsor  were
      not giving oral evidence. His answer was that he had explained to them
      that this was a de novo hearing  but  they  had  chosen  to  not  give
      evidence  orally  because  they  believed  that  they  had  adequately
      explained themselves at the previous  hearing  and  in  their  witness
      statements.

Submissions

  23. The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only. The  submissions  of
      both parties were extremely brief.


  24. Mr Jarvis argued that I should adopt the findings of fact of Judge  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Head. He submitted that these demonstrate that
      it was the purpose of both the appellant and sponsor to enter  into  a
      marriage of convenience. He argued that even if I did not accept  this
      it was plain that the appellant sought to deceive the authorities  and
      the sponsor, even if the sponsor had genuine motivations.


  25. He also argued that I  should  draw  an  adverse  inference  from  the
      appellant and sponsor electing to not put  themselves  forward  to  be
      cross-examined and have their evidence tested.


  26. Mr Ahmed argued that the appellant and  sponsor  were  asked  numerous
      questions and from among these only six discrepancies were identified.
      He submitted that the witness statements provide credible explanations
      for the  inconsistencies.  He  also  stated  that  the  appellant  had
      provided documents showing that he and  the  sponsor  live,  and  have
      lived, together and are a genuine couple. He added that the  appellant
      and sponsor have professed love for each other.


  27. I note that before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Head it was argued
      on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the  marriage  interview  was  not
      conducted fairly. This argument was not advanced by  Mr  Ahmed  before
      me.

Analysis

  28. Mr Ahmed argues that there were only a few (he gave the figure of six)
      discrepancies that emerged from the numerous questions  asked  in  the
      marriage  interview  and  that   the   multiple   questions   answered
      consistently show that the respondent has not discharged the burden of
      proof. The difficulty with this argument is that the discrepancies are
      highly significant and no plausible  explanation  for  them  has  been
      given in the brief witness  statements  adduced  by  the  sponsor  and
      appellant (only 14  paragraphs  for  the  appellant  and  28  for  the
      sponsor). Unfortunately, because the appellant and sponsor elected  to
      not be cross-examined, I have not had the  opportunity  to  hear  more
      detailed explanations which they may have been able to give. I do  not
      draw an adverse inference from their  non-attendance  but  their  non-
      attendance means that they have not been able to address,  or  provide
      an explanation, for issues that arise  from  a  consideration  of  the
      marriage interview record.


  29. There are two inconsistencies in the  marriage  interview  record,  in
      particular, which lead me to the conclusion  that  I  cannot  rely  on
      anything the appellant and sponsor have said. The first is the answers
      they gave to questions about the witnesses at  the  wedding  ceremony.
      The sponsor stated that the witnesses were her good  friend  and  work
      colleague called Julianna and Julianna's husband. She stated that  she
      met Julianna whilst working  at  a  hotel.   The  appellant,  however,
      stated in his interview  that  the  witnesses  to  the  marriage  were
      friends of his, and that they were each other's cousin. He stated that
      he met Julianna in Albania and that she became a friend of the sponsor
      through him.


  30. Plainly, the sponsor and appellant gave  entirely  different  accounts
      about how they knew the witnesses to their marriage ceremony and as to
      the relationship between the two witnesses.  The sponsor  acknowledged
      this in her witness statement and stated, by way of explanation,  that
      she thought she had to have a friend of hers sign as a witness and she
      did not want to give away that Julianna was a friend of the appellant.
      She stated that she made up that she worked with Julianna because that
      was the first thing that  came  to  her  mind.  With  respect  to  the
      relationship between the Julianna and the other witness,  the  sponsor
      stated that she did not say that  the  other  witness  was  Julianna's
      husband and that the words man and husband are the same  in  Albanian.
      These explanations are difficult to understand and, having  only  this
      brief explanation as set out in the witness statement to rely on, I do
      not accept them.


  31. The second significant inconsistency is that in the marriage interview
      the sponsor, when asked about  a  photograph  showing  guests  at  her
      wedding, stated that they were cousins of the lady  who  married  them
      who were brought there by her friend and that she did not  know  them.
      In response to the same question, the appellant described  the  people
      in the photograph as being his friends, whom  he  personally  invited.
      Plainly, the appellant and sponsor gave entirely different accounts of
      the guests. The only discernible explanation for the discrepancy  from
      within the statements  of  the  sponsor  and  appellant  is  that  the
      appellant says she thought the guests were related to  Julianna.  This
      does not explain why such different answers were given by the  sponsor
      and appellant to these questions.


  32. In her marriage interview, the sponsor described Julianna (the witness
      to her marriage whom she falsely  said  was  a  colleague/friend  from
      work) as a "the lady who married us" (paragraph 44  of  the  interview
      record) and  as  the  person  who  "said  that  she  would  marry  us"
      (paragraph 28 of the interview record). This, at the very least, gives
      the impression that Julianna was involved in  arranging  the  marriage
      and the witness statements do not dispel this impression.


  33. I remind myself that the burden is on the respondent. The question for
      me to ask is whether, in the light of the totality of the  information
      before me, the respondent has shown that it is more probable than  not
      that the marriage  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor  was  one  of
      convenience as defined in the Regulations.


  34. I am satisfied that the burden has been discharged by the  respondent.
      The inescapable conclusion from the inconsistencies described above is
      that the appellant and sponsor were not  truthful  in  their  marriage
      interviews. The impression given by the sponsor's interview record  is
      that a person whom she and the sponsor have referred  to  as  Julianna
      arranged the marriage. Having regard to all of the evidence  that  was
      before me, I am satisfied  that  the  respondent  has  discharged  the
      burden of showing that it is more likely than not that the sponsor and
      appellant agreed between themselves to enter - and then  proceeded  to
      enter -  into a marriage in order to confer on the appellant the right
      to reside in the UK under the Regulations.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Daniel Sheridan                     |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |Dated: 10 March 2021                |






