
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06599/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 4th April 2019                   |On: 8th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                  Pawel [P]
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                        Immigration Officer, Heathrow
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe, Counsel instructed by Baileys Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Poland date of birth 13th October  1983.
    On the 28th August 2018 he arrived at  London's  Heathrow  Airport  and
    attempted to enter the country using his Polish passport, and asserting
    free movement rights as an EEA national. The Respondent interviewed the
    Appellant and upon investigation refused to grant him leave  to  enter,
    on the grounds that his  exclusion  was  justified  with  reference  to
    Regulation 27 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 ('the Regulations').

 2. In particular the Officer relied upon the fact that the  Appellant  was
    convicted of a serious offence in Poland in 2006, namely causing  death
    by dangerous driving/driving under the influence of alcohol.    He  was
    sentenced to five years' imprisonment but absconded.  He moved  to  the
    United Kingdom where, in 2012, he  was  convicted  of  various  driving
    offences. He was subsequently served with a European arrest warrant and
    returned to Poland to serve his sentence.   Following  his  release  he
    had attempted to re-enter the United Kingdom through Calais in 2016 but
    had been refused entry on public  policy  grounds.  The  Appellant  had
    thereafter travelled to the Republic of Ireland where he had lived  and
    worked for about 16 months before managing to enter the United  Kingdom
    undetected.   The Immigration Officer accepted that the Appellant had a
    home, girlfriend and job in London - he was working up to 50 hours  per
    week as  a  chef  -  but  found  the  seriousness  of  the  Appellant's
    convictions to justify exclusion.   The Appellant was granted temporary
    admission.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  matter  came
    before Judge  Grimmett  on  the  20th  December  2018.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on the 2nd January 2019  the  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had a job in the United Kingdom but found that his  exclusion
    was proportionate. The Tribunal found that  he  has  few  ties  to  the
    United Kingdom, and noted that no-one appeared at the hearing to  speak
    to the  Appellant's  life  here.  Although  the  Appellant's  offending
    behaviour was largely alcohol related it  appeared  that  he  had  done
    nothing to address that. He had caused the death of a friend  by  drink
    driving in Poland but it was apparent  that  he  had  not  learned  his
    lesson, because he had subsequently been convicted of drink-driving  in
    the United Kingdom. There was no evidence that he had sought  help  for
    his alcohol problem, and his behaviour in trying to avoid his  sentence
    indicated that he remains a genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to one of the  fundamental  interests  of  society,  namely  the
    safety of citizens in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appeal was accordingly dismissed.

 5. The Appellant appeals to this Tribunal on the following grounds:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to take material  evidence
         into account, namely the Appellant's oral and written statements to
         the effect that he deeply regrets his offending behaviour, has  not
         driven  since  2012,  and  that  he  has  been  attending  meetings
         organised by 'Alcoholics Anonymous' and seeking help in other ways;

     ii) In order to justify exclusion under Reg 27 the  Respondent  had  to
         show that the Appellant poses a current  risk.  The  Appellant  has
         served his sentence for  the  conviction  in  Poland  and  has  not
         offended since 2012.  It is submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal
         failed to have regard to those matters, and materially  misdirected
         itself in its  consideration  of  whether  the  Appellant  poses  a
         sufficiently serious risk.

    iii) The Tribunal failed to direct itself to the fact that the burden of
         proof lies on the Respondent.

 6. Permission was granted on all grounds on the 6th March  2019  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Perkins. In respect of ground (i) as  it  is  summarised
    above, Judge Perkins noted that it is for the Appellant to  demonstrate
    what oral evidence was given before the Tribunal, given  that  none  of
    the matters  referred  to  in  the  grounds  are  referred  to  in  the
    determination.

 7. Before me Mr Bramble accepted that the errors of law alleged were  made
    out.   Although it was not clear exactly what evidence was given  about
    rehabilitation Mr Bramble was  able  to  discern  from  the  Presenting
    Officer's note that the Appellant had mentioned regret and seeking help
    for his drinking. None of that had been mentioned in the determination.
    More significantly, the Respondent accepted that the determination does
    not sufficiently address the key question in the appeal, namely whether
    the Appellant currently poses a risk. Given that the last  offence  was
    some six years ago, Mr Bramble  accepted  that  there  was  a  lack  of
    findings about what might have happened  since  then.   The  Respondent
    accordingly asked me to set the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    aside  and  remit  the  matter  for  re-hearing  before  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal.  Mr Pipe concurred that in view of  the  lack  of
    findings that was the most appropriate disposal.

    Decisions

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

 9. The decision in the appeal is to be remade by the First-tier  Tribunal,
    by a Judge other than Judge Grimmett.

10. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              4th April 2019
