
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06829/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th July 2019                     |On 12th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           ABRAHAM UNCHE KINGSLEY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A L Rashid, instructed by Carlton Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. In a decision promulgated on  3rd  May  2019,  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge M A Khan dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision
         by the respondent refusing him a  permanent  residence  card  under
         regulations 10(5), 15 and 18 Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2016 confirming his retained rights of residence as the
         former spouse of an EU national exercising Treaty Rights.

      2. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Robinson on the grounds, inter alia, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge had erred in law in finding the appellant  had  not  been  in
         established employment for the relevant time.

      3. Mr Tarlow accepted the First-tier Tribunal judge had erred  in  law
         and that the decision had to be set aside to be remade.

         Remaking the decision

      4. Mr Tarlow accepted that the  appellant's  former  spouse  had  been
         exercising Treaty Rights at  the  date  of  initiation  of  divorce
         proceedings. He also acknowledged that the evidence confirmed  that
         the appellant was working at the  date  of  divorce  and  that  the
         appellant had been in the UK for more than five years.

      5. The appellant plainly meets  the  requirements  for  the  grant  of
         permanent residence.

      6. I allow the appeal

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal against the
    decision to refuse the appellant permanent residence.


     Date 8th July 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
