
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ea/06338/2019
                                            EA/06340/2019; EA/06342/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 August 2021                    |On 27 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD RAZA
                              MRS REHANA KUSAR
                            MASTER MUHAMMAD IMRAN
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jaggar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellants have appealed against a decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Hatton, sent on 23 February 2021, dismissing
         their appeals on EEA grounds.

      2. The first appellant is the husband of the  second  appellant.   The
         third appellant is their child.  The first appellant's sister is an
         EEA citizen living in the UK ('the sponsor').

      3. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Tan properly accepted  that  the
         FTT erred in law and that I should remake the decision by  allowing
         the appeals.  I entirely agree with this approach for the reasons I
         provide below.

          i) In order for the appellants  to  be  extended  family  members
             ('EFM's) of the sponsor they need to establish  the  situation
             of dependence or membership of the same household must  exist:
             a) in the country from which the family members concerned come
             i.e. Pakistan, as well as; b) in the host Member State  -  see
             the clear headnote in Dauhoo  (EEA  Regulations  -  reg  8(2))
             [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC), Soares v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  575  (in
             which the Court of Appeal accepted  the  UT's  application  of
             Dauhoo at [19] and [21]) and Oboh v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  1525
             at [46].

         ii) The  FTT  clearly  resolved  b)  in  the  appellants'  favour,
             concluding  unambiguously  that  it  entirely   accepted   the
             evidence adduced in support of the appellants' contention that
             they have been dependent upon the sponsor  since  August  2014
             and this continues.

        iii) The FTT acknowledged the first appellant's clear assertion  in
             his witness statement that the appellants were members of  the
             sponsor's household when she was  in  Pakistan  but  noted  an
             absence of documentary evidence in  support.   The  FTT  found
             that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to  support  a)  and
             therefore dismissed the appeal.

         iv) It is very difficult to see why the FTT felt unable to  accept
             the clear evidence in the witness statement to the effect that
             the parties lived in the same household  as  the  sponsor  and
             were dependent upon her in Pakistan,  particularly  when  this
             was not a matter that  the  respondent  raised  as  a  concern
             within the decision under appeal.  It follows that  the  FTT's
             reasoning on issue a) is inadequate.

          v) I can remake the decision myself.  Given the positive findings
             of fact made by the FTT regarding the claimed lengthy  history
             of dependency, I entirely accept the appellants' evidence that
             they were members of the  sponsor's  household  and  dependent
             upon her when she was in Pakistan.   Mr  Tan  was  correct  to
             make a concession to that effect.

      4. It follows that I accept that the appellants have established  past
         dependency in Pakistan and continuing dependency upon the sponsor.

Notice of decision

      5. The decision of the FTT contains a material error of law and is set
         aside.  I remake the decision by allowing the appellants' appeals.


Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Date: 19 August 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
