
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal Number: EA/06108/2017         |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 July 2019                      |On 2 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                  Rida [Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moll, instructed by Howe & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Moroccan national who was born on 9 August 1985.  He
    appeals against a decision which was issued  by  Judge  McIntosh  on  7
    March 2019, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal of a
    Permanent Residence Card.

Background

 2. The history of this appeal is highly relevant and it  is  necessary  to
    set it out in a little detail.  On 22 December 2016, the appellant made
    an application for a Permanent Residence Card.  He stated that  he  had
    married a Lithuanian national named [KS] on 6 June 2012  and  had  been
    issued with a Residence Card, in reliance on that relationship,  on  25
    June 2012.  He stated that he and Ms [S] had divorced  on  26  February
    2016.  He claimed to  have  retained  a  right  to  reside  in  the  UK
    following the termination of the marriage and that he had  subsequently
    become entitled to Permanent Residence under regulation 15(1)(f) of the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.

 3. The application was refused on 16 June 2017.   In  that  decision,  the
    respondent stated that she was not satisfied that the appellant and  Ms
    [S] were actually divorced, since only a decree nisi had been sent with
    the application.  Secondly, although it was accepted that the  marriage
    had lasted for three years and that the couple had lived in the UK  for
    a year, it was not accepted that Ms  [S]  had  been  exercising  Treaty
    Rights at the point of divorce.  The evidence provided showed  that  Ms
    [S] had only worked between October 2011 and 31 March  2016.   Thirdly,
    the respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  himself  had  been
    economically active since his divorce, as required by regulation 10(6),
    because  the  evidence  of  employment  at  the  material   times   was
    inadequate.

 4. The appellant's first solicitors (Messrs  Shervins)  lodged  an  appeal
    against the first decision on 5 July 2017.  The Tribunal's records show
    that the appeal was struck out for non-payment of  a  fee  on  31  July
    2017, and the file made its way  to  the  Tribunal's  storage  facility
    because no further action was to be taken.

 5.  In  November  2017,  the  appellant  instructed  new   representatives
    (Sterling & Law Associates LLP).  They attempted to have the appeal re-
    instated but were initially unsuccessful, for reasons which I need  not
    detail.  In order to progress matters, therefore, Sterling & Law lodged
    a fresh notice of appeal against the decision of 16  June  2017.   They
    did so on  13  April  2018.   The  grounds  of  appeal  were  helpfully
    accompanied by a document setting out the history  of  the  matter  and
    seeking a significant extension of time.

 6. On 14 June  2018,  Judge  Shanahan  issued  a  decision  in  which  she
    reinstated  the  appellant's  appeal   and   extended   time.    Appeal
    EA/06108/2017 therefore began to progress through  the  appeal  process
    once again.

 7. Meanwhile, on or about 1 June 2018, Sterling & Law Associates  assisted
    the appellant to make another application  for  a  Permanent  Residence
    Card, accompanied by more evidence than had been submitted  in  support
    of the first.  I need not rehearse  what  was  provided.   This  second
    application gave rise to a second refusal from the respondent, dated 18
    July 2018.

 8. In the second refusal, the respondent concluded that the appellant  had
    failed to submit a valid passport or identity card for Ms  [S];  failed
    to submit any evidence that the couple had lived together;  and  failed
    to  establish  that  either  the  appellant  or  his  spouse  had  been
    economically active at the material times.  There was no appeal against
    this decision.

 9. This appeal was then listed to be heard at Taylor House on  10  January
    2019.  In preparation for that appeal, the respondent  filed  a  bundle
    which contained only  the  2018  application  and  the  second  refusal
    letter.  When the appeal came in front of  Judge  McIntosh,  therefore,
    she was confronted with a refusal letter from 17 July 2018 in an appeal
    which had been filed in 2017.  She also had a copy of the first refusal
    letter, against which the appeal had actually been brought.

The Decision of the FtT

10. Judge McIntosh made reference to the fact that there were  two  refusal
    letters at [20] of her decision but she treated  the  appeal  as  being
    against the 18 July 2018 decision.  Leaving that to one  side  for  the
    moment, the judge considered the evidence before  her  at  some  length
    before coming to the conclusion that the appellant had indeed failed to
    submit his wife's passport or ID card and that he  had  not  discharged
    the burden of proof upon him of showing that his ex-wife was exercising
    Treaty Rights at the date of divorce or that he  had  continued  to  be
    economically active thereafter.  She dismissed the  appeal,  therefore,
    because  she  was  not  satisfied  "that  the   appellant   meets   the
    requirements of Regulation 10 with reference to 21(5) and 15 of the EEA
    Regulations 2016".

Permission to Appeal

11. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam.  Whilst the pleaded grounds  spanned
    several pages, there was actually only a single point made,  which  was
    that Judge McIntosh had erred in law in considering the second  refusal
    letter  when  the  appeal  was  against  the  first.   Judge  McWilliam
    considered that (just) arguable.  She also  noted,  with  reference  to
    Baigazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088, that the judge may have  focussed  her
    consideration of the sponsor's economic activity at  the  date  of  the
    decree absolute, rather than the date on which the divorce  proceedings
    were commenced.

Submissions

12. Before me, Mr Bramble conceded that  Judge  McIntosh  had  fallen  into
    error in the following ways.  Firstly, whilst  the  respondent  was  at
    liberty (whether in a subsequent decision letter or otherwise) to amend
    or amplify the grounds of refusal, it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    ensure that the representatives both understood the scope of the issues
    which were to be considered in light of the procedural tangle which had
    gone before.  She had failed to do so, despite noting that there was  a
    disagreement in this respect between the representatives at  [20]-[22].
    What it was not open to the judge to  do  was  simply  to  ignore  that
    disagreement and treat the appeal as  if  it  was  against  the  second
    decision, which it was not.

13. Secondly, the judge had fallen into the same error as the respondent in
    the second decision letter, in holding against the appellant  the  fact
    that  he  had  not  submitted  proof  of  his  ex-wife's  identity  and
    nationality, in circumstances where  that  had  been  accepted  by  the
    respondent in the earlier Residence Card  application:  Barnett  [2012]
    UKUT 142 (IAC) and Rehman [2019] UKUT 195 (IAC) refer.

14. Thirdly, although the judge had explored the evidence at  some  length,
    she had failed to reach clear findings or to give clear reasons for her
    findings that the appellant and his spouse had  not  been  economically
    active at the material times.

15. Fourthly, as had concerned Judge McWillian  when  granting  permission,
    Judge McIntosh had failed to apply the law as stated in Baigazieva,  in
    that she had focused on the sponsor's economic activity at the date  of
    divorce rather than the date  on  which  the  divorce  proceedings  had
    commenced.

16. In  light of Mr Bramble's stance, with which I agreed entirely,  I  was
    able to indicate at the hearing that Judge McIntosh's decision would be
    set aside and that I would, if possible, remake  the  decision  on  the
    appeal without the need for remittal to the FtT or a further hearing in
    the Upper Tribunal.  To that end, I asked Mr Bramble what  remained  in
    issue between the parties.  Most helpfully, Mr Bramble  indicated  that
    he had undertaken a full review of the papers with a view to  answering
    that very question.

17. Mr Bramble was able to state immediately that it was  accepted  by  the
    respondent that the appellant had  retained  a  right  to  reside  upon
    divorce from his ex-wife.  He was not required to produce her  ID  card
    in the circumstances of this case.  The parties had  been  married  for
    three years and had spent at least one of those  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom (it not being required that they lived 'together'  during  that
    time: PM (Turkey) [2011] Imm AR 413).  The evidence clearly established
    that  the  sponsor  had  been  economically  active  when  the  divorce
    proceedings  commenced,  and  that  the  appellant  had  himself   been
    economically active when the marriage came formally to an end.

18. What Mr Bramble was  not  initially  minded  to  accept  was  that  the
    appellant had subsequently obtained a right to  reside  permanently  in
    the United Kingdom thereafter, under regulation 15(1)(f).   Mr  Bramble
    had been unable to locate any evidence to show that the  appellant  had
    continued to be economically active between 5 April  2017  and  6  June
    2017.  If the appellant  was  able  to  demonstrate  economic  activity
    between those dates, and therefore to show  the  continuous  period  of
    five years required by regulation 15(1)(f), the proper course would  be
    for the appeal to be allowed.

19. Mr Moll indicated that he needed time to take instructions  and  I  put
    him back in the list in order to enable him to do so.  On returning  to
    this appeal some time later, Mr Moll had not only had an opportunity to
    take instructions, he had been able to obtain  a  number  of  pertinent
    documents from the appellant, copies of which he provided to me and  to
    Mr Bramble (without objection).

20. The documents related to the period in question  and  showed  that  the
    appellant had been supporting himself during this period by working  as
    a delivery driver for Amazon Flex  and  another  company  called  Jinn.
    There were emails and records  of  the  deliveries  the  appellant  had
    undertaken as a driver, stretching into the financial  year  2017-2018,
    although not up to the start of  June  2017.   Mr  Moll  explained,  on
    instructions, that the appellant had reduced his hours of  work  during
    the summer of 2017 as he had been diagnosed with Crohns Disease and had
    been required to have an operation.  Mr Moll had seen an email from the
    appellant's consultant in this regard, although he did not have a  hard
    copy (he offered to show the email to Mr Bramble on his computer).

21. Mr Bramble was content to accept, in light of this evidence,  that  the
    appellant would have been a worker (had he been an EEA national) during
    the period which remained in contention.  He considered, as do I,  that
    the evidence is not of continuous work but it  is  sufficient  to  show
    economic activity during that period which is real  and  effective  and
    more than marginal or ancillary.  In the circumstances, I  was  invited
    by both representatives to allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant is entitled to a Permanent Residence Card, which I do.



Notice of Decision

Judge McIntosh's decision was vitiated by legal error and is set  aside.   I
remake the decision on the appeal, and allow the appeal on  the  basis  that
the appellant is entitled to Permanent Residence.

No anonymity direction is made.
                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                              19 September 2019

