
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06284/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 March 2021                    |On 7 April 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NASIR KHALIL
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Mustafa, instructed by Briton Solicitors

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  were  designated
      in the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. On 16 October 2019 the appellant, who is a citizen of Pakistan born in
      July 1977, applied for a residence card under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 Regulations") to confirm  that  he  is  an
      extended family member of  his  partner  ("the  sponsor"),  who  is  a
      citizen of Slovakia.

   3.  On  9  November  2019  the  application  was  refused.  Although  the
      respondent accepted that the appellant was in a  durable  relationship
      with the sponsor and therefore was her extended  family  member  under
      regulation 8(5) of the 2016 Regulations, it was not accepted  that  it
      would be appropriate in all the circumstances  to  issue  him  with  a
      residence card.

   4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  his  appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cole ("the judge"). In  a
      decision  promulgated  on  7  February  2020  the  judge  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal. The  respondent  is  now  appealing  against  that
      decision.


   Background


   5. The appellant entered the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  February  2012.  He
      remained in the UK after his visa expired.

   6. The appellant and sponsor  have  been  in  a  subsisting  and  genuine
      relationship since 2014 and they have two children, born in  2014  and
      2018.

   7. In 2013 the appellant met the sponsor. The sponsor was 15 at the  time
      (20 years younger than  the  appellant).  The  appellant  and  sponsor
      underwent a religious marriage ceremony just four days after her  16th
      birthday. She became pregnant shortly thereafter.  The  appellant  was
      arrested. It was accepted by the police that  although  the  religious
      marriage had been one of convenience (entered into  by  the  appellant
      solely to gain immigration status), the relationship had  subsequently
      become genuine. The appellant was nonetheless convicted  of  assisting
      unlawful immigration and sentenced to 15 months'  imprisonment.  Judge
      Mort, the sentencing judge, stated in his sentencing remarks that:

            "although [the appellant] deceived [the sponsor] initially  and
           entered into [the  religious  marriage]  purely  for  [his]  own
           purposes to get round the Immigration Rules, the relationship  [
           ] developed and that is a significant factor in this case."

   8. In  November  2014  and  again  on  May  2015  the  appellant  applied
      unsuccessfully for a residence card based on his relationship with the
      sponsor.

   9. In February 2016 he claimed asylum. The application was unsuccessful.

  10. In 2017 the appellant was served with a deportation order. His ensuing
      appeal was unsuccessful. In a decision promulgated on 1  October  2019
      dismissing his protection and human rights appeal, Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Davies  found,  inter  alia,  that  the  effect  of  the
      appellant's deportation on the sponsor and their children would not be
      unduly harsh and would not breach article 8 ECHR.

  11. On 31 December 2019 the appellant was deported from the UK.


   Relevant Law


  12. Extended family members are not automatically entitled to a  residence
      card and the respondent must exercise a discretion to  decide  whether
      or not to issue them with one. How this discretion is to be  exercised
      by the respondent is set out in regulations 18(4) and (5), as well  as
      regulation 8(8), of the 2016 Regulations.

      Regulations 18(4) and (5)

           18(4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to an
           extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who is
           not an EEA national on application if-


           a) the application is accompanied or joined by a valid passport;


           b) the relevant EEA national is a qualified person or an EEA
              national with a right of permanent residence under regulation
              15; and

           c) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State
              appropriate to issue the residence card.

           18(5)  Where the Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application
           under paragraph (4) an extensive  examination  of  the  personal
           circumstances  of  the  applicant  must  be  undertaken  by  the
           Secretary of State  and  if  the  application  is  refused,  the
           Secretary of State must  give  reasons  justifying  the  refusal
           unless this is contrary to the interests of national security.


      Regulation 8(8)


           8(8) Where an extensive examination of the personal
           circumstances of the applicant is required under these
           Regulations, it must include examination of the following-


           a) the best interests of the applicant, particularly where the
              applicant is a child;


           b) the character and conduct of the applicant; and

           c) whether an EEA national would  be  deterred  from  exercising
              their free movement rights if the application was refused.

   Decision of the respondent dated 11 November 2019 ("the refusal letter")

  13. In the refusal letter, reliance is placed on what is  described  as  a
      casework instruction called the  "European  modernised  guidance."  As
      noted by the judge in paragraph  29  of  the  decision,  the  document
      referred to by the respondent in the refusal letter  is  in  fact  the
      respondent's guidance document titled: free movement rights:  extended
      family members of  the  EEA  nationals,  dated  27  March  2019  ("the
      Guidance"). The respondent quotes from page 24 of the  Guidance  where
      it states that the decision maker must consider (i)  whether  the  EEA
      national will be prevented from exercising their free movement  rights
      if the extended family member's application is refused; and  (ii)  the
      facts and circumstances of the relationship and dependency.

  14. The respondent accepted in the refusal letter that the  appellant  and
      the sponsor are in a durable and subsisting relationship, and that the
      sponsor is currently exercising Treaty rights in the UK.

  15. The refusal letter cites paragraph 33 of the human rights decision  of
      Judge Davies, promulgated on 1 October 2019, where it was  found  that
      the effect of the appellants' deportation on the sponsor did not reach
      the   threshold  of  undue  harshness  even  though  the   appellant's
      "deportation will make life very difficult for her both in a practical
      sense that her partner shares childcare, makes it practicable for  her
      to work, helps with decisions about the children but  in  addition  is
      one half of a genuine and subsisting and  it  would  appear  a  loving
      relationship". Judge Davies also stated in the paragraph cited by  the
      respondent that it was open to  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  and
      children to relocate to Slovakia. The respondent noted in the  refusal
      letter that the appellant's circumstances have not changed  since  the
      decision of Judge Davies.

  16. After considering the decision of Judge Davies and stating that little
      weight  can  be  given  to  the  appellant's  relationship  which  was
      developed when he was in the UK illegally and which was  entered  into
      under  false  pretences  (taking  advantage  of  his   partner),   the
      respondent stated in the refusal letter that the  appellant's  partner
      would not be deterred from exercising her free movement rights  should
      the appellant be removed from the UK.

  17. The refusal letter considered the  appellant's  criminal  conduct  and
      noted that he had been convicted of  assisting  unlawful  immigration.
      After quoting at length from the sentencing remarks of Judge Mort,  it
      states that due to the circumstances of the conviction, which  relates
      to the relationship with the appellant's current partner,  it  is  not
      considered appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  in  the  appellant's
      favour. The refusal letter also stated that the offence was so serious
      that the appellant  represents  a  genuine  and  sufficiently  serious
      threat to society to justify refusing to issue a residence card.


   Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

  18. The judge directed herself at paragraph 16 of the  decision  that  the
      issue to be determined was:

           "[W]hether  the   respondent   had   undertaken   an   extensive
           examination of the personal circumstances of the  appellant  and
           whether the respondent's exercise of discretion to not issue the
           appellant with a residence card was lawful."

  19. The judge heard  evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  her  brother.  The
      appellant, who had been deported on 31 December 2019, did  not  attend
      the hearing.

  20. The judge noted that it was not in  dispute  that  the  appellant  and
      sponsor are in a durable relationship.

  21. The judge stated that the decision of Judge Davies concerned different
      legal issues: Judge Davies was  considering  article  8  ECHR  and  in
      particular whether the effect of deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh
      whereas this appeal concerned whether an extensive examination of  the
      appellant's personal circumstances had  been  undertaken  as  required
      under the 2016 Regulations.

  22. The judge found that the respondent's decision was legally flawed, for
      the following reasons:

        a. The respondent did not refer to, or  explain  why  she  did  not
           apply, the following "presumption" in the Guidance:

                 In a case where the applicant meets the definition of a
                 durable partner, it is likely that to refuse a residence
                 card would deter the relevant EEA national's free movement
                 rights. This is because it has been accepted the parties
                 are in a long-standing and enduring relationship akin to
                 marriage. You must however still consider all of the
                 circumstances of the case before making a final decision on
                 this.

        b. The respondent relied on the  findings  of  Judge  Davies  about
           "undue harshness" without recognising that  undue  harshness  is
           not the test under the 2016 Regulations.


        c. The respondent appears to not have recognised that the  findings
           of Judge Davies that life will be very difficult for the sponsor
           in the UK without the appellant and that  she  could  return  to
           Slovakia are "clear  indicators  that  the  [sponsor]  would  be
           deterred  from  exercising  her  free  movement  rights  if  the
           appellant were refused a residence card".

        d. When assessing the appellant's criminal conduct, the  respondent
           did not look at all the  relevant  factors  including  that  the
           appellant and sponsor were in a genuine relationship by the time
           the appellant was arrested, that they  have  two  children,  and
           that the application for a residence card was  made  at  a  time
           when the relationship was genuine and subsisting.

        e. There is no reference in the decision to the best  interests  of
           the appellant and to the best interests of his two children.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

  23. The first argument advanced by the respondent in the grounds of appeal
      is that the judge conducted the hearing "on the wrong premise", as  if
      she were dealing with a judicial review hearing. Before me, Mr Lindsay
      stated that he was not relying on this argument and that  he  accepted
      that the judge adopted the  correct  approach,  which  was  to  assess
      whether the respondent's  exercise  of  discretion  under  regulations
      18(4) and (5) had been undertaken adequately.

  24. The second argument in the grounds submits that the  judge  failed  to
      consider the fact that the appellant had already been deported due  to
      his serious offence.

  25. The third argument in the grounds of appeal is that the judge did  not
      explain why the sponsor  would  not  be  able  to  exercise  her  free
      movement rights. The grounds make the observation that the appellant's
      deportation has not prevented the sponsor from working in the UK.

  26. The fourth argument in the grounds submits that the judge was wrong to
      state that all of the personal circumstances were not fully considered
      in the refusal  letter.  It  is  noted  that  in  the  refusal  letter
      consideration was given to the relationship between  the  sponsor  and
      appellant, the fact that they have two children, and  the  details  of
      the offence committed by the appellant.

  27. The fifth argument in the grounds  is  that  the  judge  misunderstood
      regulation 8(8) as it does not require consideration to  be  given  to
      the best interests of the appellant's children. It is stated that,  in
      any event, the children  were  considered  in  the  broader  extensive
      examination  including  the  previous  findings  of   the   First-tier
      Tribunal, where it was found that the effect of deportation would  not
      be unduly harsh for them.

  28. At the hearing, Mr Lindsay argued that the judge's assessment  of  the
      respondent's exercise of discretion was flawed because the  issue  for
      the respondent to consider, when exercising  discretion,  was  whether
      the sponsor would be  deterred  from  exercising  her  right  to  free
      movement,  and  it  was  plain  that  the  respondent  had  done  this
      adequately in the  refusal  letter.  He  highlighted  that  regulation
      8(8)(c) refers to "deterrence"  and  maintained  that  the  judge  had
      improperly equated deterrence with merely making life more  difficult.
      The finding of Judge Davies, which the respondent was entitled to rely
      on, was  that  life  will  be  more  difficult  as  a  result  of  the
      deportation, not that the sponsor would be deterred from  residing  in
      the UK or otherwise from exercising her Treaty rights. Mr Lindsay also
      submitted that the judge was wrong to state that the  relevant  issues
      were not considered in the refusal letter.

  29. Mr Mustafa, in summary, argued that the refusal letter did not contain
      an adequate examination of the appellant's personal circumstances,  as
      required under the 2016 Regulations, for  the  reasons  given  by  the
      judge.

Analysis

  30. Mr Lindsay and Mr Mustafa were in agreement that the judge  approached
      the appeal  correctly,  by  considering  whether  the  respondent  had
      adequately undertaken an  extensive  examination  of  the  appellant's
      personal circumstances that included examination of  the  factors  set
      out in regulation 8(8). Those factors are (a) the  best  interests  of
      the appellant; (b) the character and conduct of the appellant; and (c)
      whether the  sponsor  would  be  deterred  from  exercising  her  free
      movement rights.

  31. In my view, the respondent's assessment of all three of the factors in
      regulation 8(8) was inadequate.

  32. First, even though Regulation 8(8)(a)  requires  consideration  to  be
      given to the best interests of an applicant, the refusal  letter  does
      not contain any assessment of  the  appellant's  best  interests.  The
      judge was therefore entitled to  find  that  the  respondent  did  not
      comply with her duty under regulation 8(8)(a). Mr Lindsay argued  that
      there was no duty  on  the  respondent  under  regulation  8(8)(a)  to
      consider the best interests  of  the  appellant's  children.  That  is
      correct, but the point does  not  undermine  the  judge's  finding  at
      paragraph 40 that the respondent does not appear  to  have  considered
      the best interests of the appellant.

  33. Second, Regulation 8(8)(b) requires consideration to be given  to  the
      conduct and character of an applicant. However, the only aspect of the
      appellant's conduct and character considered in the refusal letter  is
      the fact that he committed a crime which relates to his partner.  This
      crime is, of course, highly relevant to the  appellant's  conduct  and
      character, but it is not the only relevant  consideration.  The  judge
      was, in my view, entitled to reach the conclusion that the  assessment
      under regulation 8(8)(b) was inadequate both  because  the  particular
      circumstances of the offence were not considered in the refusal letter
      (as set out by the judge in paragraph 38 of the decision) and  because
      other aspects of the appellant's personal circumstances, such  as  his
      relationship with his children, were also not considered.

  34. Third, Regulation 8(8)(c) requires an assessment  of  whether  an  EEA
      national would be deterred from exercising their free movement  rights
      if the application was refused. The respondent's assessment  of  this,
      in paragraphs 25 - 30 of the refusal letter,  is  plainly  inadequate,
      for several reasons. First, reliance is placed on  the  conclusion  of
      Judge Davies that the effect of the appellant's deportation would  not
      be unduly harsh on his children  without  acknowledging  that  "unduly
      harsh"  is  not  coterminous  with  deterrence  from  exercising  free
      movement  rights.  Plainly,  an  individual  might  be  deterred  from
      exercising Treaty  rights  as  a  consequence  of  her  partner  being
      deported even though the effect of  that  deportation  is  not  unduly
      harsh. Second, despite quoting in the refusal letter  a  paragraph  of
      Judge  Davies'  decision  where  it  was  said  that  the  appellant's
      deportation will make "life very difficult" for the sponsor in the UK,
      the refusal letter does  not  address  whether  the  "very  difficult"
      circumstances will deter the sponsor from  exercising  Treaty  rights.
      Third, at paragraph 29 of the refusal  letter  the  respondent  states
      that little weight can be given to the relationship as it was  entered
      into under false pretences and when the appellant did not  have  leave
      to be in the UK. This is given as a reason the  sponsor  will  not  be
      deterred from  exercising  her  free  movement  rights.  However,  the
      appellant's status when the relationship commenced (and his conduct at
      that time) is of little, if any, relevance to whether the sponsor will
      be deterred from exercising treaty rights. Far more relevant  to  this
      question is  the  current  state  of  the  relationship  including  in
      particular the appellant's relationship with their children.  However,
      the refusal letter does not consider this.

  35. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge, for the reasons she  gave,
      was entitled to find that the respondent did not undertake an adequate
      extensive examination of the appellant's circumstances.  It  therefore
      remains for the respondent to make a lawful decision in respect of the
      appellant's application for a residence card.

Notice of decision

  36. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

  37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law. The decision stands.

|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 1 April 2021                |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |

