
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06286/2018

|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 January 2020                                |On 4 February 2020            |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              OLUWASEUN OLUYOLE
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Bassi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Mr E Yerokuh of A&E Solicitors.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission a decision of First-
        Tier Tribunal Judge L K Gibbs promulgated on 4 July 2019  in  which
        the Judge allowed Mr Oluyole's appeal against the  refusal  of  the
        above Secretary of State to issue him a Permanent Residence Card as
        the family member of his spouse,  a  citizen  of  the  Republic  of
        Ireland and the United Kingdom.



Background


     2. Mr Oluyole is a citizen of Nigeria born on 26 April 1981.
     3. The Judge accepts Mr Oluyole's spouse, Ms Gibson, has  since  birth
        had dual Republic of Ireland and British citizenship.
     4. The Judge found that Mr Oluyole and Ms Gibson were  married  on  12
        March 2011. A previous application for  a  Residence  Card  as  the
        family member of his spouse was refused on 24 January 2012  as  the
        Secretary of State was not satisfied that Ms Gibson was a Qualified
        Person in accordance with Regulation 6  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
        Regulations 2006.
     5. Mr Oluyole was ultimately issued a Residence Card on 10 June 2013.
     6. In light of the chronology the Judge was satisfied that  Ms  Gibson
        should be treated as an EEA national [22].
     7. The Judge then considered whether Ms Gibson had  been  a  Qualified
        Person throughout the required  5-year  period.  The  Secretary  of
        State accepted that Ms Gibson was a jobseeker between 19  September
        2011 and 15 February 2012 and  a  worker  between  April  2012-July
        2012, and again from 3 April 2013 to 5 April 2016 and was currently
        in support of Employment Support Allowance (ESA) as she was  unable
        to work due to illness [23].
     8. At [24 -25] the Judge writes:


             24.  The appellant's witness statement only briefly deals with
                  the issue of his wife's employment  and  it  does  not,  I
                  find, provide any helpful detail on this issue. I also  do
                  not have any witness statement from Ms Gibson and she  did
                  not attend the appeal hearing. There is however undisputed
                  documentary evidence  from  the  Department  of  Work  and
                  Pensions that she started to receive ESA on 1  April  2016
                  and that she continues to receive this benefit up  to  and
                  including the date of the appeal hearing.


             25.  I am satisfied that ESA is a benefit paid to  people  who
                  are assessed to be unfit to work. It is not disputed  that
                  for 3 years, 2013 - 2016, Ms Gibson met  the  requirements
                  of Regulation 4(1)(a) of the 2016 Regs as a worker.  Based
                  on her receipt of ESA since 1 April 2016  I  am  satisfied
                  that, in accordance with Regulation 5(7) of the 2016  Regs
                  Ms  Gibson  has  retained  a  worker   status   and   that
                  consequently  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
                  Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2016 Regs and  must  be  issued
                  with  a  Permanent  Residence  Card  in  accordance   with
                  Regulation 19 of the 2016 Regs.


     9. The Secretary of State  asserts  the  Judge  failed  to  address  a
        material issue namely whether Mr Oluyole could satisfy  Schedule  3
        of the Immigration  (EEA)  (Amendment)  Regulations  2012:  section
        2(3)b(i) - "held a valid registration certificate or residence card
        issued under the 2006 Regulations" at the  relevant  date.   It  is
        stated Mr Oluyole did not hold either of these documents.
    10. It was also submitted Mr Oluyole had no right  of  residence  under
        the 2016 Regulations in any event, as an application made on 1 June
        2012 was withdrawn before any consideration was made or  any  right
        to residence established, and no further application  was  received
        until January 2013.  As such Mr Oluyole  cannot  meet  transitional
        arrangements for his sponsors dual British and EEA nationality.
    11. The grounds assert the  errors  are  material  as  they  render  Mr
        Oluyole unable to meet section 2(3)b(i) at the relevant date  which
        must be considered together with section  2(3)b(ii)  and  (iii)  of
        Schedule 3 of the Regulations.
    12. The Secretary of State asserts Mr Oluyole cannot meet Regulation  9
        of the 2016 Regulations as there was no  evidence  of  the  sponsor
        exercising treaty rights in another Member State either.
    13. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal on the basis it is said  to  be  arguable  the  Judge  has
        fallen into error in considering the application of  the  scope  of
        Schedule 3 and in relation to  the  position  appertaining  to  the
        holding of documents. It also said to be  arguable  the  Judge  has
        fallen into error in relation to the  question  of  there  being  a
        right of residence. It is therefore arguable that the  outcome  has
        been affected and further it is arguable that the Judge has set out
        in insufficient analysis in relation to the core issues leading  to
        the  conclusion  in  respect  of  the  context  identified  in  the
        permission application.




Error of law


Submissions

    14. The Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 have undergone a  series  of
        amendments to reflect decisions of the  European  Court.  One  such
        exercise resulted in the EEA (Amendment) Regulations 2012  referred
        to by the  Secretary  of  State  in  her  pleadings.  The  relevant
        provision in this appeal is SCHEDULE 3 of the 2012 EEA  (Amendment)
        Regulation which  sets  out  the  transitional  provisions  in  the
        following terms:


             Transitional Provisions
             Interpretation


             1.  In this Schedule-


             (a)the "2006  Regulations"  means  the  Immigration  (European
             Economic Area) Regulations 2006; and


             (b)the  terms  "EEA  family  permit",  "EEA  State",   "family
             member", "registration certificate" and "residence card"  have
             the meanings given in regulation 2(1) of the 2006 Regulations.
             Amendments to the definition of EEA national


             2.-(1) Where the right of a family member ("F") to be admitted
             to, or reside in, the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  the  2006
             Regulations depends on the fact that a person ("P") is an  EEA
             national, P will, notwithstanding the effect of paragraph 1(d)
             of Schedule 1 to these Regulations, continue to be regarded as
             an EEA national for the purpose of the 2006 Regulations  where
             the criteria in subparagraphs (2), (3) or (4) are met and  for
             as  long  as  they  remain  satisfied   in   accordance   with
             subparagraph (5).


             (2) The criterion in this subparagraph is met where F  was  on
             16th July 2012 a person with a permanent right  to  reside  in
             the United Kingdom under the 2006 Regulations.


             (3) The criteria in this subparagraph are met where F-


             (a)was on the 16th July 2012 a person with a right  to  reside
             in the United Kingdom under the 2006 Regulations; and


             (b)on the 16th October 2012-


             (i)held a valid registration  certificate  or  residence  card
             issued under the 2006 Regulations;


             (ii)had made an application under the 2006 Regulations  for  a
             registration certificate or residence card which had not  been
             determined; or


             (iii)had made an application under the 2006 Regulations for  a
             registration certificate or  residence  card  which  had  been
             refused and in respect of which an appeal under regulation  26
             could be brought while the appellant is in the United  Kingdom
             (excluding the possibility of  an  appeal  out  of  time  with
             permission) or was pending (within the meaning of section  104
             of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002(19)).


             (4) The criteria in this subparagraph are met where F-


             (a)had, prior to the 16th July 2012, applied for an EEA family
             permit pursuant to regulation 12 of the 2006 Regulations; or


             (b)has applied for and been refused an EEA family  permit  and
             where, on the 16th July 2012, an appeal  under  regulation  26
             against  that  decision  could  be  brought   (excluding   the
             possibility of an appeal out of time with permission)  or  was
             pending (within the meaning of section 104 of the 2002 Act).


             (5) Where met, the criteria in subparagraph (2), (3)  and  (4)
             remain satisfied until the occurrence of the earliest  of  the
             following events-


             (a)the date six months after an EEA  family  permit  has  been
             issued if F has not within that period been  admitted  to  the
             United Kingdom;


             (b)the date on which an appeal against a decision referred  to
             in subparagraph (3)(b)(iii) or (4)(b) can no longer be brought
             (ignoring the possibility  of  an  appeal  out  of  time  with
             permission) where no such appeal has been brought;


             (c)the date on which any appeal against a decision referred to
             in subparagraph (3)(b)(iii) or (4)(b) is  finally  determined,
             is withdrawn or is abandoned (within the  meaning  of  section
             104 of the 2002 Act) (save where the  outcome  of  the  appeal
             process is that the document in question falls to be granted);


             (d)the date on which F ceases to be the family  member  of  an
             EEA national; or


             (e)the date on which a  right  of  permanent  residence  under
             regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations is  lost  in  accordance
             with regulation 15(2) of those Regulations.
             A
             (6) P will only continue to be regarded as an EEA national for
             the purpose of considering the position of F  under  the  2006
             Regulations.


    15. It was submitted by Ms Bassi that an application made in  2012  had
        been withdrawn. The Judge at [21] writes:


             21.  The appellant made a further application on 1  June  2012
                  for a Residence Card and was issued with a Certificate  of
                  Application on 6 September 2012. The respondent's Employer
                  Checking  Service  issued  a  letter  on  2  October  2012
                  confirming  that  the   appellant   had   an   outstanding
                  application at that time and that he was able to work.  On
                  27  December  2012  the  respondent  wrote  to  Ms  Gibson
                  confirming  that  the  appellant's  application  had  been
                  withdrawn further to her instructions of 20 November 2012.
                  The respondent also wrote in these terms to the appellant.
                  Ms  Gibson  and  the  appellant  disputed  that  she   had
                  withdrawn her support for the application and in a  letter
                  dated 15 February 2013 the respondent  accepted  this  and
                  stated that the application remained under  consideration.
                  The appellant was ultimately issued with a Residence  Card
                  on 10 June 2013.


    16. It was also submitted by Ms Bassi that the Judge's finding that the
        Secretary of State had accepted that the application remained under
        consideration is factually incorrect.
    17. A printout from the Secretary of  State's  Case  Management  System
        records an entry for 6 February 2013 in the following terms:


             "Female called identifying  herself  as  the  partner  of  the
             subject, Gemma Gibson.


              She stated that she had received a letter  stating  that  she
             had withdrawn her sponsorship from the  application  (of  June
             2012) and advising her to call the LIT.


             I asked if she had since made any further applications and she
             stated that they have, by just changing the date  and  sending
             the  same  application.  I  informed  her  that  this  remains
             outstanding  and  that  the  withdrawal  of  sponsorship  only
             applies to the previous application which is now concluded and
             that the new one remains outstanding.


             She adamantly stated that she did not withdraw her sponsorship
             from the previous application. I told her  that  the  new  one
             will be considered and that her claims and that if  she  wants
             to reinforce this again to be considered as part  of  the  new
             application, she can write to the team in Liverpool  where  it
             is being considered."


    18. There was no challenge by way of judicial review to the  lawfulness
        of the Secretary of State's decision to treat  the  application  as
        withdrawn.
    19. On behalf of Mr Oluyole it was argued the Secretary of  State  does
        not argue an error of law but an  error  of  fact  insufficient  to
        warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering further in this matter.
    20. Mr Oluyole also argued that if he had not made  an  application  in
        2012 the later grant of a Residence Card would not  have  occurred.
        It was also argued there was no copy of the alleged new application
        produced and that it was disputed that such an application had been
        made.
    21. Mr Yerokuh referred to a Freedom of Information Act  (FIA)  request
        having been made and claimed there  was  no  copy  of  the  further
        application in the bundle received as a result of the  application.
        He  submitted  the  application   allegedly   withdrawn   was   the
        application which resulted in the Residence Card being granted.  It
        was submitted the letter of 3 February 2012 is  the  basis  for  Mr
        Oluyole's  claim  that  the  original  application  had  not   been
        withdrawn.
    22. It was further submitted on Mr Oluyole's behalf that  the  evidence
        produced by the Secretary of State, referred to above, did not show
        that the sponsor confirmed that a fresh application had  been  made
        and that there was no  evidence  to  support  the  claim  that  the
        earlier application had been treated as withdrawn.
    23. It was accepted by Mr  Yerokuh  that  all  the  Judge  had  was  Mr
        Oluyole's appeal bundle even though the result of the  FIA  request
        had been in the position of  the  representative.  The  documentary
        evidence relied upon by the Judge was that in Mr  Oluyole's  bundle
        only. Mr Yerokuh claims the Judge was given every chance to look at
        the evidence but that the Judge did not give a direction  for  such
        evidence to be produced. It was also argued that  directions  given
        by the First-tier Tribunal did not say that the burden was upon  Mr
        Oluyole to disclose all the bundles.
    24. Mr Yerokuh submitted that the alleged error is disputed but even if
        it was made out this did not satisfy the required tests  to  enable
        the Upper Tribunal to find error  of  law.  It  was  submitted  the
        Secretary of State was attempting to amend the grounds and that the
        claim by Ms Bassi that this issue had been raised  in  the  refusal
        letter was not correct. If an error may have been made it  was  not
        material as the evidence which showed that an application had  been
        made in 2012 and not withdrawn.


   Discussion


    25. The question of whether the 2012 application had been withdrawn  is
        of importance for had it been withdrawn  and  a  fresh  application
        made Mr Oluyole would not be able to meet the requirements  of  the
        transitional provisions which would be fatal to his appeal, as  had
        Mr Oluyole not shown he could satisfy the  transitional  provisions
        the Judge's decision is not consistent with decision in McCarthy  v
        UK (Case C-434/09).
    26. The question of whether the 2012 application had been withdrawn was
        clearly a matter that was live before the Judge. The  Secretary  of
        State is therefore entitled to pursue the grounds  of  appeal  that
        she has especially in light of the grant of permission to appeal.
    27. When the Tribunal asked Mr Yerokuh to pass up  the  bundle  he  had
        following the FIA  request  a  degree  of  hesitancy  was  detected
        resulting in it having to be made clear that the Tribunal wished to
        see these documents. They had  not  been  disclosed  to  the  Judge
        despite the fact they were in the representatives possession  which
        also meant the Presenting Officer did not have sight  of  the  same
        and  was  not  given  the  opportunity  to  address   whether   the
        application of January 2013, which Ms Bassi states is the one which
        led  to  the  grant  of  the  Residence  Card,  was  treated  as  a
        continuation of  the  withdrawn  2012  application  as  Mr  Oluyole
        alleges, or not.
    28. The reason for Mr Yerokuh's hesitancy became  clear  once  the  FIA
        documents were considered. It had been submitted  on  Mr  Oluyole's
        behalf that there was no evidence in those documents to  show  that
        the earlier 2012 application had been  withdrawn.  There  had  been
        provided in Mr Oluyole's  bundle  a  copy  letter  written  by  his
        sponsor to the Secretary of State claiming not  to  have  withdrawn
        her support for his application, which must indicate the author  of
        the letter was aware of the  decision  maker's  position  that  the
        application had been withdrawn. There is in the FIA bundle  a  copy
        of a document headed "Return of Document Request" dated 20 November
        2012 stating the reason for the document request was withdrawal  of
        sponsorship, setting out the  Home  Office  reference,  applicant's
        names as that of Mr Oluyole and Gemma Sarah Gibson,  correct  dates
        of birth and  nationalities,  and  the  date  the  application  was
        submitted on 1 June 2012.
    29. There is within  the  bundle  a  letter  dated  13  May  2012  from
        Patterson  &  Co,  Immigration  Advisers  in  London,   filing   an
        application for a  Residence  Card  following  the  refusal  of  an
        earlier application for a Residence Card dated 12 January 2012.
    30. The FIA papers include a document headed "GCID" Case  Record  Sheet
        relating to an application made on 1 June 2012 for an EEA Residence
        Card of which the case outcome is noted as "Withdrawn  application"
        in the outcome section dated 27 December 2012. There is a  specific
        reference to an entry dated  20  December  2012  stating  that  the
        application has been withdrawn as the  sponsor  has  withdrawn  her
        sponsorship and is  in  the  process  of  filing  for  divorce.  An
        internal minute records a letter sent to Mr Oluyole on  14  January
        2013 which contains the following:


             "I have noted that Mr Oluyole's application was withdrawn in a
             letter dated 20 November 2012."


    31. The Note records a fax from the sponsor stating she did not wish to
        have the application withdrawn, dated January 2013, and a complaint
        received on 23 January 2013 from the sponsor stating  she  had  not
        withdrawn her support for the application.
    32. A further entry dated  2  February  2013  records  Mr  Oluyole  was
        refused a residence card  on  12  January  2012  and  his  passport
        retained as he had no current leave. It is  also  stated  a  letter
        submitted to  say  the  sponsor  was  withdrawing  her  application
        provided no reason to suggest it was not the applicant's letter  as
        it contained the address that the applicant  had  supplied  with  a
        previous application. It is also  noted  the  sponsor  appeared  to
        withdraw support for the  application  in  a  subsequent  telephone
        call. The person making the entry notes there  was  no  reason  for
        UKBA  to  question  the  genuine  nature  of  that  application  to
        withdraw. There is also a copy of the note recording the  telephone
        call by Miss Gibson referred to by Ms Bassi in her  submissions  in
        which she stated that she had not withdrawn the application but had
        made a further application by changing the  date  and  sending  the
        same application which Ms Gibson was advised would  be  considered.
        This shows a fresh application was made.
    33. A further Case Record  Sheet  dated  4  June  2013  refers  to  the
        conversation noted above and consideration of the application  that
        was pending at that date.
    34. I find that there is clear evidence to  support  the  Secretary  of
        State's assertion that the application for a Residence Card made in
        2012 was treated as withdrawn following notification by the sponsor
        that she was withdrawing her  support  for  the  same.  I  find  Mr
        Oluyole's current representative was fully aware that such evidence
        existed following receipt of the FIA request  papers.  I  note  the
        claim the Judge could have issued a direction for such documents to
        be  produced,  but  did  not,  as  if  this  somehow  absolves  the
        representative for the failure to  make  a  full,  frank  and  open
        disclosure, has no merit. It is not made out  the  Judge  was  even
        aware of these documents which had also not been disclosed  to  the
        Upper Tribunal and only came to light as a result of a comment made
        by Mr Yerokuh during his submissions.
    35. The Overriding Objectives together  with  the  obligation  owed  by
        advocates to any Court or Tribunal they appear before  means  there
        is an obligation to  make  a  full  and  frank  disclosure  of  all
        evidence they have in their possession relevant to  the  issues  in
        the appeal in accordance with their duty  of  candour.  Mr  Yerokuh
        argued that such issues had not been  raised  in  the  reasons  for
        refusal letter, but they were clearly raised at the hearing  before
        the Judge and by the Secretary of State in relation to this appeal,
        yet the denial of there being any relevant material continued.
    36. I find the balance of the evidence supports Ms  Bassi's  submission
        that as a result of the  2012  application  having  been  withdrawn
        later that year Mr Oluyole was unable to satisfy  the  requirements
        of the transitional  provisions  set  out  in  the  2012  Amendment
        Regulations. As such Mr Oluyole was not  entitled  to  a  Residence
        Card.
    37. Although it was submitted on Mr Oluyole's behalf that the Secretary
        of State was seeking to rely upon an error of fact such can  amount
        to an error of law. In this appeal, as a result of not having  been
        given the full evidential picture, the Judge has erred  in  law  in
        allowing the appeal when the correct examination  of  the  evidence
        shows Mr Oluyole has no legal basis to be granted a Residence Card.
        The decision to allow the appeal is infected by legal error.
    38. As Ms Gibson has been a British and Irish citizen since birth it is
        not made out she is able to show she has exercised treaty rights in
        a Member State of which she is not a national in  exercise  of  her
        right of free movement.
    39. It is not made out therefore that  this  is  a  case  in  which  Mr
        Oluyole has any realistic prospects of success.
    40. Even if granted a Residence Card subsequent to  the  withdrawal  of
        the 2012 application on  the  further  application  this  does  not
        support the claim that Mr Oluyole is entitled to a  Residence  Card
        on the application leading to the impugned decision under appeal.

Decision

    41. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    42. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 28 January 2020












