
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06283/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remote hearing by Skype              |On 28 May 2021                       |
|On 13 May 2021                       |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                           ANTHONY DUBEM ASOMUGHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr O. Ngwuocha, Solicitor, Carl Martin Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of the  First-
       tier Tribunal Kaler ("the judge") promulgated on 23 November 2020.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23 May 1990. His father
       ("the sponsor") is a national of Austria living in the UK.

    3. On 19 September 2019 the appellant applied for an EEA  family  permit
       to join the sponsor in the UK under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations
       2016 ("the 2016 Regulations") on the basis that he is  the  sponsor's
       family member as defined in  regulation  7(1)(b)(ii)  (the  sponsor's
       dependent direct descendant).

    4. On 14 October 2019 the respondent  refused  the  application  on  the
       basis that the evidence submitted by the appellant did not  establish
       that he was dependent on the sponsor.

    5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  decision
       promulgated on 23 November 2020, the judge dismissed the appeal.

  Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    6. The judge found that the appellant is a single man with no dependents
       and that the sponsor has been sending him money  regularly  and  pays
       his rent. The judge  was  not  satisfied,  however,  that  there  was
       dependency for the purposes of the 2016 Regulations.

    7. The judge's findings on this are set out in paragraphs 15 - 18 of the
       decision, where he stated:

           "15.   Applying Reyes [Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013]  UKUT
           00314 (IAC)], it is not enough to show that financial support is
           provided by an EU citizen to a family member; the family  member
           must need that support in order to meet his basic  needs;  there
           needed to exist a situation of real dependence. It is  necessary
           to determine that the family member is dependent in the sense of
           being in need of assistance. If the family  member  can  support
           himself,  there  is  no  dependency  even  though  he  is  given
           financial support from the EU citizen.

           16.    I note that the appellant has not provided his  own  bank
           statements or set out what his regular outgoings are. This would
           have assisted in establishing the state of his  finances.  I  am
           unable to assess whether there is any  money  available  to  him
           from other sources.

           17.    The appellant is now aged 31, he was a student until 2017
           and he was doing military service after  that.  He  says  he  is
           unemployed, and the sponsor says he  has  been  unable  to  find
           work. I accept he has been reliant on his father to pay his rent
           but there is little evidence about  why  he  needs  to  live  in
           rented property paid for by  his  father.  He  was  living  with
           relatives when he was a student  and  before  he  went  for  his
           military service. No evidence was  adduced  about  other  family
           members who are in Nigeria and with whom he lived in  the  past,
           and why he cannot stay with them. He is a fit young man, but the
           test is not whether he can support himself but whether he  needs
           his  father's  assistance  to  provide  for  his  basic   needs.
           Providing him with a flat where he lives on his own is what  the
           sponsor has chosen to do.

           18.    Thus, whilst I accept that the sponsor has  been  sending
           money to his son, I am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is
           reliant on this to pay for his basic needs.  The  appellant  has
           not shown that he is dependent on the EU citizen and so  is  not
           entitled to an EEA residence card."

  Grounds of appeal

    8. The grounds argue that the judge erred by requiring the appellant  to
       demonstrate that he needed the sponsor's support. It is  asserted  in
       the grounds that the 2016 Regulations do not require an applicant  to
       produce evidence of his own personal circumstances in his country  or
       explain the reasons for his recourse to support from the sponsor.

    9. It is also argued in the grounds that  the  judge  was  incorrect  to
       state that there had been an absence of evidence of  the  appellant's
       circumstances  in  Nigeria  given  the  evidence  submitted  to   the
       respondent about his full-time education and receipt  of  maintenance
       payments from his father.

   10. The grounds refer to, and rely upon, the following two cases:  Jia  v
       Migrationsverket (KC/1/05), [2007] QB 545 and RK (India) v  Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2010] UKUT 421 (IAC).

  Submissions

   11. I drew to  Mr  Ngwuocha's  attention  a  more  recent  authority  not
       referred to in the grounds  Lim  v  Entry  Clearance  Officer  Manila
       [2015] EWCA Civ 1383, and gave him an opportunity to consider it.

   12. Mr Ngwuocha argued that the evidence  established  that  the  sponsor
       provided support to the appellant and that this support was  for  his
       basic needs, including accommodation and  maintenance.  He  submitted
       that Lim was distinguishable because in that case the  appellant  was
       financially independent and could support  herself  whereas  in  this
       case the appellant was genuinely reliant on his father.

   13. Mr  Tufan  expressed  surprise  that  Lim  had  not  been  raised  or
       considered previously. He argued that Lim makes clear that it is  not
       enough for the appellant to show he receives  financial  support:  he
       must also show that the support is needed. He argued that the limited
       evidence submitted by the appellant  was  insufficient  to  establish
       this.

  Analysis

   14.  It  is  not  sufficient,  in  order  to  establish  the  appellant's
       dependency on the sponsor under regulation 7(1)(b)(ii)  of  the  2016
       Regulations, that the sponsor provides financial material support  to
       the appellant. It must also be shown that the  appellant  needs  that
       support for his subsistence in the county  of  origin  (although  the
       reason for the dependence is irrelevant).  This  was  made  clear  in
       Reyes v Migrationsverket 2014/C-423/12,  [2014]  QB  1140,  where  at
       [69(1)] it is stated:

           "[A]ny member of the family of a Union citizen who, for whatever
           reason, proves unable to  support  himself  in  his  country  of
           origin and  in  fact  finds  himself  in  such  a  situation  of
           dependence that the  material  support  provided  by  the  Union
           citizen is necessary for his subsistence, is to be considered to
           be a 'dependant'." [emphasis added]

   15. This interpretation of dependency was confirmed by Elias LJ  in  Lim.
       At [32] he stated:

           "[T]he critical question is whether the claimant is in fact in a
           position to support himself or not, and  Reyes  now  makes  that
           clear beyond doubt, in my view. That is a simple matter of fact.
           If he can support himself, there is no dependency, even if he is
           given financial  material  support  by  the  EU  citizen.  Those
           additional resources are not necessary to enable him to meet his
           basic needs. If, on the other hand, he  cannot  support  himself
           from his own resources, the court will not ask why that  is  the
           case, save perhaps where there is an abuse of rights.  The  fact
           that he chooses not to get a job and become  self-supporting  is
           irrelevant."

   16. I agree with Mr Tufan that the judge's approach was  consistent  with
       Reyes and Lim.  Having  found  that  the  sponsor  provided  material
       financial support to the appellant  (in  particular,  by  paying  his
       rent) the judge went on to consider whether the appellant needed that
       support for his subsistence. The judge noted that the  appellant  had
       not provided evidence about his income  and  outgoings;  or  evidence
       from family members in Nigeria to explain why he was no  longer  able
       to live with them and therefore needed the appellant to pay his rent.
       In the absence of such evidence, the judge was entitled to find  that
       the appellant had not established that he  needed  support  from  the
       sponsor.

   17. The grounds submit that the appellant was  not  required  to  produce
       evidence about his personal circumstances in Nigeria. I disagree,  as
       the burden was on the appellant  to  establish  his  case.  Moreover,
       Reyes makes it clear that the onus was on the  appellant  to  provide
       such evidence. In [69(1)] of Reyes it is said:

           "As  regards  members  of  the  nuclear  family  deemed  to   be
           dependants, such a situation must really exist and may be proved
           by any means. The applicant may thus provide the authorities  of
           the host Member State with both  subjective  evidence  connected
           with his  own  economic  and  social  situation  and  any  other
           relevant item of evidence  that  may  illustrate,  in  a  manner
           helpful to those authorities, the objective  background  to  the
           application."

   18. Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not
       identify an error of law. The decision therefore stands.




  Decision

   19. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did
       not involve the making of an error of law and stands.
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|D. Sheridan                         |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                                    |
|                                    |Dated: 14 May 2021                  |

