

                                    [pic]


|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal number: EA/06581/2017         |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Decision & Reasons           |
|         |                          |        |Promulgated                  |
|         |On 24 April 2019          |        |On 10 May 2019               |
|         |                          |                   |                   |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|                                                                            |
|           |Nicholas Andre Phillips                           |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, of Counsel, instructed  by  Cahill  De
                    Fonseka Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr. Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions



 1. The appellant, a national of Jamaica born on 25 September 1974, appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet who, in  a
    decision promulgated on 5 July 2018 following  a  hearing  on  26  June
    2018, dismissed his appeal against a decision of the respondent  of  28
    June  2017  to  refuse  his  application  for  a  residence   card   as
    confirmation of his  right  to  reside  as  the  spouse  of  Ms  Nadine
    Phillips, a British citizen born  on  15  August  1977  in  the  United
    Kingdom  (hereafter  the  "sponsor"),  under  regulation   9   of   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  (the   "EEA
    Regulations").

 2. The appellant first came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  1999.  He  then
    returned to Jamaica and married the sponsor there in 2000. Between 1999
    and 2015, the appellant lived in Jamaica whilst the sponsor  lived  and
    worked  in  the  United  Kingdom.  In  September  2015,  the  appellant
    travelled  to  Ireland.  The  sponsor  also  travelled  to  Ireland  in
    September 2015. They said that they wanted to start a new  life  there.
    They travelled to the United Kingdom in November 2015 with  a  view  to
    spending Christmas with the  family  but  did  not  return  to  Ireland
    because the sponsor's mother became ill. The appellant was not employed
    in Ireland but the sponsor worked as a nanny there.

 3. The issues before me are: (i) whether the judge erred in law by failing
    to make any findings on the evidence of the appellant and  the  sponsor
    or any relevant findings of fact; and (ii) in the alternative,  whether
    the judge failed to give adequate reasons for his findings.

 4. Ms Akinbolu submitted that the judge failed to assess the evidence  and
    merely re-stated the evidence in the section of his  decision  entitled
    "Findings of Fact". She submitted that the judge had simply  failed  to
    engage with the evidence of the sponsor's  employment  in  Ireland.  He
    made no mention of the sponsor's employment  in  the  section  entitled
    "Findings of Fact" except at para 37. In the alternative,  Ms  Akinbolu
    submitted that, even if I concluded that the judge had made an inferred
    finding that the sponsor's employment in Ireland was not  genuine,  the
    judge gave inadequate or no reasons for his decision.

 5. Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge  had  implicitly  found  that  the
    sponsor's employment in Ireland was not genuine. He gave his reasons at
    para 40 of his decision, i.e. the short period of the  appellant's  and
    the sponsor's residence in Ireland, from September 2015 until 12  2015;
    the temporary nature of their accommodation in Ireland; and the lack of
    integration in Ireland. Mr Whitwell reminded  me  that  the  judge  had
    earlier recorded, in  his  summary  of  evidence,  the  length  of  the
    residence at para 11; the evidence given  about  the  accommodation  in
    Ireland at para 15; and the evidence concerning the lack of integration
    in Ireland, at paras 13, 18, 18  34  and  33,  which  showed  that  the
    evidence was that the  appellant  was  not  employed  in  Ireland,  the
    appellant and the sponsor had no family in Ireland, the sponsor had  no
    bank account in Ireland, there was no evidence of any tax being paid in
    Ireland and there was little planning  before  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor went to Ireland. He submitted that, read as a whole, the  judge
    had given adequate reasons for his  findings,  albeit  that  they  were
    brief.

 6. I heard Ms Akinbolu in reply and then reserved my decision.

Assessment

 7. I agree with Ms Akinbolu that the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
    evidence of the  sponsor's  employment  in  Ireland.  The  evidence  of
    employment was at the core of the case, since this evidence was  relied
    upon to assert  that  the  sponsor  was  exercising  Treaty  rights  in
    Ireland. As Ms Akinbolu submitted,  there  was  a  childcare  contract,
    invoices, receipts for money paid and the sponsor  was  registered  for
    tax purposes. The sponsor and the appellant also  gave  oral  evidence.
    The judge simply failed to engage with the evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    employment and failed to explain whether he accepted  or  rejected  the
    evidence of employment.

 8. It is clear that paras 35-39 of the judge's decision, under the heading
    "Findings of Fact", amounted to no more  than  a  re-statement  by  the
    judge of the evidence in the case. Mr Whitwell did not seek to  suggest
    otherwise. However, he submitted that the judge made  his  finding  and
    gave his reasons at paragraph 40, which reads as follows:

         "40. It is for these reasons that the  appellant  therefore  cannot
             meet the requirements of Regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations. I
             am not persuaded that their residence  in  the  EEA  state  was
             genuine, taking into account the short period of time that they
             lived there, the temporary nature of  their  accommodation  and
             their lack of integration in the EEA state. I am persuaded that
             their purpose in residing in the EEA state  was  to  circumvent
             the Rules which the appellant would have to meet  on  order  to
             obtain a residence card in the UK.  In  short,  it  was  not  a
             genuine stay in the EEA state and therefore I conclude that the
             appellant cannot meet the requirements of regulation 9  of  the
             EEA Regulations. The appeal should therefore be dismissed."

         (my emphasis)

 9. However, contrary to the opening  words  of  para  40,  there  were  no
    reasons given in paras 35-39 which, as I have said, only amounted to  a
    re-statement of the evidence.

10. The fact that there was evidence of the sponsor's employment in Ireland
    in the form of the contract of service, invoices and receipts and  that
    the sponsor was registered for tax purposes in Ireland was  potentially
    capable of showing that she was genuinely employed in Ireland. Plainly,
    para 40 of the judge's decision shows that the  judge  found  that  the
    sponsor's employment in Ireland was not evidence that showed  that  her
    residence in Ireland was genuinely for the purpose of exercising Treaty
    rights but it is not clear whether he accepted that she  was  employed.
    If he rejected the evidence of employment and found  that  the  sponsor
    was not employed in Ireland, his reasons are not known. If he  accepted
    that she was employed in Ireland but did not accept that the employment
    was in genuine exercise of the Treaty rights but  was  instead  a  mere
    ruse for the appellant to avoid having to comply with the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules, it is not known why.

11. Mr Whitwell referred me to the evidence  summarised  by  the  judge  at
    paras 9-31 of his decision. However, I am satisfied, given my reasoning
    at paras 7-10 above, that any reliance upon the judge's summary of  the
    evidence would be tantamount to my having to consider the evidence  and
    provide my own reasoning, which is inappropriate.

12. I am therefore satisfied that, whilst  the  judge  had  by  implication
    found that the evidence of the sponsor's employment in Ireland was  not
    evidence that showed that her residence in Ireland  was  genuinely  for
    the purpose of exercising Treaty rights, he made inadequate findings on
    material matters, including whether he accepted that  the  sponsor  was
    employed in Ireland. In addition, he failed to give any or any adequate
    reasons for his implied finding that  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    employment in Ireland was not evidence that showed that  her  residence
    in Ireland was genuinely for the purpose of exercising Treaty rights.

13. Accordingly, I set aside the judge's decision. Paras  35-40  shall  not
    stand, including the final sentence of para 39 which  states  that  the
    sponsor had stated that she was homesick, in view of the fact that  the
    appellant disputes that the sponsor gave such  evidence  and  the  fact
    that I was unable to read the judge's Record of Proceedings. Paras 9-31
    shall stand as the record of the evidence that was given to the judge.

14. As the hearing before the judge did not result  in  any  assessment  of
    credibility, the appellant has been deprived of the benefit thereof.  I
    therefore agree with Ms Akinbolu  and  Mr  Whitwell  that  this  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing.  In
    addition, Mr Whitwell submitted a copy of the decision of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart in  the  appellant's  previous  appeal
    (OA/05693/2014) which was omitted  from  the  respondent's  bundle  and
    which the respondent now wishes to rely upon.

15. In all of the circumstances, I have concluded that  it  is  appropriate
    and just for this appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a fresh hearing on the merits on all issues.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet involved  the  making
of material errors of law. His decision is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing  on
the merits on all issues by a judge other than Judge Sweet and  Judge  Bart-
Stewart.

Directions to the parties

(1)  The decision on the appeal awaits  determination  by  a  Judge  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Sweet and Judge Bart-Stewart.

(2)  The Appellant shall notify the Tribunal within five days  of  the  date
      on which these Directions are despatched the following:

     (a) if an interpreter is required  at  the  hearing,  the  language  in
           which an interpreter is required;

     (b) the number of witnesses who will give evidence.

(3)  Any further evidence the appellant seeks to  rely  on  must  be  served
      within 21 days of the date on which this "Decision and Directions"  is
      sent to the parties. The appellant's bundle must include:
      a.  Witness statements of the evidence to be called at the hearing, to
         stand as examination-in-chief.
      b.  A paginated and indexed bundle of all documents to be relied on at
           the  hearing.  Essential  passages  must  be  identified  in   a
           schedule, or highlighted.
      c.  A skeleton argument, identifying all relevant  issues  and  citing
           relevant authorities.
      d.  A chronology of events






[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 5 May 2019
