
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06790/2016

                                                           and EA/00172/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                           |Decision & Reasons           |
|On 19th October 2018                           |Promulgated                  |
|                                               |On 20th November 2018        |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

                               [A Z] and [R Z]

                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person

For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2.  The  appellants  are  father  and  daughter.   The  father  and  first
    appellant, AZ is a Pakistan national born on  4th  January  1986.   The
    Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal against a  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ripley  promulgated  on  18th  May  2018
    allowing the appeal against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 27th May 2016 which revoked the first appellant's residence  card
    on the basis of a marriage of convenience to TZ, a Czech national  born
    on 4th February 1964.

 3. The second appellant, RZ, the daughter, (whose mother  is  a  Taiwanese
    national, MAW, born on 26th August 1976), was refused a residence  card
    by the Secretary of State on 29th November 2016.  Both  decisions  were
    refused under Regulation 2 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016.   The Secretary of State decided that as  the  father
    and first appellant was not a family member of an EEA national nor  was
    the second appellant.

 4. The background is as follows.  The first appellant AZ  claims  to  live
    with both his EU national, sponsor and wife, and also,  secondly,  with
    Ms MAW, (his daughter's mother) in an intimate relationship.   AZ,  the
    first appellant made contact with MAW in 2009, married the  EU  sponsor
    in October 2010, visited the UK twice in 2012 and 2014 and  was  issued
    with  a  Czech  residence  card  on  23rd  June  2014  because  of  his
    relationship with his EU sponsor.  The first appellant AZ  entered  the
    UK in 2014 to live. In 2015 MAW became pregnant  and  on  6th  February
    2016 the second appellant, RZ, was born. She has a  Pakistan  passport.
    It is said that the first appellant, the EU sponsor, TZ, MAW,  and  the
    second appellant RZ, all live together in a polygamous relationship.

 5. MAW applied for leave to remain on family and private life grounds  and
    that application was  refused  on  14th  June  2016.   Her  appeal  was
    refused, at the same time as this appeal was considered, by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ripley on 23rd April 2018 on  family  and  private  life
    grounds.   Permission to appeal was granted but no  error  of  law  was
    found in the decision. That Error of Law Decision  is  attached  as  an
    appendix to this decision.

Application for Permission to Appeal


 6. The application for permission to appeal made by the Secretary of State
    contended

    (i)    the claim of the first and second appellants to  be  father  and
    child was not accepted and the judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons
    for accepting this.  There was no DNA evidence.

    (ii)   in assessing the claim the judge did not indicate what, if  any,
    were the relevant findings from the appeal of  the  second  appellant's
    mother (HU/16859/2016).  The judge evinced  dissatisfaction  from  that
    decision about the evidence given but the findings were not set out nor
    did the judge identify the impact of those findings AA (Somalia) [2007]
    EWCA Civ 1040. The  judge  did  not  engage  with  the  nature  of  the
    relationships nor the  role  played  by  the  first  appellant  or  the
    concerns regarding the relationships.

    (iii)  when concluding that the marriage was not one of convenience the
    judge failed to recognise that the appellant had known  the  mother  of
    the second appellant prior to his marriage.  This was referenced in the
    decision HU/16859/2016). The  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  a
    relevant factor.

    (iv)   the judge, when factoring in that the first appellant was issued
    with a Czech residence card failed to take into account that the  first
    appellant's relationship with the second appellant's  mother  MAW,  was
    not brought to the attention  of  the  Czech  authorities.   The  judge
    therefore gave undue weight to the residence card issuance.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Buchannan. The  grant  stated
    that 'I do not wish to limit  the  scope  of  matters  which  might  be
    advanced in support thereof'.  For clarity I confirmed that  permission
    was granted on all grounds advanced by the Secretary of State.

The Hearing


 8. At the hearing, Mr Melvin submitted that he relied on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He referred to the judge's findings at [38] and  [39]  of  the
    decision in (HU/16859/2016) (MAW's appeal) that  the  evidence  between
    the witnesses, particularly that of the  first  appellant  and  the  EU
    national was discrepant.

 9. Mr AZ attended the hearing and stated that he had  since  the  decision
    submitted DNA evidence.  This was not, however, before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and nor had it been submitted in accordance with Rule 15(2) of
    The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Conclusions

10. In the separate appeal of MAW, (HU/16859/2016), the judge clearly found
    the evidence of the first appellant and the witnesses  discrepant.  The
    judge found that the appellant's EU wife and MAW  shared  accommodation
    and that they all  shared  intimate  sexual  relationships.  The  judge
    however found that the first appellant and MAW were  partners.  Neither
    had any vulnerability or dependency and the judge  found  that  it  was
    open to the first appellant to remove with MAW should  he  wish.   This
    would not interfere with the EU sponsor's freedom of  movement  rights.
    The partner and the daughter were not Taiwanese, but the appellant  had
    not shown that they could not successfully  apply  for  visa.   In  the
    alternative, MAW had not shown she could not obtain a visa for Pakistan
    and relocate there with her partner and  their  daughter.  Overall  the
    decision on removal was proportionate.

11. There was no DNA evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to  show  that
    the child (the second appellant) was the child of the first  appellant.
    As such the child was not classified as a step child and family  member
    of the sponsor.

12. In this appeal, the oral evidence given before the First-tier  Tribunal
    was set out in the decision of Judge Ripley between  paragraphs  6  and
    16.

13. The judge stated that the respondent had found the marriage to  be  one
    of convenience because he had a daughter outside of wedlock.  The judge
    noted that the child was born five years after he was married  in  2010
    but, as pointed out in the application for permission  to  appeal,  the
    evidence of the first appellant, the sponsor and MAW was  found  to  be
    inconsistent and, further, the first appellant and  MAW  had  formed  a
    relationship prior to the marriage. That they had  not  met  in  person
    prior to 2015 [23] does  not  engage  with  the  fact  that  the  first
    appellant was forming a relationship with another person, with whom  he
    proceeded to have a child, when entering  into  marriage  with  the  EU
    national sponsor.  The judge noted the age difference between the first
    appellant and the EU national sponsor, the sponsor was 20  years  older
    than AZ, but did not engage with the fact that  the  Czech  authorities
    were seemingly unaware of another relationship when issuing a residence
    card. The judge found the move to the Czech Republic was indicative  of
    commitment to the EU national but engaged no further with the fact that
    the relationship with another woman had been embarked upon or that  the
    evidence was inconsistent.  Specifically, at [26] the judge found

         'the witnesses  have  given  inconsistent  evidence  regarding  the
         development of the first appellant's relationship with  the  second
         appellant's mother and this undermined  their  credibility.   There
         were also a number of other discrepancies in the evidence which are
         set out in the linked appeal'[(HU/16859/2016)].

14. The judge proceeded

         'This and the  first  appellant's  ongoing  relationship  with  the
         second appellant's mother, leads me to have doubts that  the  first
         appellant currently enjoys a genuine matrimonial relationship  with
         the sponsor as asserted.  However, this relates to  a  period  five
         years after their marriage  and  I  am  not  satisfied  that  those
         concerns should undermine the genuineness of their relationship  at
         its outset in 2010 and the years that followed'.

15. The judge did not identify those discrepancies which were  relevant  to
    the onset of the relationship with MAW (the second appellant's mother).



16. The judge had found that it was not  possible  to  ascertain  from  the
    photographs whether their claim was correct that they were  taken  from
    each year between 2010 and 2018.  Further the judge did not engage with
    the impact of finding that the evidence was not credible  with  regards
    their later relationship, on the formation of or the  earlier  part  of
    the relationship and intentions thereto.  The  judge  referred  to  the
    Commission's guidance, but he had not determined that the  couple  were
    in a 'relationship for a long time' before marriage, or 'had  a  common
    domicile/household for a long time' (that was not specifically found on
    the evidence- merely that there had been movement to and from the Czech
    Republic).  Nor did the judge heed the guidance indicators  that  abuse
    is more likely to include where  the  'couple  are  inconsistent  about
    their respective personal details' which she had found.   Moreover,  as
    the grounds of application for appeal pointed out,  the  list  was  not
    exhaustive.  The judge  also  took  into  account  that  they  had  not
    divorced.  That is not necessarily an indicator that the  marriage  was
    not one of convenience at the outset.

17. Sadovska and another (Appellants) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Respondent) (Scotland) [2017] UKSC 54 set out as follows

         28.      ... 'as held in Papajorgji, that the tribunal has to form
         its own view of the facts from the evidence presented. The
         respondent is seeking to take away established rights. One of the
         most basic rules of litigation is that he who asserts must prove.
         It was not for Ms Sadovska to establish that the relationship was a
         genuine and lasting one. It was for the respondent to establish
         that it was indeed a marriage of convenience.

         29.      For this purpose, "marriage of convenience" is a term of
         art. Although it is defined in the Directive and the 2009
         Communication as a marriage the sole purpose of which is to gain
         rights of entry to and residence in the European Union, the 2014
         Handbook suggests a more flexible approach, in which this must be
         the predominant purpose. It is not enough that the marriage may
         bring incidental immigration and other benefits if this is not its
         predominant purpose. Furthermore, except in cases of deceit by the
         non-EU national, this must be the purpose of them both. Clearly, a
         non-EU national may be guilty of abuse when the EU national is not,
         because she believes that it is a genuine relationship.

         30.      In the case of a person exercising EU law rights, the
         tribunal must also be satisfied that the removal would be a
         proportionate response to the abuse of rights established. So it
         would be one thing to find that the proposed marriage had been
         shown to be one of convenience, and therefore that it was right to
         prevent it, but quite another thing to find that expelling Ms
         Sadovska from the country where she had lived and worked for so
         long and had other family members living was a proportionate
         response to that'.

18. Without more the judge proceeded to find at [30] that the marriage  was
    not entered into  solely  or  predominantly  for  immigration  reasons.
    Although it is understandable that the legal and factual cases  of  the
    first and second appellant and MAW were considered separately they  are
    nevertheless interlinked. When arriving  at  the  conclusion  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  shown  that  the  marriage  is  one  of
    convenience,  all  relevant   factors   needed   to   be   taken   into
    consideration.  The judge was mindful that it was for the Secretary  of
    State to prove that but the judge must address all relevant factors.

19. The decision in relation to the first appellant  is  critical  for  any
    findings with relation to RZ, the second appellant.   The  approach  to
    the findings  in  the  decision  HU/16859/2016  was  relevant  but  not
    adequately addressed for the reasons given above and  is  an  error  of
    law.

20. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside both
    decisions pursuant to Section 12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed            Helen   Rimington                            Date     13th
    November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington









