
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/06344/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th June 2018                         |On 14th June 2018                  |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                         Gheorghe Bogdan Mihalcioiu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Olufunwa (Immigration Law Practice)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyaharan (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  by  the
    Appellant in this case.  It is an appeal against the decision of  Judge
    Powell of the First-tier  Tribunal,  promulgated  on  16th  March  2018
    following a hearing at Newport on 7th March 2018.  The Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Romania born in 1985 and the appeal was against  a  decision
    by the Secretary of State to remove the  Appellant,  justified  on  the
    grounds of a misuse of the right to reside in accordance with  the  EEA
    Regulations.  That arose because the Secretary of State  asserted  that
    he planned to enter into a sham marriage with a citizen of India.

 2. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant at  the  hearing  and  also
    from his employer.  He had a copy  of  the  interview  records  of  the
    Appellant and his purported partner and he had a  number  of  documents
    submitted on the Appellant's behalf.  He did  not  hear  oral  evidence
    from the Indian national partner because she  had  returned  to  India.
    There is some dispute about whether she was removed or whether she  was
    persuaded  or  coerced  by  the  Home  Office  to  return  voluntarily.
    However, she did return in July 2017.

 3. The judge was unimpressed by the oral evidence of  both  the  Appellant
    and his employer and in the Decision  and  Reasons  points  to  various
    difficulties with that evidence.  He found that his employer's evidence
    and that of the Appellant and his partner did not match in terms of how
    and where they met, whether the partner worked  and  at  which  of  the
    Italian restaurants  the  employer  owns  she  worked  at.   There  was
    contradictory  evidence  about  that.   There  was  also  a  photograph
    suggesting that the partner worked in  one  of  the  restaurants.   The
    judge was also unimpressed by the employer's claim that he  would  have
    to shut the restaurant in Windsor, where the Appellant was a  chef,  if
    the Appellant left.  He did not accept  that  was  at  all  likely  and
    thought that the employer was, to put it  colloquially,  "over  egging"
    the situation in an attempt to support the Appellant.

 4. The judge also noted with regard to the address where the Appellant and
    his partner had purported to live for some months, that  there  was  no
    evidence of the partner's residence there.   There  was  not  a  single
    piece of correspondence, bill or anything else to indicate that she was
    there.  He also noted a few, admittedly  minor,  discrepancies  in  the
    interviews between the two and noted that despite living in a  property
    shared with others the partner was  unable  to  name  those  that  they
    shared with, apart from just one person.

 5. The judge also noted the record of the  interviews  and  in  particular
    that  the  Appellant,  when  asked,  offered  his  phone  up   to   the
    interviewing officer and the interviewing officer looked at photographs
    on it.  He found there were very few of the partner  and  none  of  the
    Appellant  and  partner  together.  There  were  however  a  number  of
    photographs of another woman including one  of  the  Appellant  kissing
    her.  In the partner's interview she was also asked if the interviewing
    officer could look at the photographs on her  phone  and  she  declined
    saying that it was private.  The judge attached considerable weight  to
    the photographs on the Appellant's  phone  and  whilst  not  making  an
    adverse inference in relation to the  partner's  refusal  to  pass  her
    phone over, noted that it was a lost opportunity  for  her  to  provide
    evidence of their relationship.

 6. Mr Olufunwa before me argued that it is significant  that  the  partner
    was removed and that she was therefore unable to  give  oral  evidence.
    That is not relevant to the issue of whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made an error of law.  He argued with regard to the lack of documentary
    evidence that there are documents now available. However he agreed that
    these were not available to the First-tier Tribunal. A judge  does  not
    make an error of law in not taking into account evidence that  was  not
    before him.  I am told that  there  were  some  difficulties  with  the
    partner's luggage arriving in India  and  she  was  some  seven  months
    without it.  However, I do not accept that the partner took with her to
    India each and  every  document  relating  to  the  address  which  she
    supposedly shared with the Appellant.

 7.   It  is  also  significant  that  there  was  no  application  for  an
    adjournment to obtain additional evidence.

 8. I am told there are now more photographs.  Again, that was not evidence
    in front of the judge and he cannot  be  criticised  therefore  in  not
    taking it into account.



Notice of Decision

 9. Mr Olufunwa was unable to point to any error of law in the Decision and
    Reasons and for that reason that judgment is untainted by error and the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

10. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 13th June 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

