
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06179/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31 January 2019                     |On 06 February 2019               |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                            RAJIVNATH CHEEKHOORY
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                               Appellant
                                     and
                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms K. Anifowoshe of counsel, instructed by
Raj Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:                  Mr. M. Kotas, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a  national  of  Mauritius.  On  2  November  2010  he
    married a Polish national and on 12 December  2011  he  was  granted  a
    residence card as her husband, which was valid until 12 December  2016.
    They lived together until in or around December 2012 but no petition to
    end the marriage was filed until 5 December 2016 and their divorce  has
    not yet been made absolute.

2.   On 9 December 2016 the  Appellant  applied  for  a  retained  right  of
    residence. This application was refused on 22 June 2017  on  the  basis
    that no evidence had been provided to confirm that  they  had  divorced
    and no sufficient evidence had been submitted to show that his wife had
    been exercising her Treaty rights for a continuous five-year period.

3.   On 20 April 2018 the Appellant's solicitors  requested  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to make directions that the Respondent obtain information from
    HMRC in relation to his wife's employment history.  The  Tribunal  made
    directions on 1 May 2018 requiring the Appellant to outline  the  steps
    that he had taken to obtain details of his wife's  employment  history.
    His solicitors replied on 18 May 2018 stating that  the  Appellant  had
    been unable to contact his ex-wife over the telephone or  Facebook  and
    stating that she was still employed at [E H] Care in Chelsea.

4.   The Tribunal wrote  to  the  Appellant's  solicitors  on  22  May  2018
    stating the reply provided by them was inadequate. Therefore, on 23 and
    30 May 2018, the Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  to  his  wife  at  her
    workplace., asking that she provide her employment  history  from  2010
    onwards or a P60 for the relevant five years. They also  asked  her  to
    confirm her current  employment  status.  She  did  not  reply  to  the
    Appellant's solicitors but telephoned the Appellant to tell him not  to
    contact her at work.

5.   The Appellant's appeal was  listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farmer on 11 June 2018 and  the  Appellant's  counsel  applied  for  an
    adjournment and for directions to be made requiring the  Respondent  to
    obtain the necessary information from  HMRC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge refused to grant an adjournment or to make  any  such  directions
    and proceeded with the hearing.

6.   In a decision, promulgated on 25 June 2018, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farmer dismissed the Appellant's appeal and on 12 December  2018  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb granted him permission to appeal.





ERROR OF LAW HEARING

7.   At the start  of  the  hearing,  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    conceded that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in  law  when  in
    paragraph 12 of her decision, she found that Regulation 15(1)(b) of the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  required  the
    Appellant to show that he had lived with his EEA wife  for  five  years
    before he could qualify for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of
    the time that he had  been  resident  here.  In  PM  (EEA  -  spouse  -
    "residing with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 89 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  found
    that:

         "Regulation 15(1)(b) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006 applies to those who entered  a  genuine  marriage
         where both parties have resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  five
         years since the marriage; the EEA national's spouse has resided  as
         the family member of a qualified person or otherwise in  accordance
         with the Regulations and the marriage has not been  dissolved.  The
         "residing with" requirement relates to presence in the UK; it  does
         not require living in a common family home".


8.   However, the Home Office Presenting Officer submitted  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farmer had not erred in law when she refused to grant an
    adjournment of the hearing which  had  been  listed  before  her.  Both
    counsel for the Appellant and the Home Office Presenting  Officer  made
    oral  submissions  and  I  have  referred  to  the  content  of   these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

9.   It is possible for an Appellant to request  the  Respondent  to  obtain
    details about a partner from the HMRC and the necessary directions have
    become known as Amos directions after the case of Amos v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA  Civ  552.  The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer was correct to note that  no  obligation  to  obtain
    such documents can be derived from  that  case  where  proceedings  are
    adversarial. However, if an appellant may have a right to reside  under
    EU law, the Respondent will usually make such enquiries to ensure  that
    EU law is upheld.

10.  Counsel for the Applicant took me through  the  correspondence  between
    the Appellant and the First-tier Tribunal in relation to obtaining such
    a direction. In response, the Home Officer Presenting Officer submitted
    that the Appellant  had  not  taken  sufficient  steps  to  obtain  the
    evidence needed and had delayed in making any request to the  Tribunal.
    As a consequence, he submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was
    correct to refuse to grant the Appellant an adjournment for the reasons
    which she gave in paragraphs 6 and 7 of her decision.

11.  In paragraph 7 of her decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  stated
    that she had considered whether she could conduct a  fair  hearing  and
    whether it was in the interests of justice and  fairness  to  hear  the
    appeal. She noted that the decision under appeal had been made nearly a
    year before and that the issues had been clear from that date. She also
    noted  that  the  Appellant's  solicitors  had  not  written   to   the
    Appellant's wife before 23 May 2018.

12.  However, I find that to ensure that the interests of justice were  met,
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farmer  needed  to  consider   the   wider
    procedural history of the appeal.  The notice setting a  date  for  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was sent to the  Appellant  on  5
    October 2017 but the evidence given by the Appellant indicated that  he
    did take some steps on his own to obtain information from his wife  hen
    he knew that his appeal had been set down for a hearing but without any
    success.

13.   In  addition,  nearly  three  months  before  the  hearing  date,  the
    Appellant's solicitors sought directions from the  First-tier  Tribunal
    in relation to obtaining information from HMRC. It  was  not  the  case
    that this was left to the date of the hearing. When the  Tribunal  said
    that it would not make an Amos direction until it knew more  about  his
    own efforts to obtain information, the Appellant's  solicitors  replied
    to letters from the Tribunal requesting more information on both 1  and
    28 May 2018. They also sent two letters to the Appellant's wife at  her
    workplace and it was the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  that  she  then
    telephoned him telling him not to contact her at her  workplace.  These
    actions by the Appellant and his solicitors  indicate  that  they  were
    seriously attempting to obtain the necessary  evidence  to  enable  the
    Tribunal to have sufficient information on which to reach a sustainable
    decision.

14.  In addition, the First-tier Tribunal Judge made an adverse  finding  of
    credibility against the Appellant on the basis that he had not tried to
    write to her at her home address when the  Judge  recognised  that  the
    Appellant had only recently been  able  to  acquire  her  correct  home
    address.

15.  I have reminded myself that in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00418 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284".


16.  In the light of the fact that the Appellant had  initiated  a  possible
    Amos procedure and had responded to directions given by the Tribunal in
    a timely manner and the unchallenged fact that his wife  had  told  him
    not to contact her at work, the decision to refuse him  an  adjournment
    was arguably unfair. It has now also been conceded  that  he  does  not
    need to show that he and his wife have been  living  together  for  the
    necessary five-year period. It is not asserted that he cannot meet  any
    other requirements of the relevant regulations. Therefore, evidence  to
    show that the Appellant's wife  has  been  exercising  a  Treaty  right
    throughout that period has now become determinative of his  appeal.  It
    is also on this basis that the decision to refuse  him  an  adjournment
    can be said to be unfair.

17.  As a consequence, the decision under appeal contain arguable errors  of
    law.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Farmer or Ford.

Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 1 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
