


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: EA/06205/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 February 2018                         |On 8 February 2018             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH
                                   Between
                             IFTIKHAR AHMAD RANA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms. S. Iqbal, Rana & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:                   Mr. A. Miah, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born on 15 April 1978, is a national of Pakistan.  On
    20 October 2015 he applied for a residence card as an  extended  family
    member of an EEA national exercising  a  Treaty  right  in  the  United
    Kingdom. His application was refused on 10 May 2016 and  the  Appellant
    appealed.

2.   His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron on the  papers
    on 23 August 2017. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron found that he  had
    no jurisdiction to hear the  appeal  following  the  decision  in  Sala
    (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2006] UKUT 00411 (IAC). The Appellant appealed
    on 14 November 2017 and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  granted  him
    permission to appeal on 29 November 2017 on the basis that the  grounds
    were arguable in the context of the Court of Appeal's judgment in MK  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   The Appellant's solicitor noted that she was still  not  in  possession
    of the Home Office file but I informed her that there was  now  one  on
    the file. The Home Office Presenting Officer applied for an adjournment
    pending permission being granted to appeal to the Supreme Court in  MK.



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   I am aware that the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  has
    applied for permission in MK and that judgment is awaited in  the  case
    of SM (Algeria), which was heard on 29 November 2017.

5.   Paragraphs 3 off the order made by the Court of  Appeal  in  MK  stayed
    the part of the decision that found that  the  decision  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal would be set aside and the appeal remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and paragraph 4 also stayed the costs order made in favour  of
    the Appellant. However, it did not stay paragraph 1 of the order, which
    stated that the appeal was allowed or paragraph 2 of the  order,  which
    said that permission to appeal to the Supreme Court was refused.

6.   Therefore, the substance of the decision stands, which  was  that  Sala
    was  wrongly  decided  and  that  extended  family  members  refused  a
    residence card are entitled to a right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2008. I am bound by that decision as  it  was  made  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

7.   As the substance of this appeal has not  yet  been  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I find that the appeal should be remitted to  that
    Tribunal.  This  was  not  opposed  by  either  party;  The  First-tier
    Tribunal will be able to address any subsequent  decisions  reached  by
    the Supreme Court in the cases referred to by the Respondent.
   8.    Furthermore, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Cameron did  err
    in law in his decision.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cameron for a de novo hearing.



Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 1 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


