

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06586/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 19 December 2016                           |On 20 December 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               DARKO IVANKOVIC
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr I. Komusanac of Igor & Co. Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Bosnia & Herzegovina who applied for  an
    EEA residence card recognising a right of permanent  residence  in  the
    UK. The respondent refused the application on 19 May 2016 on the ground
    that he failed to produce sufficient evidence  to  show  that  his  EEA
    national spouse had been residing in the UK in accordance with the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 for a continuous period of five years.

3.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dearden  considered  the  appeal  on  the
    papers. He allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 August 2016. The judge was satisfied that the further
    evidence produced by the appellant relating to  his  wife's  employment
    history in the UK was sufficient to discharge the burden  of  proof  to
    show that his EEA sponsor had been  residing  in  accordance  with  the
    regulations for a continuous period of  five  years.  He  concluded  as
    follows:

            "16. If I was deciding this appeal under the EEA  Regulations  I
           would conclude that the Appellant has discharged the  burden  of
           proof upon him to show that his Sponsor has been residing in the
           UK for a continuous period of five years in accordance with  the
           Regulations.


            17. After 6th April 2015 we no longer  have  appeals  under  the
           Immigration Rules but deemed human rights applications which are
           viewed through the lens or prism of the  Immigration  Rules.  In
           any Article 8 case I am bound to be cognisant of the  provisions
           laid down in Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department
           [2004] UKHL 27. The first burden upon the Appellant is to  prove
           that he has existing family  life  which  the  decision  in  the
           appeal interferes with to such an extent as to engage Article 8.
           I acknowledge that the couple are married and were so married on
           24th July 2010. It would be unusual for a married couple not  to
           have family life together and I therefore, in engaging with  the
           low burden, find that family life sufficient to  engage  Article
           8.


            18. I am then to assess the proportionality of the Secretary  of
           State's decision balancing the desire of the Appellant to have a
           residence  card,  against  the  desire  of  the  United  Kingdom
           government to have an orderly system of immigration  control  in
           the economic wellbeing of the country.


            19. In assessing any appeal under  Article  8  a  very  material
           consideration  is  whether  the  Appellant  would  satisfy   the
           relevant Immigration Rules or EEA Regulations.  I  have  decided
           that in this appeal the Appellant does satisfy those Regulations
           and that drives me to the conclusion  that  the  appeal  of  the
           Appellant should be allowed."

4.    The Secretary of State appeals the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on
    the following limited grounds.

       i) The respondent makes  clear  that  she  does  not  challenge  the
          substantive findings relating to the EEA  Regulations  2006  i.e.
          the respondent accepts that the appellant meets the  requirements
          for permanent residence.


      ii) However, the judge erred in failing to appreciate that  this  was
          an appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  2006  and  in  failing  to
          determine the appeal under those regulations.


     iii) In light of the decision in TY (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
          1233 the judge erred in proceeding to consider and determine  the
          appeal on human rights grounds.

      iv) The respondent suggests that the decision in respect of the human
          rights findings should be set aside and that the appeal should be
          allowed under the EEA Regulations 2006.

5.    I have no hesitation in  agreeing  with  the  arguments  made  by  the
    Secretary  of  State.  It  appears   that   the   judge   fundamentally
    misunderstood the new appeals regime introduced after  06  April  2015.
    Although amended section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") now restricts the number of appeals  within  the
    statutory appeal regime to decisions to refuse a  protection  or  human
    rights claim, the EEA Regulations 2006  have  always  been  a  separate
    appeal regime and this continued after 06 April 2015. Having found that
    the appellant  met  the  requirements  for  permanent  residence  under
    regulation 15 the judge should have gone on to allow the  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations 2006.

6.    The decision also discloses an error in the judge's  understanding  of
    the role of human rights issues in an appeal under the EEA  Regulations
    2006. There is now a line of clear and binding  authority  in  TY  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD and Amirteymour and Others (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)
    [2015] UKUT 465 to say that human rights issues cannot be determined in
    an EEA appeal where no one-stop notice has been  issued  under  section
    120 of the NIAA 2002.

7.    For these reasons I set aside the decision in so far  as  it  purports
    to make findings relating to human rights. The respondent accepts  that
    the appellant meets the  requirements  of  regulation  15  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006. Accordingly, the decision is remade  and  the  appeal
    allowed under the EEA Regulations 2006.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is remade and the appeal  ALLOWED  under  the  EEA  Regulations
2006


Signed   [pic]   Date  19 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








