
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06580/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th November 2018                 |On 15th November 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                          MUTHUSWAMY MANGAYATKARASI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, instructed by Jein solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent
         refusing her a residence card as a dependant was dismissed by First-
         tier Tribunal judge Greasley in a decision promulgated on 19th June
         2018. Permission to appeal was sought and granted  on  the  grounds
         that the First-tier Tribunal judge had unfortunately not been fully
         appraised of the situation regarding the last-minute instructing of
         Jen solicitors and their earlier request and apology in advance for
         filing the bundle of documents late. The judge refused to admit the
         bundle and so took a decision without the benefit of  any  evidence
         from the appellant.

      2. It was apparent from the file before me  that  the  solicitors  had
         been in correspondence with the Tribunal and had given an  adequate
         explanation for the late service of the documents. As  accepted  by
         Mr Bramble, the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred  in  law  (albeit
         because of a lack of information before him) in failing to consider
         either putting the case back to enable the  presenting  officer  to
         consider the documents or adjourning to enable  the  respondent  to
         consider the documents.

      3. I set aside the decision to be remade.

      4. This is an appeal where there have been no findings made at all and
         where relevant evidence has not been considered. I remit the appeal
         to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.



                                    Date 9th November 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
