

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ea/06235/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   31.10.2018|
|on    31.10.2018                              |Sent out:                    |
|                                              |08.11.2018                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                             Nancy Karen DADZIE
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mrs Regina Spio-Aidoo, solicitor, Spio & Co, Ilford
For the respondent: Mr Chris Avery

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Valerie Mays), sitting at Taylor House on  1  June,  to
    an EEA wife's appeal by a citizen of Ghana, born 1987, against  refusal
    of a residence card on 28 June 2017. There had been previous  decisions
    to the same effect, including one by Judge Linda Veloso on 27  November
    2015.

 2. Judge Veloso had dismissed the appeal before her on the same, and other
    grounds; but Judge Mays found in the appellant's favour on  all  points
    except for whether she qualified for a retained right of  residence  on
    the basis of her status at the relevant time. Permission was  given  on
    the basis that, following Baigazieva [2018] EWCA  Civ  1088,  this  had
    been the date of commencement of divorce proceedings  between  her  and
    her husband; not, as the judge took it, the date of decree absolute.



 3. The relevant provisions are set out  in  reg.  10  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016:

      (1) In these Regulations, "family member who has retained the right of
      residence" means, subject to paragraphs (8) and (9), a person who
      satisfies a condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).
      (5) The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-
         (a) ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or an EEA
             national with a right of permanent residence on the
             termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;
         (b) was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
             Regulations at the date of the termination;
         (c) satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
         (d) either-
             (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the
             termination of the marriage or the civil partnership, the
             marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least three
             years and the parties to the marriage or civil partnership had
             resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year during its
             duration;
      ...
      (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
        (a) is not an EEA national but would, if the person were an EEA
        national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-sufficient
        person under regulation 6 ...

 4. There was no  issue  on  (5)  (a)  or  (b):  the  judge  found  in  the
    appellant's favour on (d), so that the only question is whether she was
    right to find against her on (6) (a). That provision,  unlike  (5),  as
    interpreted in  Baigazieva,  does  not  specify  a  relevant  date  for
    satisfying it; but, as I suggested to Mr Avery,  it  would  be  strange
    indeed to have to assess the non-EEA spouse's  status  on  a  different
    date  from  the  EEA  one's,  unless  compelled  by  something  in  the
    Regulations.

 5. Mr Avery was unable  to  point  to  anything  to  that  effect  in  the
    Regulations. It is common ground that this appellant still was a worker
    at the date of the initiation of divorce proceedings,  so  this  appeal
    must be allowed, though the  judge  could  hardly  be  blamed  for  the
    result, when neither side had referred her to Baigazieva.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
