
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/06629/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                     |                                     |
|At Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st May 2019                     |On 5th July 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                             Agatha Agyeman Duah
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Rungasamy, Lawrence & Associates Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born in 1950. She  appeals  with
       permission the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Andrew
       Davies)  to  dismiss  her  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2016.


    2. The matter in issue before the First-tier Tribunal  was  whether  the
       Appellant qualified for permanent residence under Regulation 15(1)(b)
       as the family member of an EEA national. It was her case that she had
       already  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
       Regulations for a continuous period of five years.  Her  EEA  sponsor
       is her son, a national of the Netherlands.  Although  the  Respondent
       accepted that the Appellant had lived in this country  since  January
       2011, it was his case that the Appellant had  not  demonstrated  that
       she had done so 'in accordance with' the  Regulations.  As  a  family
       member in the ascending line she was required to demonstrate that she
       was  dependent  upon  her  son,  and  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
       assessment, this she had failed to do.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal found against the Appellant and dismissed the
       appeal.  Although it accepted that the Appellant had lived  with  her
       son between 2011 and 2018 when she was admitted to a  care  home,  it
       could not be satisfied that this had been  shown  to  result  from  a
       "situation of real dependency": Bigia [2009] EWCA Civ 79.


    4. The Appellant now appeals on several grounds but for the  purpose  of
       this appeal I need focus only on the central  point  made.   That  is
       that the First-tier Tribunal applied too high a standard of proof  in
       its dependency assessment.   Having accepted  that  this  lady  lived
       with her son for some seven years, and that he was the  EEA  national
       exercising  treaty  rights,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should   have
       accepted  that  she  was  his  dependent,  and  accordingly  met  the
       requirements of Regulation 15(1)(b) by showing herself to be:


           (b)   a family member of an EEA  national  who  is  not  an  EEA
           national but who has resided in the United Kingdom with the  EEA
           national in accordance with these Regulations for  a  continuous
           period of five years;


    5. The Appellant points out that the Home Office's own policy  gives  as
       an example of evidence establishing dependency "evidence of living in
       the same household".  The same policy instructs  caseowners  who  are
       unsure to look to the  guidance  on  extended  family  members  which
       itself indicates, in line with Dauhoo (EEA Regulations  -  Reg  8(2))
       [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC), that membership of the EEA national's household
       is sufficient.  The point, in short, is that it would be  nonsensical
       if family members were held to a higher standard than extended family
       members.


    6. These grounds were unopposed by the Secretary of  State.  Mr  McVeety
       accepted that where the Appellant had been found to live with her EEA
       worker son for seven years (and where there was  no  suggestion  that
       the Appellant had an income from  anywhere  else)  she  had  in  fact
       discharged the burden of proof.  I agree.  There may have been  other
       deficiencies  in  the  evidence,  and  the  determination  may   have
       contained cogent reasoning on other matters, but on the finding made,
       the  Appellant  had  established  'dependency'  for  the  purpose  of
       Regulation 7(1)(c).


    7. The appeal is therefore allowed.






       Decisions


    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law such
       that it must be set aside.


    9. The appeal is allowed.


   10. There is no order for anonymity.



    [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               21st May 2019
