
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/06516/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre| Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 August 2019                       | On 10 September 2019               |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                             Mr ABDELLAH SANIBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shea, counsel instructed by FMB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Morocco born on 17 September  1973.   He
    arrived in the UK in 2004 in possession of a visit visa  and  it  would
    appear thereafter  overstayed.   He  subsequently  met  a  national  of
    Poland, Ms Kataryzyna Agath Rybczyaska, born on 23 June 1980.  They met
    in 2009, began a  relationship  and  married  on  10  January  2011  at
    Blackburn Registry Office, at which time they were living in London but
    the Appellant's mother and siblings resided in the Blackburn area.

 2. The Appellant applied for and was issued with a residence  card  on  27
    May 2011 as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights  in
    the UK, valid until  26  August  2016.   The  Appellant  and  his  wife
    separated in July 2014 and their divorce was finalised on 21 July 2017.



 3. On 17 April 2018, the Appellant applied for permanent residence on  the
    basis that he was the former  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK for more than five years.  This application was
    refused in a decision dated 14 September 2018, on the  basis  that  the
    Respondent considered,  having  interviewed  the  Appellant,  that  his
    marriage with his former EEA national wife was one of convenience.  The
    Appellant appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McAll for hearing on  30  April  2019.
    In a decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  14  May  2019  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal, finding that the Appellant had not discharged the
    burden on him to establish that the marriage was genuine.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had erred materially in law.  In particular it  was  asserted  that  in
    light of the judgments in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and  Papajorgji  (EEA
    spouse - marriage of convenience) [2012] UKUT 38, the burden was on the
    Respondent to make out an allegation that an  Appellant's  relationship
    was one of convenience and it was asserted the judge had  not  followed
    this approach.  A number of other matters were  raised,  in  particular
    the judge had assessed the Appellant's  credibility  unfairly  and  his
    consideration of irrelevant matters such as the failure  to  note  that
    Muslims celebrate Eid three times a year - January, July and October in
    2014.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Norton-Taylor
    in a decision dated 12 July 2019 on the basis:

      "Whilst the judge made  reference  to  Rosa  [2016]  1  WLR  1206  and
Sadovska [2017] 1 WLR  2926 at 12 of his decision, it is arguable that  what
is then said at paragraph 29  indicates  an     incorrect  approach  to  the
burden of proof.  Permission is granted".

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Shea  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, sought to rely on the grounds of appeal  and  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.  His position was that there was a material error
    and the appeal should be remitted back to the First-tier for a  hearing
    de novo.  He submitted that the Respondent's argument was based  solely
    on the interview with the Appellant and the four points therein,  which
    the Appellant had discharged; that there had been  a  lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny of the claim by the judge and that there was a material  error
    of law.

 7. In his submissions, Mr McVeety pointed out that the judge does in  fact
    clearly refer to the correct test at [29].  Whilst it was asserted  the
    judge did not take account of the cases in Rosa and Sadovska  (op  cit)
    it is clear that this is not  the  case,  see  [12]  of  the  decision.
    Consequently, even before he starts to make  his  findings,  the  judge
    directed himself as to the correct legal test.  At [15] the  judge  was
    entitled to take account of the fact  that  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence to show that  the  Appellant  had  been  cohabiting  with  his
    spouse, apart from a letter from  the  Television  Licensing  Authority
    dated 29 February 2012.  Consequently at [29] the judge  accepted  that
    the Respondent had discharged the burden upon him.  The judge was aware
    not only of the questions the Appellant got right during his  interview
    but also those that he got wrong and those four points go to the  heart
    of  his  appeal.    Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  judge  had  done
    everything that he should have done, particularly given that there  was
    no Presenting Officer present.

 8. In reply, Mr Shea reiterated that there had  been  a  lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny.   He  submitted  the  judge  had  accepted  the  Respondent's
    evidence carte blanche without it being properly tested in court.

     Findings and Reasons

 9. I find no material errors of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge McAll.  It is apparent from the judge's  self-direction  at  [12]
    that he had clearly in mind the decisions in Rosa [2016]  EWCA  Civ  14
    and Sadovska [2017] 1 WLR 2926, where he held:

         "The legal burden is on the Secretary of State  to  prove  that  an
         otherwise valid marriage is a marriage  of  convenience  so  as  to
         justify the refusal of a residence card under the EEA  Regulations.
         The legal burden of proof in relation to  the  genuineness  of  the
         marriage lay on the Secretary of  State,  however,  if  he  adduces
         evidence capable of pointing to the conclusion that the marriage is
         one of convenience,  the  evidential  burden  then  shifts  to  the
         applicant".

10. The judge then reached findings of fact on the evidence before him  and
    I find was entitled  to  take  properly  into  consideration  that  the
    Appellant had produced no documentary evidence from the period of  time
    where he was residing with his wife in Greenford,  London,  apart  from
    the aforementioned letter from the Television Licensing Authority,  and
    at [16] to find that this seriously damages  his  credibility  and  his
    claim.  I further find the judge was entitled  at  [17]  to  take  into
    consideration as impacting negatively on the  Appellant's  credibility,
    the absence of any photographic evidence attesting to the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his  former  wife  after  the  issue  of  the
    residence card in  2011.   The  judge  recorded  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's brother attesting as to the relationship but at [22]  found
    and was entitled to find the witness vague as  to  the  events  he  was
    citing and that he appeared to be making up his  evidence  rather  than
    recalling actual events.

11. The judge considered the issue of the  immigration  interview  at  [23]
    onwards of the decision and at [25] accepted submissions on  behalf  of
    the Appellant in relation to two of those points, i.e. the spelling  of
    the Sponsor's family name and the fact the Appellant could  not  recall
    the day of the week that he married.  However, I find  that  the  judge
    was entitled to take account as he did at [26] of  the  fact  that  the
    address and the Appellant's  vague  responses  as  to  where  he  lived
    following the wedding were relevant given the lack  of  documentary  or
    other supporting evidence to show that he was in  a  relationship  with
    the Sponsor during the period he claims and:

         "I would also have expected the Appellant to recall  the  witnesses
         names at the wedding if he claims he had  been  in  a  relationship
         with the Sponsor for five years.   There  is  therefore  sufficient
         evidence before me to raise suspicions as to the genuineness of the
         marriage".

12. The judge then noted at [27] that it would have been possible  for  the
    Appellant to locate the  Sponsor  to  assist  in  providing  supporting
    evidence given his evidence that the relationship ended on good  terms,
    and at [28] in relation to his employment during the  duration  of  the
    marriage, that he could have contacted HMRC in order to obtain his  tax
    and national insurance record to show his income and that he was living
    and working in London at that time or his former  landlord  to  confirm
    his residency at the same address as his wife.  That is the context  of
    the judge's finding at [29] which is inter alia as follows:

         "I am satisfied the lack of evidence in regard to his  cohabitation
         with the Sponsor is a  sufficient  ground  for  the  Respondent  to
         discharge the burden on him and to challenge the genuineness of the
         marriage.  I find the Appellant has not discharged  the  burden  on
         him to establish the marriage was genuine".

    The judge concludes as follows at [30]:

         "For the reasons I have set out above I am not satisfied  that  the
         Appellant and Sponsor have cohabited together as a  married  couple
         or in a relationship akin to marriage from 2009 until 2014  as  the
         Appellant claims.  I find the Appellant and the Sponsor  did  enter
         into a marriage of convenience the sole purpose being  to  gain  an
         immigration advantage.  I find the Respondent's refusal to issue  a
         residence  card  is  lawful  and  in  accordance  with   the   2016
         Regulations".

13. I find that there is no error in the judge's approach in light  of  the
    jurisprudence viz Rosa and  Sadovska  (op  cit).   The  judge  provided
    reasons which are sound for finding that the Respondent had  discharged
    the initial burden on him and it is clear from the case law  that  once
    the legal burden has been discharged this  the  burden  shifts  to  the
    Appellant in respect of the evidential burden.  In the absence  of  any
    documentary  evidence  at  all  and  somewhat  vague  evidence  by  the
    Appellant and in particular his brother who was his witness, the  judge
    was entitled to find that the burden had not been discharged.

14. Therefore, for those reasons  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed with the effect that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 8 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
