
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/06042/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 February 2019                   |On 28 February 2019                |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                             SHARON ANDREA GRAY
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Thoree of Thoree and Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          the appellant  in  respect  of  the  determination  of  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Graves dismissing, on 7 November 2018,  her  appeal
          against the respondent's refusal to issue  her  with  a  permanent
          residence card.


       2. The appellant is a Jamaican national born on 30 January 1974.  She
          initially entered the UK as a visitor in June 2002 and overstayed.
          She made student applications in December 2002,  March  and  April
          2003 which were all refused. Nevertheless, she remained in the UK.




       3. On 19 January 2008, he appellant married a  Polish  national  but,
          according to the Home Office chronology and for reasons which  are
          not explained, she did not apply for a residence card until 3 July
          2010. This was issued on 12 November 2010 valid for five years. On
          16 November 2015, she applied for a permanent residence  card.  By
          that time, she and her husband were separated (they  separated  in
          in September 2014) but it does not  appear  that  this  change  in
          circumstances was brought to the attention  of  the  Secretary  of
          State. The application was refused  on  9  May  2016  because  the
          respondent considered that she had failed to show that her sponsor
          was a qualifying person and because she had not shown that she had
          resided in the UK for five continuous years in accordance with the
          Regulations. A short time later, the appellant filed for divorce.


       4. The appeal was initially listed for hearing on 5 October 2017  but
          had to be adjourned as the appellant's representatives was  double
          booked. It was relisted for 19 December 2017. On that occasion  it
          was adjourned again with the judge  making  an  'Amos'  direction,
          directing HMRC to supply documentary  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
          employment history. It then came for hearing before  Judge  Graves
          on 10 October 2018.


       5. In the meantime, on 1 June 2017, the divorce was finalised.


       6. Judge Graves dismissed  the  appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  was,
          however, granted on 28 December 2018 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
          Grimmett on the basis that  the  judge  had  arguably  erred  when
          assessing evidence at the date of the divorce, rather than at  the
          date the divorce proceedings  commenced  (pursuant  to  Baigazieva
          [2018] EWCA Civ 1088).




          The Hearing


       7. I heard submissions from the parties at the hearing before  me  on
          11 February 2019. For the  appellant,  Mr  Thoree  relied  on  the
          grounds and submitted that the  relevant  date  was  that  of  the
          initiation of divorce proceedings and not the date of the  divorce
          itself. He submitted that the judge  had  misdirected  herself  at
          paragraphs 21, 22, 30 and 32. He stated that  divorce  proceedings
          had commenced on 27 May 2016 and that the judge had found that the
          sponsor had been exercising treaty rights between April  2016  and
          April 2017. That was enough for the appeal to succeed. He  further
          submitted that the appellant had  herself  worked  from  2011.  He
          asked that I re-make the decision and allow the appeal.


       8. I then heard submissions from  Mr  Lindsay.  He  agreed  that  the
          relevant date was that of the initiation  of  divorce  proceedings
          but drew my attention to the contradiction in when that  was  said
          to be. He argued that the only evidence before the judge as to the
          date of initiation of the proceedings was the appellant's  witness
          statement where she asserted it was May 2016. That date  had  been
          shown to be wrong by the petition now adduced which gave the  date
          as 6 June 2016. He submitted that there could be no error  of  law
          in the judge failing to consider a date that had turned out to  be
          wrong.  Mr Lindsay pointed to paragraph 31  of  the  determination
          where the judge had applied her mind to the correct test  and  had
          referred to the date of the initiation of divorce proceedings.  He
          also pointed out that the judge had been asked by the  appellant's
          representative to consider the situation as at  the  date  of  the
          divorce.  There  was  no  material  error  and  the  new  evidence
          submitted could not be used to argue  an  error.  The  appellant's
          remedy was to make a fresh application and submit all the relevant
          documentary evidence. He submitted in the alternative,  the  judge
          had found that the appellant had not shown a continuous five  year
          period. That finding should  be  preserved  as  it  had  not  been
          challenged. If an error were to be found, he asked for  a  further
          hearing.


       9. Mr Thoree responded. He submitted that regardless of the  date  of
          the commencement of proceedings, the  judge  had  found  that  the
          sponsor had been working between April 2016  and  April  2017.  He
          submitted that the hearing had taken place before the handing down
          of Baigazieva. Whilst the judge may have referred to the  date  of
          the commencement of divorce proceedings in her determination, this
          had not been applied to her findings.  There  was  ample  evidence
          before the judge to show that the appellant had been  continuously
          working since 2010 and there was evidence now  available  to  show
          that her employment was continuing.


      10. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      11. I have considered all the evidence before me and have  had  regard
          to the submissions made. I remind myself that it is  the  evidence
          as it was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  I  must
          consider in order to determine whether or not she made an error of
          law and whether it was a material one, and not the fresh  evidence
          subsequently adduced for this hearing.


      12. It was not alleged by the respondent in the decision  letter  that
          the marriage was one of convenience and the judge proceeded on the
          basis that it was genuine.


      13. The judge was required to consider whether,  under  reg.  10,  the
          appellant had retained  the  right  of  residence,  with  specific
          reference to sub paragraph (5) and also whether she  was  entitled
          to permanent residence under reg. 15(f). Achieving the first  does
          not automatically result in  the  second.  To  satisfy  10(5)  the
          appellant had to show that her spouse was a  qualified  person  at
          the date the divorce proceedings commenced, that the marriage  had
          lasted at least three years, that the appellant  and  sponsor  had
          been in the UK with the sponsor exercising treaty  rights  for  at
          least one of those  years  and  that  following  the  divorce  the
          appellant had been exercising treaty rights as though she  herself
          had been an EEA national.


      14. Under reg. 15(f), the appellant had to show that she  had  resided
          in the UK for a continuous five  year  period  and  that  she  had
          retained rights of residence at the end of that period.


      15. It is agreed that the appellant and  her  husband  married  on  19
          January 2008 and divorced on 1 June 2017. Divorce proceedings were
          initiated in May 2016,  according  to  oral  evidence  before  the
          judge, and June 2016 according to a  petition  which  was  adduced
          with the permission to appeal application and which was not before
          the judge.


      16. It is not correct, as maintained by Mr Thoree in his  submissions,
          that at the time of  the  appeal  hearing  in  October  2018,  the
          Baigazieva judgment had not been handed down.  It  was  issued  in
          June 2018 and so should have been known to all the parties. It was
          patently wrong to ask the judge to determine whether  the  sponsor
          was a qualified person  at  the  date  of  the  divorce  (at  14).
          Nevertheless, I am satisfied that the judge applied  her  mind  to
          the correct test. Despite what she says about the  period  of  the
          divorce itself (at paragraph 30), it is plain,  at  paragraph  31,
          that she was aware of what the appellant had to show and when. She
          states: "...the appellant does have to establish  that  Mr  Pisula
          was actually in the country, exercising treaty rights  here,  both
          during any period of  residence  relied  upon,  and  also  at  the
          commencement  of  divorce  proceedings".   She  then  proceeds  to
          consider the evidence, finding that apart from the oral  evidence,
          there was very little reliable  evidence  to  show  the  sponsor's
          presence in the UK over the duration of  the  marriage.  His  bank
          statements showed no activity, although the appellant  claimed  he
          was working at the time, and the documentary evidence was  largely
          in the form of junk mail sent to him at  the  claimed  matrimonial
          address. There  were  also  inconsistencies  identified  with  the
          address where the appellant claimed they lived and that  shown  on
          the documents for the same period (at  31).  The  judge  accepted,
          however, that there was satisfactory evidence  for  the  sponsor's
          employment between April 2016 to April 2017 and so found  that  he
          was here and had been a qualified person during that time and also
          that the marriage had lasted for at least three years.  The  judge
          therefore found that at best the appellant could  rely  on  having
          met two of the requirements of reg. 10(5) although plainly she had
          met all three of the requirements in  that  at  the  time  divorce
          proceedings commenced, whether in May or June  2016,  the  sponsor
          was accepted to be in the UK and  exercising  treaty  rights.  The
          appellant has, therefore, shown retained rights of residence.


      17. The judge went on to find, however, that  the  appellant  had  not
          shown that she had  acquired  permanent  residence  (at  32).  The
          grounds are silent on this failing. She observed that  Mr  Thoree,
          who  represented  the  appellant  then  as   he   did   now,   was
          unforthcoming about what five  year  period  was  relied  on  even
          though she sought to clarify this (at 15). She  found  that  there
          was  no  evidence  covering   the   appellant's   employment/self-
          employment after April 2017. She took account of  the  appellant's
          oral evidence but found it to be  vague  and  at  odds  with  HMRC
          records. She found evidence  of  the  appellant's  own  activities
          would have been available to her  and  she  was  not  prepared  to
          simply accept the inconsistent oral evidence. Although  Mr  Thoree
          sought to rely on a supplementary bundle of evidence  relating  to
          the appellant's work, that evidence was not before the  judge  and
          there is no explanation for why evidence, at the least up  to  the
          date of that hearing was not adduced.


      18. The problem  for  the  appellant  is  that  the  grounds  make  no
          challenge at all to the findings of the judge  on  the  five  year
          period and there was  no  application  to  amend  the  grounds  to
          include such a challenge. Therefore, even if the judge  had  erred
          regarding the test to be applied to until when the sponsor had  to
          be a qualified person, that error is immaterial to the outcome  of
          the appeal as the judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
          established she was entitled to a permanent residence card did not
          form part of the challenge.


      19. It may be that instead of pursuing this appeal, the appellant  may
          have been better off making a fresh application to the  respondent
          with all the relevant evidence. That  is,  of  course,  an  avenue
          still open to her.


      20. For all these reasons, therefore, I  conclude  that  there  is  no
          material error of law in the judge's decision.


          Decision


      21. The judge did not make any material errors of law. The  appeal  is
          dismissed.






          Anonymity


      22. I make no order for anonymity.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 25 February 2019


