
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06534/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Rolls Building, London           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 20 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 fahad habib
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Anifowoshe
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Fahad Habib, was born on 28 January 1985 and is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E B
    Grant) against a decision of the respondent dated 23 May 2016 to refuse
    to issue him with a permanent residence card as confirmation of a right
    of residence as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty Rights.
     The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 19 October 2017,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  There has been some confusion as to the extent  of
    the grant of permission.  This  was  resolved  by  notice  of  decision
    issued by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  on  15  January  2018.   Judge
    Hanson's direction made it clear that permission had  been  granted  on
    all grounds of appeal.

 2. There are four grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant complains  that
    there was a procedural irregularity amounting to unfairness in that the
    appellant was deprived of his right to be represented by a  friend  who
    had attended before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant  asserts
    that the friend would not receive payment and should have been heard as
    a representative.

 3. The ground has no merit.  At [3], the judge addresses the  question  of
    the appellant's representative, Mr Deka.  It was apparent that Mr  Deka
    told the judge that he  wished  to  act  as  the  appellant's  McKenzie
    friend.  He had occupied a position in the place normally reserved  for
    the appellant's representatives.  The judge asked him a  few  questions
    about his identity and  then  suggested  that  he  could  "sit  by  the
    appellant and give advice as and  when  the  appellant  needed  advice.
    During the hearing when required the appellant conferred with Mr Deka."
     Given that Mr Deka had identified himself as a McKenzie friend  rather
    than representative, the manner in which he was treated by Judge  Grant
    was wholly reasonable.  She allowed  Mr  Deka  to  act  as  a  McKenzie
    friend, which is what he had sought to do.

 4. Secondly, the appellant asserts that the judge reversed the  burden  of
    proof.  It is the Secretary of State's case  that  this  appellant  had
    entered a marriage of convenience.   The  appellant  asserts  that  the
    judge appeared to cast the burden of proof upon the  appellant,  rather
    than the respondent.

 5. The ground of appeal has no merit.  Whilst  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller,  for
    the respondent, accepted that the judge had perhaps gone too  far  when
    at [19] she found that there was "not  a  shred  of  credible  evidence
    before the Tribunal" [my emphasis] that the sponsor had been exercising
    Treaty Rights at the time of her divorce from the appellant however the
    fact remained that the judge had accepted at [14] that the Secretary of
    State had established a prima facie case for the fact that the marriage
    was one of convenience.  She went on at [15]  et  seq  to  address  the
    evidence of both parties.  She rejected the evidence of  the  appellant
    himself as "most unsatisfactory" noting, for example  that,  "the  bank
    statement in the party's name with no activity on it at  all  does  not
    support the claim the marriage was genuine.   Quite  the  reverse.   It
    suggests that the marriage and the account opening the bills  in  joint
    names etc. were part of a package to convince the respondent  to  issue
    the first residence card and it worked because he succeeded in  getting
    one residence card."  I  am  not  concerned  that  the  judge  is  here
    reversing the burden of proof, as the appellant argues; she  is  simply
    addressing that evidence  which  was  put  before  her,  including  the
    evidence  of  the  appellant.   Ultimately,  the  judge  rejected   the
    appellant's own evidence as satisfactory and  unreliable  and  accepted
    that the Secretary of State had discharged the burden of  proving  that
    the marriage was not genuine.

 6. Thirdly, the appellant asserts that the judge had  not  given  adequate
    reasons for rejecting  such  evidence  as  the  appellant  himself  had
    adduced.  The grounds provide explanations for evidence which the judge
    found unsatisfactory, including the bank statement  (see  above).   The
    ground of appeal is without merit.  It amounts to nothing more  than  a
    disagreement with findings which were available to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence and which the judge has supported with cogent reasons.

 7. Fourthly, the appellant challenges what the judge says at  [19].   Once
    again, this is nothing more than disagreement with  findings  available
    to the judge.  Indeed, I would not go so far as Ms Brocklesby-Weller to
    criticise the judge's observation  that  there  was  "not  a  shred  of
    credible evidence before the Tribunal" regarding the sponsor's exercise
    of Treaty Rights; it would be true  to  say  that  there  was  evidence
    before the Tribunal but Judge Grant made it very clear that she did not
    regard that evidence as "credible."  The judge's decision is brief  but
    it is, in my opinion, adequate for the purpose having addressed all the
    relevant evidence and made appropriate findings of fact with respect to
    it.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 18 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

