
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/06081/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2019                   |On 15 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                 zaim dashaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mupara, Counsel, instructed by Reiss Edwards
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an extempore decision.   The  appeal  is  brought  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett dated 13 June 2019 which
    refused the appeal of the appellant against the  respondent's  decision
    of 8 May 2018 to refuse a residence card showing the appellant's status
    as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

 2. In this matter the  appellant  and  his  partner  were  invited  to  an
    interview by the respondent. They both attended the interview.   During
    the course of this appeal they were provided with a transcript  of  the
    interview  record.   They  responded  to  that  transcript  in  witness
    statements. The appellant's statement is dated  1  April  2019  and  is
    pages 93 to 95 of his bundle of evidence. The statement of his  partner
    is dated 1 May 2019 and is at pages 97 to 99 of the appellant's bundle.
    Those statements set out the evidence of the appellant and his  partner
    on the specific allegations of inconsistency in the  interview  records
    which the respondent relied upon in the refusal letter.

 3. The appellant and his wife also  gave  oral  evidence  at  the  hearing
    before First-tier Tribunal Bartlett.

 4. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett reads as follows  in
    paragraph 15:-

         "The respondent's refusal letter identified a number  of  areas  in
         which it was claimed that the appellant and his wife's answers were
         inconsistent.  In witness statement evidence and oral evidence  the
         appellant and his wife sought to provide evidence which was  wholly
         consistent  with  each  other.   It  is  easy  to  do  this   after
         inconsistencies have been identified and I attach little weight  to
         the witness statement and oral  evidence  which  seeks  to  provide
         different evidence on the areas of inconsistency identified by  the
         respondent."

 5. The appellant's ground 5 argued that this approach disclosed a material
    error of law. It was  maintained  that  finding  the  evidence  in  the
    witness statements and the oral evidence given at  the  hearing  to  be
    inherently unreliable because it was provided after the inconsistencies
    had already been  pointed  out  to  the  appellant  and  his  wife  was
    irrational. It was only then that they knew the case that they  had  to
    answer. The appellant and his wife were entitled to  address  the  case
    made against them in the witness statements and at the hearing and  the
    substance of the witness statements had to be considered  and  weighed,
    even if not in the  appellant's  favour,  rather  than  being  rejected
    outright as inherently unreliable.

 6. We were in agreement with the appellant  that  the  approach  taken  by
    Judge Bartlett in paragraph 15 to the witness  statement  evidence  was
    irrational and on that ground we find sufficient reason  to  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. As the error of law undermines the overall finding on  credibility  and
    whether the appellant was in a marriage of convenience  and  where  the
    views of the parties were that the proper disposal of this  matter  was
    for a re-making in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  we  concluded  that  the
    matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material error on a
    point of law and is set aside to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: [pic]                                Date: 12 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
