
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07445/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 September 2018                          |On 10 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                            miss beatrice boateng
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  10  October  1969.   She
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 14 July 2017 who refused  the  appellant  a  permanent
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016.  In a decision promulgated on 16 April 2018 Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the grounds that the Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  had  applied  the  decision  in  Karim  (proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 0024 rather than Awuku  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 178.

 3. The Secretary of State conceded that the EU law approach taken  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in  Karim  and  later  by  reference  to  Cudjoe  (proxy
    marriages: burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 188 (IAC) is no longer good law
    in that there is no longer a need for an assessment of the requirements
    of the law  of  the  spouse's  EU  State.   It  was  properly  conceded
    therefore by Mr Jarvis, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    reliance on this line of case law.

 4. Such error is  material  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ought  to  have
    considered whether there was reason to doubt  the  genuineness  of  the
    Ghanaian marriage certificate  (which  had  been  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant).  There  were  are  no  adequate  findings  on  this  point,
    relevant to whether or not the  appellant  in  question  was  a  family
    member who had been divorced in accordance with Ghanaian law,  for  the
    purposes of retained rights of residence under the EEA Regulations.  Mr
    Jarvis conceded that this was the case.

 5. Rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    applies as the decision to set aside and remit the appeal was made with
    the consent of the parties.

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it falls to be set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard de novo  by  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    other than Judge Grimmett.

No anonymity direction was sought or is required.




Signed                                                 Date      02  October
2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

