
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07461/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                     |Promulgated                        |
|On papers                          |On 24 February 2020                |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 KAYLEE HILL
                            (NOW KAYLEE HERBERT)
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   For the sake of continuity I shall refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant (Mrs Herbert) appealed  the  respondent's  (Secretary  of
    State) decision dated 09 October 2018 to refuse to  issue  a  residence
    card recognising a right of residence as the family member of a British
    citizen who  returned  to  the  UK  having  exercised  rights  of  free
    movement. The decision was made with reference to regulation 9  of  The
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the   EEA
    Regulations 2016").

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis  allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 09 May 2019. He allowed the  appeal  with  reference  to
    regulation 9 (family member of a British citizen). He also purported to
    allow the appeal with reference to regulation 15 (permanent residence).
    The judge made no findings to explain how or why he considered that the
    requirements for permanent residence were met.

4.   The Secretary of State does not seek to challenge the judge's  findings
    relating to rights of residence with  reference  to  regulation  9  but
    argues that the judge erred in purporting  to  allow  the  appeal  with
    reference to regulation 15 when Mrs Herbert did not return  to  the  UK
    with her husband until early 2018 and could not  meet  the  requirement
    for five years' continuous residence under the EEA Regulations 2016.

5.   Correspondence  from  Mr  and  Mrs  Herbert  indicates  that  they  may
    recognise that this was an error  because  Mrs  Herbert  only  made  an
    application for a residence card as a family  member.  Nothing  in  the
    application form nor the Secretary of State's decision letter indicated
    that this was an application for recognition of a  permanent  right  of
    residence.

6.    Given  the  delay  due  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  out  of  time
    application for permission to appeal, the Upper Tribunal considers that
    it might be possible for the appeal to be dealt with without  the  need
    for the parties to attend a hearing.

7.   The role of the Upper Tribunal is, initially, to consider  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge made an error of law in his decision. If  the
    Upper Tribunal concludes that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved
    an error of law, it can set aside the whole decision or only part of it
    depending on the nature and extent of  the  error  of  law.  The  Upper
    Tribunal can then substitute its own decision if necessary.

8.   In this case it seems that the parties might agree that the judge  made
    a mistake when he referred to regulation 15 of the EEA Regulations 2016
    when it was not a relevant  issue.  Understandably,  the  Secretary  of
    State does not want to be bound to issue  a  permanent  residence  card
    when Mrs Herbert did not apply for one, nor, on the face of it, did she
    meet the criteria for permanent  residence.  Otherwise,  it  seems  the
    Secretary of State accepts the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge in so far as they relate to rights of residence with reference to
    regulation 9 of the  EEA  Regulations  2016.  The  Secretary  of  State
    appears to be willing to issue a residence card on that basis.

9.   For these reasons the Upper Tribunal proposes to find that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law  only  in
    so far as the judge wrongly  referred  to  regulation  15  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016.

10.  I bear in mind that Mrs Herbert is acting in person and  may  not  have
    relevant legal  expertise.  To  be  clear,  the  effect  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision to find an error of law  would  be  that  only  the
    findings relating to regulation 15 would be  set  aside.  The  findings
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis relating to regulation 9 would
    stand i.e. the positive findings relating  to  the  application  for  a
    residence card as a family  member.  The  decision  would  be  formally
    remade and Mrs Herbert's appeal would be allowed solely with  reference
    to the findings relating to regulation 9. The only relevant  ground  of
    appeal would be that the Secretary of State's decision dated 09 October
    2018 breaches the appellant's rights under the EU Treaties  in  respect
    of entry into or residence in the United Kingdom.



DIRECTIONS

11.  Since Mrs Herbert is acting in person, it may be  of  assistance  if  a
    representative of the Secretary of State contacts her to see  if  there
    is any agreement in relation to the above issues.

If the parties object

12.  If either party has any  objection  to  this  course  of  action,  they
    should write to the Tribunal within 14 days of the date  this  decision
    is sent outlining their reasons for objecting to the proposed course of
    action. The Upper Tribunal will then consider whether it  is  necessary
    to list the case for hearing.

If the parties do not object

13.  If neither party has lodged an objection  to  the  proposed  course  of
    action within 14 days of the date this decision is sent, the  error  of
    law decision outlined above will become final and shall have effect.

14.  If neither party has any objection, the Upper Tribunal finds  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of  law  and  sets
    aside the decision in so  far  as  it  refers  to  regulation  15.  The
    decision is remade and Mrs Herbert's appeal is  allowed  based  on  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings relating to regulation 9.  The  decision
    breaches the appellant's rights under the EU  Treaties  in  respect  of
    entry into or residence in the United Kingdom.  This  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal shall take effect and there will be no need for an  oral
    hearing.


Signed:  [pic]         Date: 10 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

