
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07915/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 August 2019                    |On 5 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                UMLISH SINDHU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. In a decision sent on 30 April 2019, I concluded that  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Burns, sent on 26 November  2018,
         contains errors of law.  I now re-make the decision.

Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He married  a  citizen  of
         the Czech Republic ('the  sponsor')  on  5  November  2013.   After
         making an application for a residence card on 1 January  2014,  the
         appellant and the sponsor were invited  to  interviews  on  23  May
         2014. The initial application for a residence  card  and  all  such
         subsequent  applications  based  on   that   marriage   have   been
         unsuccessful.

      3. Judge Burns' decision has been set aside but there  have  been  two
         previous FTT decisions: a decision by Judge  Butler  dated  21  May
         2015 and a decision by Judge Anthony dated  14  March  2017.   Both
         judges dismissed the appellant's respective appeals,  finding  that
         the respondent had displaced the burden of demonstrating  that  the
         appellant's marriage was one of convenience.

Hearing

      4. At the beginning of the hearing before me, the parties agreed  with
         the matters set out below.

          i) The primary issue in dispute is  whether  notwithstanding  the
             two previous un-appealed FTT decisions, the marriage is one of
             convenience.  In the alternative, I must determine whether the
             parties are in a durable relationship (albeit it would be  for
             the respondent to exercise his discretion).

          i) It is not necessary to determine whether the parties have been
             exercising Treaty rights at  the  material  time  because  the
             respondent no longer disputes the positive  findings  in  this
             regard.

         ii) The findings of fact contained in the decisions made by  Judge
             Butler and Judge Anthony are the  appropriate  starting  point
             for my own findings.  The previous findings were  made  closer
             to the key issue in dispute - the parties'  intentions  as  at
             the date of  their  marriage  -  and  for  this  reason  those
             findings  must  be  carefully  considered   with   appropriate
             deference - see Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT  00702.   Those
             findings can be summarised as follows:

               a. There are significant discrepancies  between  the  answers
                  given by the appellant and those given by the  sponsor  at
                  their respective marriage interviews.

               b. Little reliance could be placed  on  an  undated  document
                  from the school providing the appellant  as  an  emergency
                  contact number for the sponsor's child ('C').

               c.  Little  weight  was  attached  to  photographs   of   the
                  appellant, the sponsor before Judge Anthony as these  were
                  not provided to Judge Butler.

               d. A joint council tax bill addressed to  the  appellant  and
                  the  sponsor  demonstrate  that  they  live  at  the  same
                  address.  The sponsor gives the appellant  money  for  her
                  share in the household bills by  transferring  money  from
                  her account to his. Although  the  couple  live  together,
                  their relationship is not genuine and the marriage is  one
                  of convenience.

        iii) I must however make my own findings of fact having  considered
             the above matters together with all the evidence available  to
             me,  as  contained  in  the  consolidated  bundle,  considered
             holistically.  This includes the following:

               a. All the answers provided at the marriage  interview,  both
                  consistent and inconsistent - see the respondent's  policy
                  regarding the holistic approach to marriage interviews  in
                  the Home Office's guidance dated 18 February 2019 and  the
                  summary of the  consistencies  in  the  skeleton  argument
                  prepared on behalf of the appellant.

               b. The explanations for inconsistencies as  set  out  in  the
                  parties' witness statements.

               c. The updated evidence from C's school.

         iv) The burden of proof of establishing that the marriage  is  one
             of convenience falls on the respondent;  the  respondent  must
             therefore displace the burden upon her  of  establishing  that
             the predominant  purpose  of  the  marriage  is  in  order  to
             circumvent the relevant rules - see  Sadovska  v  SSHD  [2017]
             UKSC 54.

          v)  The  respondent  maintains  that  the  marriage  is  one   of
             convenience  but  Mr  Mills  explained  that  this  could   be
             determined  by  me  on  the  extensive  documentary   evidence
             available.  He did not wish to cross-examine the appellant  or
             the sponsor. The 2014s interviews provided  good  grounds  for
             considering the marriage to be one of convenience.

      5. I did not hear evidence from the sponsor or the appellant  for  the
         reasons I have set out above.  After hearing briefly from Mr  Mills
         and then from Mr Pipe, who took me  to  detailed  evidence  in  the
         consolidated bundle, I reserved my decision.

Legal framework

      6. The relevant legal framework is not in dispute and for this reasons
         is merely summarised.  In order to be a spouse of a  family  member
         of an EEA citizen, the relevant person does not include a party  to
         a marriage of convenience - see Regulation  2  of  the  Immigration
         (EEA)  Regulations  2016  ('the  2016  Regulations').    The   2016
         Regulations  do  not  define  a  marriage  of  convenience.   That,
         however, is set out within the overarching Article 1 of EC  Council
         Resolution 97/C382/01 of 4 December 1997.  That Article  defines  a
         marriage of convenience as follows:

             "A marriage concluded between a national of a member state  or
             third country national legally resident in a member state  and
             a third country national with the sole  aim  of  circumventing
             the Rules on entry and residence of  third  country  nationals
             and obtaining for  the  third  country  national  a  residence
             permit or authority to reside in the member state".

      7. It is well-known that the burden of proof of  establishing  that  a
         marriage is one of convenience rests on the Secretary  of  State  -
         see Sadovska (supra) and Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.   At  [24]
         of Rosa Richards LJ said that in his judgment the legal burden lies
         on the Secretary of State to prove that an otherwise valid marriage
         is a marriage of convenience so as to justify  the  refusal  of  an
         application  for  a  residence  card  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
         Pausing there, we know that if the Secretary of State displaces the
         legal burden the evidential burden then rests on the person who  is
         alleging that the marriage is not one of convenience.

      8. At [41] of Rosa Richards LJ also said this:

             "It may be useful to contrast a marriage of convenience with a
             genuine marriage, indeed Underhill LJ treated them as antonyms
             at paragraph 6 of his judgment  in  Agho,  but  the  focus  in
             relation to  a  marriage  of  convenience  should  be  on  the
             intention of the parties at the time the marriage was  entered
             into, whereas the question whether a  marriage  is  subsisting
             looks to whether the  marital  relationship  is  a  continuing
             one".

      9. Although the focus remains on the intentions of the parties at  the
         time of the marriage, it remains relevant to consider the  couple's
         post-marriage circumstances, as these are capable of shedding light
         on their intentions at the time of the marriage.

Findings of fact

     10. The respondent's reasons for contending that the parties'  marriage
         is one of convenience is firmly predicated upon their responses  at
         the marriage interviews (which took place on 23 May 2014),  as  are
         the previous judges' findings, which  I  must  use  as  a  starting
         point.  I therefore begin by considering the  marriage  interviews.
         There has been a dispute in the past regarding the  extent  of  the
         transcripts available to the previous  judges.   I  have  therefore
         considered for myself the responses to the questions asked.

     11. I acknowledge that the  transcripts  contain  several  inconsistent
         responses regarding significant issues including:  how  the  couple
         met;  the  proposal;  the  engagement  and   subsequent   marriage;
         important events in their relationship such as birthday,  Christmas
         and Valentine's day celebrations.  The appellant  and  the  sponsor
         have provided detailed explanations for these in witness statements
         prepared in November 2018.  Although there  has  been  considerable
         delay in providing these explanations, the  full  transcripts  were
         only sent by the respondent on 14 August 2018.  The  DVD  recording
         was sent on 1 November 2018.

     12. I accept that the appellant and sponsor have been able  to  clarify
         and explain a number of concerns previously held,  in  a  plausible
         manner - see for example the  explanation  provided  regarding  the
         language used to communicate and the difference in approach to what
         constituted an engagement  party.   There  are  also  a  number  of
         inconsistencies that are minor in nature - see for example when the
         Christmas presents were opened and the reference  to  'Asda'  as  a
         generic way of describing the shopping centre that the  rings  were
         bought from.

     13. There have however been areas where the parties  have  clearly  had
         considerable time to reflect and have provided explanations with  a
         view to enhancing credibility or consistency - see for example  the
         appellant's  belated  explanation  that  they  had  a  disagreement
         regarding the sponsor's birthday celebrations.   I  also  note  the
         text message  from  the  appellant  to  the  sponsor  giving  their
         address.  I note their explanations in their statements.  I find it
         very difficult to accept that the sponsor would have forgotten  her
         own address.  However I note that it has  not  been  disputed  that
         they resided together at the time and have done so  for  a  lengthy
         period.

     14. Although some inconsistencies have been credibly explained,  others
         have not, and as Judge Butler found, these inconsistencies tend  to
         undermine  the  credibility  of  the  evidence  that  the   parties
         intentions were genuine when they married each other.  However, the
         previous judges did not consider these issues of concern  alongside
         all the consistent responses at  the  interviews.   I  accept  that
         there are many issues of substance in relation to which the parties
         provided consistent answers.  These include answers of a  sensitive
         or intimate nature that go beyond the respondent's claim  that  the
         parties are no more than housemates - for example  they  were  both
         able to explain references  to  the  sponsor  attending  a  medical
         clinic.  These also include details regarding, inter alia religion,
         religious practices and C.  These are set out in Mr Pipe's skeleton
         at [17].  Mr Mills acknowledged these are consistent answers that I
         must consider in the round.

     15. I also bear in mind that that the respondent permitted the marriage
         to take place a few days after preliminary interviews conducted  by
         an immigration officer on 1 November 2013.  This demonstrated  that
         a friend believed the parties to be together.  This is  of  limited
         relevance but does complete  the  background  before  the  marriage
         itself.

     16. Mr Mills accepted that evidence post-dating the marriage itself can
         inform the intention of the parties at the time of the marriage and
         it is appropriate for me to take such evidence into account.   None
         of these matters are determinative.  I have considered them in  the
         round together with the nature and extent of the consistencies  and
         inconsistencies in the marriage interviews.

          i) I note that the parties have  maintained  the  genuineness  of
             their marriage for a lengthy period of over five  years.  This
             may simply demonstrate a determination to maintain a lie.   On
             the other hand, the parties have demonstrated over many  years
             a  determination  to  demonstrate  that  their  marriage   was
             genuinely  entered  into  and  that  they  are  in  a  genuine
             relationship.

         ii) It is not disputed that the parties  have  cohabited  for  the
             entirety of that period.  This is evidenced from  the  council
             tax bills.  As such it is unsurprising that the  30  pages  of
             photographs before me show the couple together and with  C  in
             various places and various times.  The  photographic  evidence
             shows intervening devotion between the couple and as a  family
             unit with C.  These of course might be manufactured  poses  in
             response  to  Judge  Butler's  concern  that  the  photographs
             available at that hearing did not include any family life with
             C.  However the photographs  depicting  family  life  must  be
             considered alongside the documentary evidence from the school,
             to which I turn next.

        iii) C's school has provided a  letter  dated  30  April  2019,  on
             headed notepaper signed by the Head Teacher, to  confirm  that
             the appellant, who is described as C's step-dad has  been  the
             second point of contact since C was entered onto the  school's
             system on 23 June 2014.  This timeline is  broadly  consistent
             with the evidence regarding  C's  education  in  the  marriage
             interviews.  I note that there is  other  information  in  the
             bundle of evidence to confirm that as at  19  March  2018  C's
             grandmother was named as  third  point  of  contact.   If  the
             appellant and the sponsor were only flatmates, it is  unlikely
             that the appellant would have been  second  point  of  contact
             over  the  grandmother.   The  evidence  from  the  school  is
             credible and important.   This  can  be  contrasted  with  the
             school evidence before Judge Anthony.  The letter contained no
             date and did not state  when  family  members  were  added  as
             points of contact.

         iv) I also note that during the process of formally sorting out an
             'Individual Voluntary Arrangement' the appellant declared  the
             sponsor's income and named C as a dependent.

Conclusion

     17. When the evidence is considered holistically, I am  satisfied  that
         there is sufficient  evidence  to  justify  a  departure  from  the
         findings of fact made by the previous judges.   I  have  found  the
         particularisation of consistencies within the  interviews  and  the
         school letter dating the appellant to be the  step-dad  and  second
         point of contact back to 2014,  to  be  particularly  helpful.  The
         parties have  also  been  able  to  put  forward  explanations  for
         inconsistent responses at  the  interviews  (albeit  to  a  limited
         degree).  There remain concerning  issues  regarding  the  parties'
         responses within their  marriage  interviews.   However,  when  the
         evidence is considered as a whole, the respondent has not displaced
         the burden of establishing that the marriage is one of convenience.

Decision

     18. I re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal.


Signed UTJ Plimmer     Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer    29 August 2019
