
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07495/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2019                              |On 28 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mrs bente elisabeth lovell
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Respondent is a citizen of  Denmark.   Her  date  of  birth  is  28
    November 1959.  I shall refer to the Respondent as the Appellant as she
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant made an application for a document  certifying  permanent
    residence under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016  (the  EEA  Regulations).  Her  application  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 8 November 2018.   The  Appellant  appealed.  Her
    appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kaler  in  a  decision
    that  was  promulgated  on  29  January  2019  following  the   judge's
    determination of the appeal on  the  papers  (at  the  request  of  the
    Appellant).

3.   The Secretary of State was granted permission by First-tier Tribunal  I
    D Boyes on 14 February 2019.

The decision of the FTT

4.    The  judge  in  her  decision  set  out  Regulation  9  of  the   2016
    Regulations:

         "Family members of British citizens


         9.-(1)   If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied, these
                Regulations apply to a person who is the family member ("F")
                of a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an EEA
                national.


            (2)   The conditions are that-


                (a)    BC-


                    (i)    is residing in an EEA State as a worker, self-
                        employed person, self-sufficient person or a
                        student, or so resided immediately before returning
                        to the United Kingdom; or


                    (ii)   has acquired the right of permanent residence in
                        an EEA State;


                (b)    F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and


                (c)    F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.


            (3)   Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
                or was genuine include-


                (a)    whether the centre of BC's life transferred to the
                    EEA State;


                (b)    the length of F and BC's joint residence in the EEA
                    State;


                (c)    the nature and quality of the F and BC's
                    accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is or was
                    BC's principal residence;


                (d)    the degree of F and BC's integration in the EEA
                    State;


                (e)    whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with BC
                    was in the EEA State.


            (4)   This regulation does not apply-


                (a)    where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                    was as a means for circumventing  any  immigration  laws
                    applying to non-EEA nationals to which F would otherwise
                    be subject (such as any applicable requirement under the
                    1971 Act to have leave to enter or remain in the  United
                    Kingdom); or


                (b)    to a person who is only eligible to be treated  as  a
                    family member as a result of regulation 7(3)  (extended
                    family members treated as family members).


            (5)   Where these Regulations apply to F, BC is to be treated
                as holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the
                purposes of the application of these Regulations to F.


            (6)   In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is only to be treated as
                having acquired the right of permanent residence in the EEA
                State if such residence would have led to the acquisition of
                that right under regulation 15, had it taken place in the
                United Kingdom.


            (7)   For the purposes of determining whether, when treating
                the BC as an EEA national under these Regulations in
                accordance with paragraph (1), BC would be a qualified
                person-


                (a)    any requirement to have comprehensive sickness
                    insurance cover in the United Kingdom still applies,
                    save that it does not require the cover to extend to BC;


                (b)    in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as
                    a worker under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC is not
                    required to satisfy condition A;


                (c)    in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker
                    as defined in regulation 6(1), BC is not required to
                    satisfy conditions A and, where it would otherwise be
                    relevant, condition C."

5.   The judge made reference to what she  described  as  various  documents
    purporting to show that the Sponsor, the  Appellant's  British  citizen
    husband, worked in Denmark in 1991 and that they had lived together  in
    Denmark.  The judge stated that she had  not  been  provided  with  the
    application and documents in support. She had before  her  the  refusal
    letter, the notice  of  appeal  and  the  documents  submitted  by  the
    Appellant with the appeal.  However, she went on to  reach  conclusions
    specifically at paragraphs 6 and 7 of the decision:

         "6.  It is accepted that the Sponsor is a British  citizen  and  is
             the  Appellant's  husband.   The  documents  provided  by  the
             Appellant.  The documents are in Danish, but it is clear  that
             they all relate to the year 1991.  I am  satisfied  that  they
             show the Sponsor worked in Denmark in 1991 and that  he  lived
             there with the Appellant in that year.  The Sponsor was issued
             with a residence permit as an EEA citizen on 28/01/1991.


         7.   I am satisfied that the Sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights
             in Denmark and also that he and his wife lived there together.
              It would seem that the Appellant and the  Sponsor  have  been
             residing together in the UK for more than 5 years."

The grounds of appeal

6.   The first ground is that it is unclear from the findings of  the  judge
    the basis on which the appeal was allowed and what documents the  judge
    referred to.  It is asserted in the second ground that  the  judge  did
    not identify the relevant Regulations that the Appellant met and failed
    to show how the evidence before her could enable the Appellant to  meet
    the requirements with reference to OB  (EEA  Regulations  2006  Article
    9(2)  Surinder  Singh  spouse)  Morocco  [2010]  UKUT  420.  That  case
    establishes there has to be a sufficient link between the  exercise  of
    treaty rights in the EEA State and return.  The  third  ground  asserts
    that the judge did not engage with whether the Sponsor  was  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK or on what basis the Appellant had  established
    that she meets all the requirements of 15(1)(a) of the Regulations.

7.   Having considered the decision of  the  judge  it  is  clear  that  she
    allowed the appeal under Regulation 9. However, I accept that the judge
    did not give adequate reasons why she allowed the appeal with reference
    to documents submitted in support.   I  have  some  sympathy  with  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.

8.   The Appellant attended the hearing before me.  She  was  unrepresented.
    It became clear that the judge had before her  certain  documents  that
    were submitted in support of the appeal in which the Secretary of State
    did not have and had not seen.  These  include  a  permanent  residence
    card  relating  to  the  Sponsor,  evidence  of  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant's tax returns showing that they lived at the same address and
    documents relating to the British citizen  husband's  employment.   The
    documentation supported that the Sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights
    in 1991, he had permanent residence in  Denmark  and  that  they  lived
    together there.

9.   Ms Everett agreed to the  Appellant  giving  evidence  at  the  hearing
    before me. The Appellant explained the documentation  that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Her evidence was  that  her  British  citizen
    husband was working in Denmark between 1985 and 1992.  He  was  granted
    permanent residence, they were  living  there  together  and  they  had
    purchased a house together in Denmark. He continued to work there until
    1992 when in autumn he returned to the UK where  he  has  been  working
    since.

10.  There was no challenge by Ms Everett to the Appellant's evidence.   The
    judge in my view did not adequately reason the  decision.  She  made  a
    reference to material that had been  submitted  on  which  she  relied;
    however, it was not clear how this established that the  Appellant  met
    the  requirements  of   the   Regulations.    Having   considered   the
    documentation and having heard the Appellant's evidence  about  it  and
    her circumstances, there is in my view no need to  interfere  with  the
    decision of the judge to allow the appeal.   The documentation that the
    judge had before her and the Appellant's evidence establishes that  the
    Sponsor was exercising treaty rights in Denmark between 1985  and  1992
    (when he returned to the UK), he had permanent residence there, he  and
    the Appellant lived together in Denmark and their residence was genuine
    and he continues to work here.

11.  There is no need for me to interfere with the decision of  the  FTT  to
    allow the appeal under Regulation 9. It is not clear whether the  judge
    found that the Appellant's appeal is allowed under  Regulation  15.  It
    was conceded  by  Ms  Everett  that  if  the  Appellant's  unchallenged
    evidence was accepted her appeal should  be  allowed  under  Regulation
    15(1) (b) of the 2016 Regulations on the basis that she is entitled  to
    permanent residence. I agree and allow her appeal on this basis.


Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's is dismissed.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the 2016 Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                 Joanna McWilliam               Date 25 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

