
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
EA/07879/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 November 2019                     |On 26 November 2019                   |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ms lovely Uwadiae
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Ariyo instructed by Apex Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 25 June 2019.  I shall refer to the parties  as
    they were described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant had appealed against the Secretary  of  State's  decision
    taken to remove her from the United Kingdom in accordance with  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 which applied  by  virtue  of
    Regulations 23(6)(a)/23(6)(c) pursuant to Regulation 26(3) and 32(2) of
    the EEA Regulations.  The First-tier Tribunal however had  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 3. At the outset of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated:-

         "The respondent's decision notice makes  clear  that,  inter  alia,
         that the appellant can appeal the decision on the grounds  that  it
         is unlawful because it is incompatible with the appellant's  rights
         under the ECHR; the decision breaches the appellant's rights  as  a
         member of an EEA national and that the  appellant's  removal  would
         breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee Convention  or  would
         be incompatible with the appellant's rights under the ECHR".

 4. The judge identified that the appellant's notice  of  appeal  indicated
    that the appellant appealed under each of the above heads, but  neither
    party's representative was in a position to identify what it  was  that
    the appellant was appealing or the grounds that  were  being  advanced,
    let alone clearly identify the  issues  that  he  was  being  asked  to
    resolve.

 5. The judge stated:-

         "Nevertheless, I have determined this appeal in accordance with the
         avenues of appeal that were available  to  the  appellant  and  the
         evidence which was before me.  I allow this  appeal  on  the  basis
         that the  appellant's  removal  would  be  a  breach  of  the  UK's
         obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR.  It follows that I do  not
         need to consider the appellant's other avenues of appeal".

 6. The Secretary of State contended that the judge  had  made  a  material
    misdirection on law in considering and allowing  the  appeal  on  human
    rights  grounds  because  the  appeal  was  made  under  the  2016  EEA
    Regulations and the  judge  therefore  did  not  have  jurisdiction  to
    determine the appeal on the basis that she did.

 7. In addition, it was submitted that the judge had failed  to  adhere  to
    the guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal  in  Quaidoo  (new  matter:
    procedure/process) [2018] UKUT 00087 (IAC)  when  determining  the  new
    human rights issue raised by the appellant and the judge did not appear
    to take into account that no consent was provided by the  Secretary  of
    State to determine the new matters raised.

 8.   A  detailed  skeleton  argument  was  submitted   by   Ms   Uwadiae's
    representatives.  It  submitted  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    factually wrong because the appellant had appealed against the decision
    to remove her from the United Kingdom in accordance with Section 10  of
    the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The  notice  of  immigration
    decision informed her that she was a person liable to  removal  because
    her right to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 had ceased.   The  matter  of
    the appellant's appeal against the refusal to recognise her  rights  of
    residence had been dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal in a  previous
    determination on 5 December 2017 prior to the issue of  the  notice  of
    immigration decision taken.

 9. It was contended that the decision to remove on 4th December  2018  was
    the substance of the appellant's appeal and that  which  the  appellant
    was challenging that decision on human rights grounds.  Mr Ariyo relied
    on the fact that prior to the decision under challenge  to  remove  the
    appellant the respondent had undertaken an assessment of the factors in
    relation to her private and family life and that further to  Regulation
    36 of the EEA Regulations the  appellant  may  appeal  against  an  EEA
    decision as defined by Regulation 2(1) of the EEA Regulations.  It  was
    submitted that the appellant was still entitled to rely on human rights
    grounds and the  Tribunal  did  have  jurisdiction  to  consider  those
    grounds.  Mr Ariyo referred to paragraph 34 of the case of  Amirteymour
    [2017] EWCA Civ 353.

10. Mr Clarke pointed out that the First-tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction
    to hear this appeal in the way that it  did  and  as  such  the  second
    ground of appeal in relation to the new matter was in effect redundant.
     It was open to the appellant to make a further human rights claim.

Analysis

11. As set out in Munday (EEA decision:  grounds  of  appeal)  [2019]  UKUT
    00091 (IAC):-

         "(1)     In an appeal against an EEA decision under the Immigration
             (EEA) Regulations 2016, the sole ground of appeal is that  the
             decision breaches the appellant's rights under the EU Treaties
             in respect of entry to and residence in the UK (sched 2,  para
             1).

         (2)      Consequently, in such an appeal an appellant may not  rely
             on human rights grounds in the absence of a s.120  notice  and
             statement of additional grounds in which  reliance  is  placed
             upon human rights or there has been an additional decision  to
             refuse a human rights claim".

12.  The notice of immigration decision was  clearly  taken  by  virtue  of
    Regulation  23(6)(a),  23(6)(c)  pursuant  to  Regulation   26(3)   and
    Regulation 32(2) of the EEA Regulations 2016:-

         "23.     (6)  Subject to paragraphs (7) and (8),  an  EEA  national
                  who has entered the United Kingdom or the family member of
                  such a national who has entered the United Kingdom may  be
                  removed if-

                  (a)  that person does not have or ceases to have  a  right
                      to reside under these Regulations;

                  ...

                  (c)  the Secretary of State has decided that the  person's
                      removal is justified on grounds of misuse  of  rights
                      under regulation 26(3).

         ...

         26.      (3)  The Secretary of State may take an  EEA  decision  on
                  the grounds of misuse of rights where there are reasonable
                  grounds to suspect the misuse of a right to reside and  it
                  is proportionate to do so.

         ...

         32.      (2)  Where a decision is taken to remove  a  person  under
                  regulation 23(6)(a) or (c), the person is to be treated as
                  if the person were a person to whom section 10(1)  of  the
                  1999 Act(21) applies, and section 10 of that Act  (removal
                  of certain persons unlawfully in the United Kingdom) is to
                  apply accordingly".

13. It is clear that the decision was taken under the relevant  Regulations
    and there is confirmation in the authority of Munday that  the  grounds
    of appeal are restricted.  Further to Regulation 26(3):-

         "The Secretary of State may take an EEA decision on the grounds  of
         misuse of rights where there are reasonable grounds to suspect  the
         misuse of a right to reside and it is proportionate to do so".

    That is the proportionality assessment that the  Tribunal  should  have
    undertaken.

14. With regard to the consideration of Amirteymour, Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb in Munday sets out at paragraphs 80 and 81 as follows:-

         "80.     At the  time  of  Amirteymour,  Schedule  1  to  the  2006
             Regulations  read  across  into   appeals   under   the   2006
             Regulations the more extensive grounds of appeal found in  the
             (then) s.84(1) of the NIA Act 2002 with the exception of paras
             (a) and (f).  These  grounds  included,  therefore,  that  the
             decision was unlawful as it  breached  the  individual  rights
             under the ECHR or that  his  removal  in  consequence  of  the
             decision would breach his rights  under  the  ECHR.   Despite,
             therefore, the broader range of grounds then read across  from
             s.84(1) (with the exception of paras  (a)  and  (f)  concerned
             with claims based upon the Immigration  Rules)  the  Court  of
             Appeal, nevertheless, interpreted  the  legislative  structure
             when an appeal was brought against an 'EEA  decision'  as  not
             permitting reliance upon Art 8 of the ECHR or indeed any other
             human rights ground.  In the light of  the  amended  terms  of
             Schedule 2, para 1 to the 2016 Regulations, in the absence  of
             a s.120 notice  and  statement  in  response,  it  is,  in  my
             judgment, impossible to see how an  individual  in  an  appeal
             under those Regulations can rely upon his or her human rights.
              The necessary ground is simply not part  of  the  legislative
             framework applicable to that individual's appeal.

         81.           That the 'sole'  ground  of  appeal  under  the  2016
             Regulations against  an  'EEA  decision'  is  the  EU  ground,
             appears to mean that,  even  when  there  is  an  EEA  removal
             decision, an individual cannot rely upon any  of  the  'other'
             grounds in s.84 in the absence of a  s.120  notice.   To  that
             extent, the more restrictive wording of para  1  to  Sched  2,
             which was not in  effect  at  the  time  of  Amirteymour,  may
             eliminate one of the two situations envisaged  by  Beatson  LJ
             (under  the  earlier  unamended   provisions   of   the   2006
             Regulations) where an individual was not restricted to the  EU
             ground in an appeal against an 'EEA decision'."




15. Although Mr Ariyo submitted that the Secretary of State had  considered
    human rights in her GCID Notes there was clearly no human rights  claim
    made and thus no decision and, as pointed  out  in  Munday,  an  appeal
    against an EEA decision can only be brought and maintained on the basis
    of the decision being contrary to EU law.  The grounds  so  limited  do
    not contemplate a  right  of  appeal  based  upon  the  decision  being
    contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

16. I realise that the notice of rights of appeal given  to  the  appellant
    did not appear to reflect the provisions  which  were  amended  in  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and which came into effect
    on  20  October  2014  and  which  significantly  changed  the   appeal
    provisions that were previously contained within Part  5  of  the  Act.
    Section 82 now sets out the rights of appeal against three decisions:-

      1) the refusal of a protection claim - Section 82(1)(a);

      2) the refusal of human rights claim - Section 82(1)(b); and

      3) a decision  to  revoke  a  person's  protection  status  -  Section
         82(1)(c).

17. The  fact  is  that  the  appellant's  right  to  appeal  stemmed  from
    Regulation 36 of the 2016 Regulations which incorporate certain of  the
    appeal provisions in Part 5 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  By  virtue  of  Regulation  36(10)  the  provisions  in  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 referred to in Schedule  2
    to the 2016 Regulations have an effect in any  appeal  under  the  2016
    Regulations.

18. It is important to note that Section 82(1)(b) creates a right of appeal
    against a decision to refuse a human rights claim.  The right of appeal
    only arises if a human rights claim has  been  refused  and  that  pre-
    supposes that a human rights claim has been made.  There is no evidence
    that there was any human rights claim made in this  particular  appeal.
    I accept that there was a previous decision made by the  respondent  on
    13 January 2016 refusing to issue a permanent residence card  and  that
    decision was considered by the First-tier Tribunal on 8 December  2017,
    but at no point has the  appellant  submitted  any  representations  in
    response to a Section 120 notice or made a human rights claim.

19. As pointed out at the hearing, in this instance there is  no  right  of
    appeal against a removal  decision  outside  the  EEA  Regulations  and
    specifically  Regulation  32(2)  makes  particular  reference  to   the
    application of Section  10(1)  of  the  1999  Act  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 23(6)(a) or (c).  It would appear however that the  decision
    is not caught by Regulation 37  such  that  the  appellant  has  an  in
    country right of appeal.

20. The judge adopted an incorrect approach to the  appeal,  understandably
    perhaps because of the defect in the notice of immigration decision and
    the notice of appeal, but nonetheless, the appropriate  findings  under
    the correct provisions should be made.  I set aside  the  decision  and
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016  rather  than  in
    relation to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

21. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

22. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed Helen Rimington                       Date 26th November 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


