
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07668/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 02 August 2019                    |On 07 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                         Liz Danitza Martinez Perez
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Jegede of Ashton Ross Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a Bolivian national born on 27 October 1985.  She  appeals,
with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
her appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue her  with  a
residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
2016 as the family member (spouse) of an EEA national.

The background to this appeal is as follows. The appellant  entered  the  UK
illegally in August 2013, via the Republic of Ireland. On 24 April 2014  she
submitted an application for an EEA residence card on  the  basis  of  being
the spouse of a French national, [DB], whom she had married  on  18  January
2014. Her application was refused on 8 April  2015  and  an  appeal  against
that decision was dismissed on 3 October 2016.  The  appellant  and  Mr  [B]
subsequently divorced on 31 January 2017 following a decree nisi  issued  on
14 December 2016.

The appellant claims to have entered into another relationship in May  2015,
with a Spanish national from Ecuador, [WJ], whom she  married  on  18  March
2017. On 22 March 2017 she submitted an application  for  an  EEA  residence
card on the basis of that marriage. On 4 September 2017  the  appellant  and
her husband attended a Home Office marriage interview, following  which,  on
the same day, her  application  was  refused  and  she  was  served  with  a
liability to removal notice. The appellant  appealed  against  the  decision
under the  EEA  Regulations.  On  13  September  2017  she  made  a  further
application, for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds. That application  was
also refused, on 25 September 2017, and was certified as  clearly  unfounded
under section 94(1) of the Nationality, Immigration Act 2002. The  appellant
sought to appeal that decision as well,  but  the  appeal  was  subsequently
withdrawn after it was accepted by  her  representative  that  she  was  not
entitled to an in-country right of appeal.

The basis for the decision made under  the  EEA  Regulations  was  that  the
appellant's marriage was one of convenience and that she was  therefore  not
a "spouse" for the purposes of Regulation 2. The respondent considered  that
there had been numerous inconsistencies and discrepancies arising  from  the
marriage interview which led him to conclude that the  claimed  relationship
was not genuine and that the marriage of 18 March 2017 had  been  undertaken
for the sole purpose  of  remaining  in  the  UK.  The  respondent  provided
details of the inconsistencies between the evidence  of  the  appellant  and
the  sponsor  at  the  marriage  interview  and  the  discrepancies  in  the
evidence,  which  included  differing  accounts   of   who   completed   the
application  form  and  received  notification   of   the   interview;   the
appellant's lack of knowledge of her previous husband's first name  and  the
sponsor's lack of knowledge of her previous marriage application and  appeal
and of her divorce and separation from her  first  husband;  inconsistencies
in the evidence of the sponsor's  immigration  history;  inconsistencies  in
the evidence about the sponsor's child and her previous  visit  to  the  UK;
inconsistencies in the account of when they first met and  their  subsequent
meeting; inconsistencies about where they first lived together  and  a  lack
of evidence of that residence; and the appellant's lack of  knowledge  about
the sponsor's recent visit to the GP.

The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Callow  on  23
November  2018  and  was  listed  together  with  the  human  rights  appeal
HU/14007/2017 which, as stated above,  was  accepted  as  being  an  invalid
appeal and subsequently withdrawn. The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the
appellant and the sponsor and then, having reserved  his  decision,  resumed
the proceedings at a further hearing on 19 April 2019 after concluding  that
the appellant ought to be given an opportunity to provide  further  evidence
to clarify the documents submitted. The appellant and sponsor  gave  further
oral evidence at the resumed hearing.

Judge Callow considered, in his decision, that  the  appellant  and  sponsor
were poor witnesses who lacked knowledge of  each  other's  backgrounds.  He
noted that they did not know each other's working hours and  that  they  had
given inconsistent evidence about the occupants of the property  where  they
lived. The judge considered that the discrepancies in the evidence  were  of
such significance that he found the marriage to have been entered  into  for
the purpose of the appellant gaining an immigration advantage and  that  the
marriage  was  one  of  convenience.  Accordingly  he  concluded  that   the
respondent had properly refused to issue a residence card to  the  appellant
under the Regulations and he dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
grounds that the judge had failed to give reasons for determining  that  the
appellant and EEA sponsor lacked knowledge of one another's backgrounds  and
that they were poor witnesses; that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  had  been
aware of each other's hours of work but  had  given  incomplete  information
and the judge ought to have sought  further  clarification  in  that  regard
rather than concluding that it  demonstrated  the  marriage  to  be  one  of
convenience; that the judge ought to have given the  appellant  and  sponsor
an opportunity to respond to the concerns about  the  additional  tenant  at
their property; and that the judge had erred by focussing on  a  handful  of
discrepancies arising from the marriage interview rather than giving  weight
to the rest of the questions and had failed to give weight to the bundle  of
evidence.

Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  in  a
decision of 13 June 2019 on all grounds.

The matter then came before us and both parties made  submissions,  with  Mr
Jegede relying and expanding upon the  grounds  of  appeal  and  Mr  Bramble
submitting that the appellant had had plenty of opportunity to  address  all
relevant matters of concern  and  that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in  his
decision.



Discussion and findings

We do not consider that this is a case where permission ought to  have  been
granted in the first place. Judge Hollingworth's reference to  "insufficient
analysis" and an "attribution of weight" is simply an  endorsement  of  what
is essentially a disagreement with Judge Callow's decision.  The  weight  to
be accorded to the  evidence  was  a  matter  from  the  judge  and  he  was
perfectly entitled to conclude that the concerns he  raised,  and  those  of
the  respondent,  were  sufficiently  weighty  to  outweigh  any  areas   of
consistency  which  otherwise  arose  from  the  evidence  at  the  marriage
interview.

The first challenge in the grounds is  an  assertion  that  the  judge  made
broad and general assertions as to the parties' lack  of  knowledge  of  one
another's backgrounds and to being poor witnesses, without  giving  reasons.
However it is clear from his observation to that effect at [21] that he  was
specifically referring back to the evidence  from  the  interviews  and  the
respondent's concerns arising from  that,  as  set  out  in  detail  in  the
earlier part of his decision, and to the sponsor's and appellant's  attempts
to address those inconsistencies and discrepancies.

It was not the case, as Mr Jegede suggested, that there were only a  handful
of inconsistencies arising from the parties' hours of  work  and  their  co-
tenants, but there were clearly concerns about many issues  of  which  those
matters  only  formed  a  part.  The  appellant  and  sponsor  had   clearly
demonstrated limited knowledge of  each  other's  immigration  history,  the
sponsor knew little or  nothing  of  the  appellant's  former  marriage  and
application and appeal on that basis despite the fact that  the  matter  was
still ongoing for some time  after  their  own  relationship  had  allegedly
begun, there were concerns about the appellant's knowledge relating  to  the
sponsor's daughter, there were concerns about the parties'  recollection  of
the occasion when they first met and there  were  inconsistencies  in  their
evidence about their living arrangements. The judge considered and  analysed
the  appellant's  attempt  to  address  those  concerns  at  [10]  and   the
appellant's  and  sponsor's  attempts  to  address  the  matters  in   their
supplementary statements and oral evidence at [13]. It  is  clear  that  the
first few lines of [21]  were  his  conclusions  on  that  analysis  of  the
evidence as opposed to generalised and unreasoned  statements,  as  asserted
in the grounds.

With regard to the assertions made at [4] and [5] of the grounds and  by  Mr
Jegede in his submissions, that the judge ought to have recognised that  the
appellant and sponsor had simply given  incomplete  information  about  each
other's working hours and  ought  to  have  been  given  an  opportunity  to
clarify the matter further, it was not for the judge to lead the parties  in
their evidence but he  was  entitled  to  assess  the  evidence  as  it  was
presented  to  him.  Likewise,  with  regard  to  the  evidence  about   the
additional tenant in their property it  was  not  for  the  judge  to  probe
further but he was entitled to consider the evidence as it was presented  to
him. The appellant and sponsor had more than ample  opportunity  to  address
all relevant matters and to give  full  details  of  all  aspects  of  their
lives, having had the benefit of a resumed hearing and a further  chance  to
clarify and expand upon the evidence,  all  with  the  assistance  of  legal
representation. The grounds, at [5] and [6], in seeking to elaborate on  the
evidence and to suggest reasons  for  the  discrepancies  in  the  evidence,
quite simply fail to demonstrate any error on the part of the judge.

As for the suggestion at [8] of the grounds,  that  the  judge  ignored  the
positive  features  of  the  appellant's  and  sponsor's  evidence  at   the
interview but relied only on the "handful of discrepancies", that is  simply
not the case. The judge clearly undertook a full  and  careful  analysis  of
all the evidence in the  round  and,  having  appropriately  considered  the
burden and standard of proof in accordance with  the  relevant  authorities,
provided cogent reasons for concluding  that  the  relationship  was  not  a
genuine one and that the marriage had been entered into solely to provide  a
basis for the appellant to remain in the UK. There was nothing erroneous  or
unlawful in the judge's approach to the evidence. He was fully and  properly
entitled to conclude that the appellant  had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
convenience and that she was not, therefore, entitled to  a  residence  card
as the family member of an EEA national.  There are no errors of law in  the
judge's decision.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. We do not set aside the decision. The  decision  to
dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed: [pic]                           Dated:      2 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
