
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07923/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 29 June 2018                              |On: 10 October 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 Stephen [M]
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Althea Radford, Counsel instructed by Greater
London
                  Solicitors Ltd

For the respondent:    Mr Ian Jarvis, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                        AMENDED DECISION AND REASONS

 Pursuant to paragraph 41 (2)(d) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

 1. The appellant appealed with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse him a  permanent  right  of  residence  pursuant  to
    Regulations 5, 6 and 15 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016.  The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.

 2. The decision in this appeal will turn on the proper  interpretation  of
    Regulation 6(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2016, and the decision of the Court of Justice of the European Union in
    Saint Prix v Secretary of State for Work  and  Pensions  (Aire  Centre,
    intervening) [2014] EUECJ C-507/12, [2015] 1  CMLR  5  (Case  C-507/12)
    (the Saint Prix issue).

 3. The appellant's application is based  on  his  marriage  to  a  Swedish
    citizen said to be exercising Treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom  at
    the material  times.   The  parties  have  two  children,  born  on  15
    September 2011 and 18 March  2013.   Both  children  have  sickle  cell
    anaemia. The sponsor's mother is also in the United Kingdom  and  helps
    with their care.  The sponsor has not worked since  her  children  were
    born, though she may have studied for a time in 2014.

 4. The sponsor's failure to return to work after the birth  of  her  first
    child extended well beyond the maternity leave period, which is why she
    lost her job. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was not  such
    as to indicate that the sponsor herself was ill  as  a  result  of  her
    pregnancy, but both of her children have sickle cell disease  and  have
    been very unwell since birth as a  result,  such  that  even  with  her
    mother helping with the children's care, she has not felt able to  work
    since they were born.

The Saint Prix issue

 5. The EEA Regulations provision relevant to  this  appeal  is  Regulation
    6(2):

         "6...(2).     A person who is no longer working must continue to be
         treated as a worker provided that  the  person-(a)  is  temporarily
         unable to work as the result of an illness or accident;"

 6. In Saint Prix, the Court of Justice of the European Union held  that  a
    woman who was temporarily  unable  to  work  because  of  the  physical
    constraints of the late  stages  of  pregnancy  and  the  aftermath  of
    childbirth did not cease to be a worker, so long  as  she  returned  to
    work within 'a reasonable period after the birth of  her  child'.   The
    Court of Justice envisaged an extensive, fact sensitive  evaluation  as
    to whether a woman had really left the labour market.

 7. The appellant contends that the language of Regulation 6(2) extends, or
    should be extended, to include the illness or accident of a member of a
    person's family, causing such person to be unable to work,  as  opposed
    to her own illness or accident.   There  is  no  decided  authority  in
    United Kingdom law to the effect for which the appellant  argues,  that
    the natural meaning of the language 'as the result  of  an  illness  or
    accident' in Regulation 6(2) should be treated as inclusive of  persons
    other than the worker.

 8. The decision in Saint Prix has been considered by the Upper Tribunal in
    Weldemichael and another (St Prix C-507/12;  effect)  [2015]  UKUT  540
    (IAC) and in Gauswami (Retained right of residence, Jobseekers)  [2018]
    UKUT 275 (IAC).  In Weldemichael, the Upper Tribunal found that a woman
    was entitled to continue to be treated as a worker  provided  that  her
    absence from work did not extend beyond 52 weeks, beginning no  earlier
    than the 11th week before her expected date of  confinement,  and  that
    she returned to work.

Rule 41

 9. At the hearing on 29 June 2018, I reserved my decision.  I gave an oral
    indication that I was likely to set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, preserving the findings of fact, and remit the appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing on the Saint Prix issue, with  no
    findings of fact or credibility preserved.  Both parties  made  a  note
    that I had so indicated.  I accept, having  regard  to  the  Presenting
    Officer's note of proceedings and Counsel's note, both  of  which  have
    been confirmed in writing, that  the  parties  considered  that  I  had
    decided to remit the appeal on those terms.

10. When writing up my reserved decision on 3 September 2018, I  reached  a
    different conclusion, and the decision  as  promulgated  dismissed  the
    appeal.  Both parties have challenged that decision.

11. Where an indication is given on a reserved decision,  the  decision  of
    record is the written decision. However, I  accept  that  there  was  a
    procedural irregularity in reaching a different  conclusion  from  that
    which was discussed at the hearing, without seeking further submissions
    from the parties on the Saint Prix issue.

12. It is in the interests of justice for there to be findings of  fact  as
    to whether the sponsor left the labour market after the  birth  of  her
    children, so that the Saint Prix issue can be properly considered.

13. Pursuant to paragraph 41(2)(d) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules, I
    therefore set aside my decision dismissing the appeal, and  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade afresh,
    with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.

Discussion

14. The question here is whether the Saint Prix extension  extends  to  the
    illness of the sponsor's children, or only to her own  physical  and/or
    mental recovery from the birth, and whether she left the labour  market
    during that long period of  absence.   The  basis  of  the  appellant's
    challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is that the  Judge
    failed to make adequate findings as to whether the appellant's wife had
    really left the labour market.

15. The appeal is allowed.  The decision in this appeal will be  remade  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.



DECISION

16. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision did involve the making of no  error
    on a point of law

    I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The  decision  in
    this appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


Date:         8 October 2018                 Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson


