
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07157/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th January 2020                 |On 30th January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                MR AMAIE BADR
                        (NO anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Zeb, Invictus Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Egypt.  On  21st  December  2017  he
         applied for a permanent residence card as confirmation that  he  is
         the former family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
         rights in the UK, who  has  a  retained  right  of  residence.  His
         application was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in  a
         decision dated 22nd February 2018. The appellant's  appeal  against
         that decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  French
         ("the judge") for reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on  21
         May 2019.


      2. The judge referred to the relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the 2016 regulations"),
         at paragraph [2] of his decision.  The judge noted inter  alia  the
         requirement in Regulation 21(5) of the  2016  Regulation  that  the
         application must be accompanied by a valid national  identity  card
         or passport in the name of the EEA national.  The judge also  noted
         that even if the  appellant  had  provided  the  original  national
         identity card or passport of  the  EEA  national,  the  application
         would still fail unless Regulation 15(1)(f) is satisfied.


      3. At paragraph [3] of his decision the Judge  noted  the  appellant's
         claim that valid documentation had been produced in  respect  of  a
         previous application for a residence card that had been granted  by
         the respondent in April 2012 and which was valid until  10th  April
         2017.  At paragraph [4] of the decision, the judge  refers  to  the
         other evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  in  support  of  the
         appeal to demonstrate that he has resided in the UK  in  accordance
         with the Regulations for a continuous period  of  five  years  and,
         was, at the end of the period, a family member who has retained the
         right of residence as set out in Regulation 10(5).


         At paragraph [5] of his decision, the judge stated:


             "It was my view that it  was  not  permissible  to  submit  ID
             documentation in support of  this  application  that  was  not
             valid.

         The judge considered it insufficient to say that the  documentation
         had been accepted for a previous application and did  not  consider
         that the production of a document that is out of  date,  meets  the
         legal requirements.  At paragraph [6], the judge stated:


             "I  did  not  consider  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a
             satisfactory explanation for  the  failure  to  provide  valid
             identification for the "sponsor".  He did not say why  he  had
             not submitted an application for  permanent  residence  at  an
             earlier stage, what efforts he made to contact her  to  obtain
             valid   documentation   through   mutual   friends   or    her
             employers..."

      4. The judge did not make any particular findings as  to  whether,  on
         the evidence before the Tribunal, Regulation 15(1)(f) is satisfied.




      5. The appellant claims the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  take  into
         account the evidence of the appellant by way of explanation for not
         having submitted an  application  for  permanent  residence  at  an
         earlier stage, and the steps taken to locate  his  former  partner,
         the EEA  national,  and  obtain  the  required  identity  document.
         Furthermore the appellant  claims  the  judge  failed  to  consider
         Regulation 42 of the 2016 Regulations, that permits an applicant to
         provide alternative evidence of identity and nationality where  the
         person is unable to obtain or produce the required documents due to
         circumstances beyond  their  control.   Permission  to  appeal  was
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney on 12th June 2019.


      6. Before me, Mr McVeety accepts the judge should have had  regard  to
         Regulation 42 of the 2016 Regulations.  The fact the appellant  had
         previously provided a valid national identity card or  passport  in
         the name of the EEA national, when he made his previous application
         for a residence card that had been granted  by  the  respondent  in
         April 2012, should have been sufficient when  taken  together  with
         the explanation provided by the appellant  regarding  the  attempts
         made by him to locate his  former  partner.   Mr  McVeety  candidly
         refers to the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Rehman  (EEA
         Regulations 2016 - specified evidence) [2019] UKUT 000195 (IAC), in
         which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  held  that  the  provisions
         contained in Regulations 21 and 42 must be interpreted in the light
         of European Union  law  and  in  some  cases,  this  might  involve
         ignoring the requirement for specified  evidence  altogether  if  a
         document is not in fact required to establish a right of residence.
          Here, as in Rehman, Mr McVeety accepts the respondent had accepted
         the appellant was married to an EEA national  when  he  was  issued
         with the previous residence card.


      7. Mr McVeety, rightly in my judgement, accepts that the focus of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge was upon the fact that the appellant  had
         not provided a valid national identity card or passport in the name
         of the EEA national, and the decision of the judge is vitiated by a
         material error of law.


      8. Having had an opportunity to review the evidence  that  was  before
         the First-tier Tribunal, Mr McVeety accepts the appellant  is  able
         to establish that he has resided in the UK in accordance  with  the
         Regulations for a continuous period of five years and, was, at  the
         end of the period, a family member who has retained  the  right  of
         residence as set out in Regulation 10(5).    It  follows  that  the
         evidence establishes that the appellant has a  right  of  permanent
         residence under  Regulation  15(1)(f)  and  the  appeal  should  be
         allowed.


      9. In the circumstances,  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge French and remake the decision, allowing the appeal.


Notice of Decision


     10. The decision of FtT Judge French promulgated on 21st  May  2019  is
         set aside.


     11. The appeal is ALLOWED on EU Law grounds.



    Signed                                  Date 28th January 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


