
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
EA/07739/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th October 2017                  |        On 19th October 2017          |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                        Olufumilayo Omowunmi Ajiboye
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss W Bremang of Counsel, instructed by Arndale
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge O'Brien of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 12th December 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Nigerian citizen born 25th April  1980.   She
    applied for confirmation that she was entitled to  permanent  residence
    in  the  UK  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

 3. The application was made on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    married to an EEA national, the marriage having  taken  place  on  24th
    February 2007 in Nigeria, and which ended in divorce on  11th  November
    2014.  The Appellant's case was  that  she  had  retained  a  right  of
    residence following divorce.

 4. The application was refused  on  17th  March  2016  with  reference  to
    regulations 10(5) and 15(1)(f) of the 2006 Regulations.

 5. The Appellant appealed and requested that her appeal be decided on  the
    papers without an oral hearing.

 6. The FTT dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 12th December
    2016.  The FTT accepted  that  documentary  evidence  proved  that  the
    marriage had lasted for more than three years prior to divorce, and the
    couple had resided in the  UK  for  at  least  one  year  during  their
    marriage.  The FTT found that the EEA national had  been  self-employed
    in the UK "since no later than 5th April 2009 until no earlier than 5th
    April 2015."  The EEA national was exercising treaty rights at the date
    of divorce and the Appellant had been a worker prior to that  date  and
    thereafter until at least 28th August 2015.  The appeal  was  dismissed
    for reasons given in paragraph 19 of the FTT decision which is set  out
    below;

         "19. Whilst she continued to work, therefore, the Appellant enjoyed
             retained rights of residence.  However, there is  no  evidence
             before me that  the  Appellant  was  resident  in  the  United
             Kingdom before 6th October 2010 or that she continued to  work
             until 6th October 2015.  It might be  that  such  evidence  is
             easily obtainable by the Appellant, upon production of which I
             would find that the Appellant had acquired permanent right  of
             residence.  Until such time, however, her  application  for  a
             permanent residence card must fail."

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the FTT had erred by  not  considering
    material evidence which proved that the Appellant had been resident  in
    the UK  before  6th  October  2010.   The  Appellant's  representatives
    referred specifically to the Respondent's bundle of documents at N1 and
    N2, those documents being a GP letter dated 8th  September  2015  which
    related to the Appellant, and an NHS medical card which also related to
    the Appellant.

 8. The Appellant's representatives also attempted to submit  new  evidence
    to the Tribunal, which is not appropriate, as it cannot be an error  of
    law for the FTT not to have considered evidence which  was  not  before
    it.

 9. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  Judge  Cruthers  of  the
    FTT, but a renewed application was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb in the following terms;

         "2.  It is arguable that the judge in erred in law  by  failing  to
             take into account  evidence  within  the  Respondent's  bundle
             relevant to whether the Appellant could establish her presence
             in the UK prior to 6th October 2010.  The Respondent's  bundle
             does not appear to be in the file.  The appeal was  determined
             on the papers and it is unclear whether the Respondent filed a
             bundle with the documents referred to in the decision  letter.
             If that was the case, and it will need to  be  established  at
             the hearing, there was an arguable procedural irregularity.

         3.   For these reasons, permission to appeal is granted."

10. Following  the  grant  of  permission  directions  were  issued  making
    provision for there to be  a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    ascertain whether the FTT decision contained an error of law such  that
    it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Miss Bremang relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application
    for permission to appeal, and the grant of permission by Judge Grubb.

12. Mr McVeety advised  that  the  Respondent  had  prepared  a  bundle  of
    documents, but there was no evidence that this had been lodged with the
    Tribunal.  Mr McVeety advised that if the Respondent's bundle  had  not
    been before the FTT, it was  accepted  that  this  would  amount  to  a
    procedural irregularity, and a material error of law.

13. Miss Bremang submitted that the decision  of  the  FTT  should  be  set
    aside.  The Appellant maintained her  request  for  the  appeal  to  be
    decided on the papers, and therefore Miss Bremang  submitted  that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the FTT to be decided on the  papers.   Mr
    McVeety did not oppose that application.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. As I announced at the hearing, I am  satisfied  that  the  Respondent's
    bundle  of  documents  was  not  before  the  FTT.   In  reaching  that
    conclusion, I took into account that Mr McVeety could  not  submit  any
    proof that the bundle had been lodged with the FTT, that there  was  no
    Respondent's bundle upon the Tribunal file, and there was no  reference
    to the Respondent's bundle at paragraph 5 of the FTT decision which set
    out the documents which were before the FTT.

15. At paragraph 19 of the FTT decision it  was  found  that  evidence  was
    missing, such that there was  no  documentary  evidence  to  prove  the
    Appellant was resident in the UK before 6th October 2010, or  that  she
    continued to work until  6th  October  2015.   It  is  clear  that  the
    Respondent's  bundle  had  been  served  upon  the  Appellant,  as  her
    representatives made specific reference to documents  contained  within
    the Respondent's bundle at N1 and N2 in the application for permission.
     It is apparent that contained within the Respondent's bundle  was  the
    evidence referred to  by  the  Appellant's  representatives,  and  that
    evidence was submitted with the application for permanent residence, as
    the GP letter dated 8th September 2015, and the NHS  medical  card  are
    contained in the list  of  documents,  which  was  submitted  with  the
    application, referred to at page 3 of the Respondent's refusal  letter.



16.  As  conceded  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the  absence  of   the
    Respondent's bundle before the FTT,  means  that  potentially  material
    evidence was  not  considered  by  the  FTT,  and  this  amounts  to  a
    procedural irregularity and a material error of law.

17. Therefore the decision of the FTT is unsafe and is set aside.

18.  Having  considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  at
    paragraph 7, I decided that it was appropriate to accede to the request
    that the appeal be remitted to the FTT to be  decided  on  the  papers.
    This is because I accept that there was not a fair hearing  before  the
    FTT in the absence of the Respondent's bundle, and the  nature  of  the
    fact-finding required, means that it is more appropriate for the appeal
    to be decided by the FTT rather than the Upper Tribunal, which  is  not
    primarily a fact-finding Tribunal.

19. I find that some findings made by the FTT can be preserved as they have
    not been the subject of any challenge.  Those  findings  are  that  the
    couple married on 24th February 2007  and  divorced  on  11th  November
    2014.  The marriage lasted more than three years prior to divorce,  and
    the couple resided in the UK for at least one year during the marriage.
     The EEA citizen to whom the  Appellant  had  been  married  was  self-
    employed in the UK as found in paragraph 18 of the FTT decision  "since
    no later than 5th April 2009 until no earlier than 5th April 2015"  and
    was exercising treaty rights at the date of divorce.

20. Mr McVeety helpfully copied the Respondent's bundle, which has  annexes
    A - N and this is now on the Tribunal  file.   There  is  also  on  the
    Tribunal file  an  updated  bundle  of  documents  from  the  Appellant
    comprising 207 pages.  For the avoidance of doubt, these documents  are
    admitted into evidence.   Therefore  the  FTT  Judge  considering  this
    appeal will have  the  benefit  of  considering  bundles  of  documents
    submitted by both parties.

21.  It  would  be  of  assistance  to  that  judge  if   the   Appellant's
    representatives submitted a skeleton argument setting out  the  issues,
    but that is a matter for the Appellant and her representatives  and  is
    not a direction.

22. The appeal will therefore be considered by  an  FTT  Judge  other  than
    Judge O'Brien on the papers as requested by the Appellant.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT.


Anonymity

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th October 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FTT.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             16th October 2017

