

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/07191/2017

                                             HU/12193/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 5 July 2019                          | on 10 September 2019              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                             & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 A U CEYLAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Sharma, The Chamber Practice, Aberdeen
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Buchanan,
    promulgated on 26 April 2018.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of Turkey, applied for a residence card  under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 as  the  family  member  of  his
    wife, a UK citizen, on the basis that she had been residing in  an  EEA
    state (the Republic of Ireland) as a self-employed  person  immediately
    before returning to the UK; that he and she had resided there together;
    and that their residence there was genuine - regulation 9 (2) (a)  (i),
    (b) and (c).

 3. In a  decision  dated  9  August  2017,  the  SSHD  accepted  that  the
    appellant's wife resided in the Republic of Ireland as a  self-employed
    person immediately before returning to the UK, and  that  they  resided
    there together from 23 April to 13 September 2016.  However,  the  SSHD
    did not accept that her centre of life  "had  transferred  to  Ireland,
    because she did not relinquish her life in the UK.  It would  therefore
    appear that it was always [her] intention to return to  the  UK".   The
    decision goes on  to  hold  that  her  residence  in  Ireland  was  not
    "genuine"  and  was  "a  means  for  circumventing  the  UK's  domestic
    immigration rules or other immigration law".

 4. We think that the decision of the SSHD discloses  misconceptions  which
    in turn have infected the decision of the FtT.

 5. The transfer of the centre of the British citizen's life to  the  other
    EEA state is not a free-standing  requirement,  but  only  one  of  the
    factors relevant in terms of regulation 9(3) to  whether  residence  in
    the EEA state was genuine.  The regulations do not  clarify  whether  a
    person may have more than one centre of life.  Mr Govan did not  submit
    that they should be read as imposing such a restriction.

 6. The concept of free movement of migrant workers does not  signify  that
    an EEA citizen must at any one time have only one centre.   Rather,  it
    appears to envisage that EEA citizens may work in other EEA  countries,
    retaining a home base in their country of origin.   That  might  remain
    their principal centre,  particularly  if  their  work  takes  them  to
    multiple destinations for varying periods.  There is  nothing  contrary
    to the spirit or the letter of EEA law in the appellant's wife having a
    house and two adult children in Aberdeen after she moved to Dublin.  It
    would be strange to expect her not  to  see  Aberdeen  as  one  of  the
    centres of her life.

 7. The decision goes far beyond the terms of the  regulations  in  looking
    for the appellant's wife to have "relinquished" her  life  in  the  UK.
    That drastic test is devoid of any legal basis.

 8. We see no reason to think that in moving to and working in Ireland  the
    appellant's wife was engaging in anything other than  the  exercise  of
    her free movement rights.  The point might be tested from the point  of
    view of the authorities in Ireland.   Nothing  could  have  given  them
    reason to suspect that her residence there was anything but genuine.

 9. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  appeal  under  the
    regulations is set aside.  That appeal,  as  brought  to  the  FtT,  is
    allowed.  (The appellant did not press the grounds in  respect  of  the
    human rights appeal.)

10. The FtT made an anonymity direction, but for no apparent reason, so  we
    discharge it, and this determination is not anonymised.

      [pic]
      9 September 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
