
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07859/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 January 2020                         |On 3 February 2020              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            valentyna andrushkiv
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, instructed by Kadmos Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a national of Ukraine born on 22 October 1952, appealed
      against the respondent's decision to refuse to issue her with  an  EEA
      residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations") as the family member (spouse)
      of Vladas Gumuliauskas, a Lithuanian national exercising treaty rights
      in the UK.

   2. The appellant entered the UK on 14 September  2017  on  a  visit  visa
      valid until 11 February 2018. She married  the  EEA  national  sponsor
      following a marriage interview on 23 March  2018  and  applied,  on  4
      October 2018, for a residence card  under  the  EEA  Regulations.  The
      application was refused on 27 November 2018  on  the  basis  that  the
      respondent considered the marriage to be one of convenience.

   3. The appellant appealed  against  that  decision  and  her  appeal  was
      determined in the First-tier Tribunal on the papers, at  her  request,
      on 22 March 2019, by Judge O'Rourke.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
      appellant had failed to discharge the burden of  proof  upon  her  and
      concluded that the marriage was one of  convenience.  The  appellant's
      appeal was accordingly dismissed.

   4. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on the grounds that there had been unfairness in the  judge's
      decision, in that it had  been  made  without  the  respondent  having
      provided the interview transcript which was relied upon in the refusal
      decision.

   5. Permission was granted on 24 April 2019. However, the Upper  Tribunal,
      following an oral hearing  on  31  May  2019,  upheld  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision. The Upper Tribunal concluded that this was one of
      the rare occasions where the non-disclosure of  the  interview  record
      did not contaminate the fairness  of  the  tribunal's  decision-making
      process, given the failings and complete inaction of  the  appellant's
      representatives. The Upper Tribunal observed that it may be said  that
      the First-tier Tribunal erred in  relation  to  the  legal  burden  of
      proof, but noted that that point had not been raised  in  the  grounds
      and that there had been no application to amend the grounds.

   6. The appellant's new  representatives  then  made  an  application  for
      permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal on detailed grounds  which
      raised issues of fairness owing to the poor advice and  representation
      provided  by  the  previous  representatives.  The   grounds   seeking
      permission were that there had been an unfair  hearing  owing  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal's reliance on assertions made  by  the  respondent
      without  any  supporting  evidence;  and  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
      application of the wrong burden of proof.

   7. Following that application, the  Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  its  own
      decision in light of the additional  evidence  of  sub-standard  legal
      advice from the appellant's previous representatives which cast  light
      on the entirety of the fairness of the proceedings before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

   8. In response to the Upper Tribunal's directions made with the set aside
      decision,  the  appellant's  new  representatives  submitted   amended
      grounds, in line with the grounds seeking permission to the  Court  of
      Appeal.

   9. The matter then came before me to re-make the decision in relation  to
      whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. At  the  hearing  Mr
      Singh confirmed that there was no objection to the amended grounds and
      these were then admitted. Mr Singh helpfully conceded that the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law in its application of the  burden
      of proof, which was contrary to the principles set out in  Sadovska  &
      Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Scotland)  (Rev  1)
      [2017] UKSC 54. Whilst he was resisting the first ground of appeal, he
      accepted that that was academic in light  of  his  concession  on  the
      second ground. Ms Pinder made submissions on the fairness point in the
      first ground.

  10. In light of Mr Singh's properly made concession on the  second  ground
      relating to the burden of proof, and given the comments made by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor at paragraph 6 of his  Directions  Notice
      of 30 September 2019 proposing to set aside his previous  decision  on
      grounds of unfairness arising from sub-standard legal advice from  the
      appellant's previous representatives,  it  is  plain  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge O'Rourke's decision simply cannot stand and must be set
      aside in its entirety. As the parties both agreed, this  is  a  matter
      that has to go back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

DECISION

  11. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge O'Rourke.








Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  29 January
2020
