
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07182/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2018                              |On 5 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                               ms comfort sam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Lanlehin, of Counsel instructed by J F Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 11 September  1970.
    She appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Mace who, in a determination promulgated  on  8  December
    2017, dismissed her appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State
    to refuse to grant her a permanent residence card in Britain.

2.     The appellant had entered Britain  in  1992.   She  had  married  the
    sponsor in 2009 and in 2011 had been granted a residence card valid for
    five  years  until  January  2016.   The  relationship  had  broken  up
    resulting in the EEA national leaving the matrimonial home at  the  end
    of 2013.  The divorce took place on 29th April 2015.

3.   The reasons for the refusal were set out in a letter of  refusal  dated
    31 May 2016.  The Secretary of State stated that in  order  to  qualify
    for a retained  right  of  residence  following  divorce  from  an  EEA
    national the appellant would, in accordance with  Regulation  10(5)  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, need to provide  evidence  that
    her EEA national former spouse was exercising free movement  rights  in
    the United Kingdom at  the  time  of  the  divorce.   Although  it  was
    accepted by the Secretary of State that the  appellant's  marriage  had
    lasted for three years and that she and her former spouse  had  resided
    in the United Kingdom for at least one year during her marriage and  it
    was also accepted that she had been employed prior to, and  since,  her
    divorce there was insufficient evidence to show  that  the  appellant's
    EEA spouse was a qualifying person.   The  evidence  produced  included
    payslips for the EEA  national  from  June  to  August  2010  and  bank
    statements for him showing wages paid through March 2011  and  February
    2012 but there was no evidence provided to show that  the  EEA  sponsor
    was exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom from  February  2012
    to 29 April 2015 when he and the  appellant  had  been  divorced.   The
    letter of refusal stated:

         "The onus is with the applicant to provide evidence  that  the  EEA
         national former spouse is exercising Treaty rights  in  the  United
         Kingdom for a continuous period of five years and  that  they  were
         doing so at the time of divorce.  The evidence  provided  does  not
         demonstrate this as you provided no evidence of employment for your
         EEA national sponsor, between the period February 2012 and the date
         of divorce 29 April 2015.  No explanation has been given as to  why
         you have been able to obtain employment/bank statements and a  copy
         of your ex-spouse's ID  for  submission  of  your  application  but
         nothing that covers dates after 2012.  Any attempts  to  obtain  or
         failure to obtain evidence over the  latter  period  has  not  been
         evidenced or explained other than your statement that you  know  he
         resides in the United Kingdom and was a qualifying  person  at  the
         time of divorce.


         You have failed to provide evidence that you meet the  requirements
         of Regulation 10(5) and you have therefore not retained a right  of
         residence following divorce."

4.   Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mace  noted  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and discrepancies in  that  evidence  as  to  what  work  the
    appellant's husband was undertaking.  Indeed  he  found  that  she  was
    vague as to details of his work or  his  hours  of  work.   Judge  Mace
    considered the documentary evidence provided and  having  commented  on
    the evident discrepancies therein stated that there was no evidence  to
    indicate that the EEA national was a qualified person at  the  date  of
    divorce on 29th April 2015.  The judge wrote:

         "The evidence as  far  as  that  date  is  concerned  is  that  the
         appellant either had not seen or heard from her ex-spouse since  he
         left in 2013, or that she had seen him around in 2013 when  he  had
         told her that the company he had been working for  had  folded  and
         someone else had  told  her  later  that  he  had  another  job  at
         Retrograde Ltd.  She stated herself at the hearing she did not know
         whether he had been working from 2013 to the date of the divorce in
         2015 but she had met people who said  they  had  seen  him  around.
         This together with the inconsistencies in the evidence as  detailed
         above does not satisfy me that the EEA  national  was  a  qualified
         person at the date of the termination of the marriage.  Home Office
         Guidance provides for circumstances where the marriage has ended as
         a result of domestic violence  or  other  difficult  circumstances.
         Although  the   appellant   mentioned   her   ex-husband   drinking
         excessively and becoming abusive, the guidance also  requires  that
         it be shown that evidence has been provided that every  effort  had
         been made to obtain  the  documents,  for  example  making  contact
         during divorce proceedings.  There is no evidence the appellant had
         made any such efforts, despite stating that  she  sees  people  who
         have seen him around.  Further while it is acknowledged that it  is
         difficult for victims of domestic violence to  produce  documentary
         evidence for violence, there is no supporting evidence on behalf of
         the appellant."

5.   The judge found the requirements of the Regulations were not  met  and,
    having noted that both parties stated that Article 8 was not a relevant
    consideration dismissed the appeal.

6.   The grounds of appeal, having set out the terms of Regulations  10  and
    15 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,   asserted  that  the
    interpretation of Article 13 of Directive 2004/38 was relevant  stating
    that retention of the right of residence by family members in the event
    of divorce should not entail the loss of rights of residence of a Union
    citizen's family members who are not nationals of a Member State  where
    prior to the initiation of the divorce the marriage has lasted at least
    three years including one year in the Host Member  State.  They  argued
    that  it was wrong for the judge to consider that the appellant had  to
    show that the EEA national was a worker at  the  date  of  divorce  and
    could have met the Rules if it was shown that he was a  worker  at  the
    initiation of the divorce proceedings.

7.   The second ground of appeal said  that  in  the  Home  Office  Guidance
    document headed "Free Movement Rights: Retained  Rights  of  Residence"
    Version 3 published on 7 February 2017 it was stated that  the  officer
    dealing  with  an  application  should  take  a   pragmatic   approach,
    considering each case on its merits and if satisfied that an  applicant
    could not get evidence themselves make enquiries on their behalf  where
    possible getting agreement from a senior caseworker  before  doing  so.
    It was stated that guidance had not been considered by the judge.

8.   At the hearing of the appeal before me  Ms  Lanlehin  argued  that  the
    judge had misinterpreted Article 13 upon the issue of the retention  of
    rights.  Having referred to the  Regulations,  she  asserted  that  the
    appellant was not required to show that the EEA national was exercising
    Treaty rights at the date of  the  divorce.   She  also  asserted  that
    further enquiries should have been made  given  particularly  that  the
    appellant had provided a letter from the HMRC which gave details of the
    EEA national's former employment.  Mr  Nath,  having  referred  to  the
    letter of refusal stated that there was a requirement that the evidence
    be provided as is set out in the Regulations and  that  moreover  there
    was no requirement of the Secretary of State to make  enquiries  -  the
    burden of proving her claim lay on the appellant.

9.   The grounds of appeal before me set out the terms of  the  Regulations.
    At 10(1) it is stated that:

         "In these Regulations, 'family member who has retained   the  right
         of residence' means subject to paragraph (8) and (9) a  person  who
         satisfies the condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).


         (5)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A") -


             (a)  ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or  an
                  EEA national with a right to permanent  residence  on  the
                  termination of the marriage or the  civil  partnership  of
                  (A)


             (b)  was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with the
                  Regulations at the date of the termination;


             (c)  satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


             (d)  either -


                  (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for  the
                      termination of the marriage or the civil  partnership
                      the marriage or the civil partnership had lasted  for
                      at least three years and the parties to the  marriage
                      or civil partnership resided in the United Kingdom at
                      least one year during its duration.


                  (ii)     the former spouse or the  civil  partner  of  the
                      qualified person or the EEA national with a right  of
                      permanent residence has custody of a child  and  that
                      qualified person or EEA national ...


         (6)  the condition in this paragraph that person -


             (a)  is not an EEA national but would, if the person  were  an
                  EEA national would be a worker or self-employed person  or
                  self-sufficient person under Regulation 6; or


             (b)  is the  family  member  of  a  person  who  falls  within
                  paragraph (a)."

10.   The  relevant  paragraph  is  that  at  10(5)(a)  which  requires  the
    appellant had ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or  an
    EEA  national.   The  definition  of  a  qualified  person  under   the
    Regulations are set out in Regulation (6) which reads as follows:

         "Qualified Person"


         (6)(i)   In these Regulations "qualified person" means a person who
                is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as -


                (a)    a jobseeker;


                (b)    a worker;


                (c)    a self-employed person;


                (d)    a self-sufficient person; or


                (e)    a student.

11.  The reality is that there was no evidence that the appellant's  husband
    was a worker or a jobseeker or in any  other  way  a  qualified  person
    under the Regulations at the time of the commencement  of  the  divorce
    proceedings or when the  marriage  broke  up.    The  appellant  cannot
    therefore benefit from the provisions of Regulation 10  of  the  Rules.
    That therefore leads to the refusal  under  Regulation  15(1)(f)  which
    requires a person who has resided in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
    with the Regulations for a continuous period of five  years;  and  (ii)
    was at the end of the period, a family  member  who  had  retained  the
    right of residence.

12.  The judge was therefore correct to find  that  the  appellant  did  not
    qualify under the Regulations. Although the grounds of appeal  refer to
    the terms of the Directive it was not argued either in the  grounds  of
    appeal or before me that the Regulations  are not compatible  with  the
    terms of the Directive, and in any event the grounds  themselves  quote
    from the judgement of the ECJ in Kuldip Singh C-218/14  which makes  it
    clear that the spouse  of the  non-EEA national must  have  resided  in
    the host state in accordance with Article 7 of the Directive - that  is
    as a person exercising Treaty rights -and clearly that was not the case
    as the appellant has not shown that her former  spouse  was  doing  so.
    Moreover, the reality is that there is no obligation on  the  Secretary
    of State to make any further enquiries regarding the work  of  the  EEA
    national.  There is no case  law  to  suggest  that  is  something  the
    Respondent is obliged to do or that it is anything other than something
    that an official at the Home Office might consider doing.

13.   I therefore find that there is no error of law  in  the  determination
    of the judge.  He  was  entitled  to  dismiss  this  appeal  under  the
    Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed: [pic]                           Date: 4 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
