
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07618/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 19 August 2019                    |On 15 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                        Zulkarnein Mohammed Al hassan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Ms E Grove, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing after considering the papers the  appeal  of  the  appellant
    against the decision of the Secretary of State refusing him a residence
    card as the husband of an EEA national. Permission was given  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Clive Lane who indicated that in the event of the  Upper
    Tribunal finding that the First-tier Tribunal having erred in law:

         "both parties should be prepared for the Upper Tribunal  to  remake
         the decision at the initial hearing on the  existing  evidence  and
         without requiring a resumed hearing".

 2. Several grounds were raised but  the  fundamental  difficulty  for  the
    respondent is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge said that it  was  for
    the appellant to prove the case on a balance of probabilities but  this
    is a case where the Secretary of State alleges that the  appellant  has
    entered into a marriage of convenience and it is clear,  following  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Sadovska and  Another  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 54, that this is an allegation that the Secretary  of  State  must
    prove.   It  follows  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   decision   is
    fundamentally flawed and I set aside the decision and proceeded to hear
    evidence and submissions in order to remake the decision.

 3. Although the marriage is alleged to be one of  convenience  it  is  not
    doubted that the marriage is lawful even though it was  a  marriage  by
    proxy in Ghana on 1 December 2017.

 4. The appellant and his wife had produced a "Statement in Support of  the
    Appeal" dated 11 December 2018. I have read  it.  It  is  more  in  the
    nature of written submissions than evidence  going  to  issues  in  the
    appeal. It does, however, include a useful summary of  the  appellant's
    immigration history.

 5. It shows that he claims to have entered the United Kingdom as a visitor
    on 16 October 1999. He applied "to regularise his stay" in October 2000
    and his application was refused in July 2002.

 6. It also identifies a dispute with  the  Respondent.  According  to  the
    appellant, the respondent claimed  that  the  appellant  "was  removed"
    during the period  15  October  2004  and  12  January  2005"  but  the
    appellant denies being "deported" and asserts that  the  respondent  is
    unfairly prejudiced against him because of a false immigration history.
    The Appellant has not shown that  the  application  that  led  to  this
    appeal has been prejudiced in any way.

 7. An application for leave as a student was refused on 29 August 2007.

 8. An application for leave on  "private  and  family  life"  grounds  was
    refused in July 2013.

 9. On 1 September 2014 he applied for a residence card confirming a  right
    to  reside  because  his  marriage  to  a  French  national.  This  was
    application was refused in April 2015.

10. On 30 April 2015 he applied for leave to remain on "private and  family
    life" grounds. The application was refused on 10 February 2016.

11. On 26 March 2018 he applied for a residence card confirming  his  right
    to reside with his present wife, a Dutch national. The application  was
    refused on 22 November 2018 and that is the decision complained of.

12. The Secretary of State had produced a copy  of  the  interview  records
    between the appellant and his wife and I gave  him  an  opportunity  to
    consider them. The appellant did not object to their being relied  upon
    before me.

13. In the course of her interview the appellant's wife explained that  she
    is the mother of four children.   The  younger  two  children  are  the
    children of the appellant. There are birth  certificates  showing  that
    she is the mother and the appellant is the father of a daughter born in
    October 2014 and a son born in June 2016.

14. She said that the appellant and all of the children lived with  her  at
    the same address.  She also said that the older two  children  had  the
    same father and saw their father "every so  often  but  she  could  not
    remember when".  He lives in Holland.  She is a Dutch national.

15. She also explained that they had moved house since the application form
    was completed.  The removal was in April 2018.  She gave details  about
    their life together and practical  details  such  as  where  they  were
    registered with a general medical practitioner.  She explained that her
    husband was still registered with a doctor in London, that she  was  at
    their new address.  She denied that she had ever lived with her husband
    in the same house in London.  She was asked  when  she  first  met  her
    husband.  She was trying to recall she thought it was probably 2012 but
    it could have been 2011.   She  said  that  she  was  no  longer  in  a
    relationship with her former partner.  That relationship ended when she
    discovered she was pregnant.  She did know that she had met her husband
    in England in Wembley.

16. I find the answers recorded at question  95  particularly  significant.
    The appellant's wife was asked about  how  her  relationship  with  her
    husband  began  and,  following  answers   that   made   the   question
    appropriate, she was asked "were you heavily pregnant at the time  that
    you met?"  The reply recorded is "yes, pretty much". Using the date  of
    the child's birth as a reference point it was suggested that  she  must
    have met the appellant in the middle of the year.   She  accepted  that
    but was still trying to work out if they met  in  2011  or  2012.   She
    seemed unable to  give  clear  answers  about  how  their  relationship
    developed but laughed when asked about whether they exchanged telephone
    numbers at their first meeting.  She said  rather  coyly  perhaps  that
    they would both prefer it if she said that he said he wanted  to  phone
    her.

17. The appellant's wife said that she  moved  permanently  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2013 or possibly 2012 (question 123) and that was when their
    relationship  became  "exclusive".   She  knew  her  husband  had  been
    previously married but did not know  much  about  that  marriage.   She
    expressed her disappointment that her  husband  had  not  given  her  a
    wedding ring.

18. Her husband, the appellant, was  interviewed  at  considerable  length.
    When the appellant was interviewed he was uncertain about the  date  on
    which he had met his wife.  He decided it was in 2013 but he could  not
    remember the month.  It was towards the end of the year.   At  question
    109 he accepted his wife had two children when they first  met  and  he
    confirmed this with his response to question  110.   Clearly  this  was
    something that interested  the  interviewing  officer  because  it  was
    contrary to his wife's account and the question was put  again  at  113
    where the officer said: "So, at the time you met her, she  had  already
    had these two children?" and the appellant replied "yeah, she had".

19. He was also asked questions about someone called Mavis who he said  was
    no longer in his life.   Mavis  was  of  interest  to  the  Immigration
    Officers because the appellant had made an earlier application of  some
    kind to stay on in the United Kingdom because of his relationship  with
    "Mavis" but he withdrew that application.  Additionally he  claimed  to
    have been married to a French woman for about  a  year.  The  appellant
    thought that he married a "French  woman"  on  28  May  2014  and  they
    divorced "somewhere in the middle of 2015". He was  asked  at  question
    192 if he was "in a relationship with the French and with your wife  at
    the same time?"  and he replied "no, I call it a girlfriend, Mavis".

20. At question 195 he was asked:

         "So, you've made an application with two women at  the  same  time.
         You made separate applications, at the same time that you  say  you
         started a relationship and you were in  an  exclusive  relationship
         with your wife.  Have you told your wife about Mavis?"

         He replied "Mavis don't exist in my life".

21. There were other inconsistencies that  were  thought  remarkable.   The
    appellant's wife had said that she last travelled with her children  to
    the Netherlands in 2017 and stayed for one week with her family but the
    applicant said that since they had been together  his  spouse  had  not
    returned to the Netherlands.

22. The appellant gave evidence before me.

23. He had explained that his wife was not attending.  She had travelled to
    Ghana to see her father who was ill.  She had left the  United  Kingdom
    on 24 July 2019 and was expected back  shortly  after  the  hearing  (I
    think 23 August).  It was described as "an emergency trip".

24. He knew that they married by proxy on 1 December 2017 and he  indicated
    where they started to live together.

25. Predictably and appropriately, in cross-examination he was asked if his
    wife was pregnant when they first met.  He was reluctant to answer  the
    question and when pressed said that he  did  not  know.   When  he  was
    reminded of what he had said in interview he said  that  his  wife  did
    have two children when they met.  He was asked to explain why his  wife
    had said that she was heavily pregnant at the time.  He did not know.

26. He had produced a letter from the school to indicate that his wife  had
    approached the school for permission  to  take  them  to  Ghana.   That
    letter does not refer to him  in  any  way  and  is  of  no  evidential
    significance  as  far  as  these  proceedings  are   concerned   beyond
    suggesting that this still some contact between the appellant  and  his
    wife.  He thinks his father-in-law has cancer "or something".  He  then
    said the tickets were purchased some time in February.

27. I have read the papers.  I am not particularly concerned about some  of
    the difficulties in  the  evidence.   It  would  not  have  harmed  the
    appellant's claim to live as a nuclear  family  if  he  had  known  the
    colours of his  children's  school  uniform  but  I  do  not  find  his
    hesitancy damaging. Not everyone notices colours. I  also  accept  that
    some people find it easier to remember dates than do  others  and  that
    not all marriages are characterised by faithfulness.

28. The inability of the appellant and his wife to agree  about  her  being
    heavily  pregnant  (not  merely  pregnant)  when  they  first  met   is
    troubling. It is surely something that they would both remember about a
    first meeting. It must be an unusual start to a romantic  relationship.
    Clearly they did have a first meeting. For some reason they do not want
    to tell the truth about it and they have been caught out in a lie.

29. It is also a matter of real concern to me that the appellant's wife was
    not present.  I do not accept that she was  on  an  emergency  trip  to
    Ghana.  The trip was arranged in February.  It may  well  be  that  her
    father is very poorly.  It may well  be  that  she  wants  to  see  him
    whether he is poorly or not but emergency meetings in  August  are  not
    arranged in the previous February.

30. I also recognise the fact that there may be unhappiness in the marriage
    now  is  only  of  some  value  in  illuminating  the  nature  of   the
    relationship when it began.  Nevertheless the lack of support from  the
    appellant's wife is a startling omission in his case.

31. I also found the appellant a very unsatisfactory witness.   There  were
    several times in his evidence where he seemed to be  hesitating  before
    answering what appeared to be a straightforward  question.   I  do  not
    read too much into this but it adds to the picture of somebody who  was
    untruthful.

32. I have considered the documentary evidence  that  tends  to  show  some
    cohabitation and the photographs that tend to show the  appellant  with
    (I assume) this wife and the four  children  of  the  family  but  such
    evidence is not very helpful. The documents supporting cohabitation say
    nothing about the reasons for commencing the relationship or its nature
    and do not prove that the parties actually live together.

33. The photographs only show that two adults and four children  appear  to
    be on good terms in an instant when the photograph is taken.

34. The appellant has made several applications for permission to, or proof
    of entitlement to, remain in the United Kingdom. Whilst this  might  in
    some   circumstances   suggest   responsibility,   here   it   suggests
    desperation. The claims  have  all  been  weak  and  rejected  and  his
    reliance on relationships that have proved to be less than long lasting
    tends to suggest that he is ready to claim that  they  are  stable  and
    significant relationships when they are not.

35. It is extraordinary that the appellant and his wife cannot agree  about
    her being heavily pregnant when they first met. One of them is  clearly
    not telling the truth. It is obvious that it is an  inconsistency  that
    would prompt inquiry and it has not been addressed. If the  appellant's
    wife really could not attend the hearing he could  have  asked  for  an
    adjournment and if that application was refused she could at least have
    served a detailed statement. I can only conclude that the appellant and
    is wife are unable to tell the truth about how their relationship began
    because  there  is  something  that  they  believe  would  damage   the
    appellant's case if they told the truth.

36. I find it probable that the  marriage  was  contrived  for  immigration
    purposes. The Respondent has persuaded  me  that  this  is  probably  a
    marriage of convenience.

37. A marriage of convenience can become a genuine marriage (although  such
    a marriage would still have been a marriage  of  convenience)  and  the
    birth of two children is clearly something to consider.  However  I  am
    not satisfied that their relationship ever developed into a  supportive
    marriage. I cannot attach much weight to the wife's evidence. There  is
    not much that is important in her signed  statement  and  she  did  not
    attend to be cross-examined.

38. In the absence of the wife and any independent evidence I do not accept
    that the appellant actually lived together for  any  significant  time.
    Clearly they had some  contact  because  they  have  children  and  the
    production of a letter from the school suggests that they are in  touch
    with each other but this does not persuade me that they  established  a
    durable relationship.

39. It follows therefore that although I find error of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and set aside this  decision  I  remake  the
    decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its  decision  and  I
    substitute a decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 October 2019                |


