
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07293/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Mirush [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Anyene, Counsel, instructed by MBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Malone ("the  judge"),  promulgated  on  24  July  2019,  by  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal  to
    issue him with a residence card pursuant to the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the  Regulations").   The  Respondent
    asserted that the Appellant's marriage to a Greek national (Ms  G)  was
    one of convenience only.  The  Appellant  had  had  a  previous  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal in which Judge Farmer concluded that the
    Appellant's  relationship  with  his  now  wife  was  in  fact  one  of
    convenience.

 2. The decision  of  Judge  Farmer  was  relied  upon  before  the  judge.
    Additional evidence was called both in the form of live  witnesses  and
    various documents.  It is right to say that  the  judge  was  decidedly
    unimpressed with much, if not all, of  this  evidence.  Those  findings
    were combined with Judge Farmer's, leading the judge to  conclude  that
    the Appellant's marriage was indeed one of convenience only.

 3. The rather lengthy grounds of appeal are to a large extent  an  attempt
    to re-argue the matters that were before the judge.  A number of points
    raised are  in  truth  nothing  more  than  simple  disagreements  with
    findings that would, all other things being equal, appear  sustainable.
    However,  the  grounds  also  contain  the  assertion  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself as to the  burden  of  proof  in  this  case.   The
    judgment of the Supreme Court in Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54  is  cited  in
    support thereof.  It was on this basis that permission was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 16 December 2019.

 4. Before me Mr Anyene relied on the grounds of  appeal,  emphasising  the
    burden of proof point.

 5. Mr Avery submitted that this case was somewhat different from the norm,
    in that a Devaseelan point arose as a result of Judge Farmer's previous
    decision and her adverse findings on  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship.  The judge had  considered  new  events  adduced  by  the
    Appellant and had unequivocally rejected this  with  reference  to  the
    decision as a whole and in particular paragraphs 50 and 51.   Mr  Avery
    submitted that the conclusion reached by the judge  that  the  marriage
    was one of convenience was inevitable.

 6. I conclude that the judge has materially erred in law  by  misdirecting
    himself as to the burden of proof in this particular case.

 7. At paragraph 15 of his decision the judge stated that:

         "If I am to allow this appeal, the Appellant must satisfy  me  that
         the Respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law or  the
         Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).   In  particular  provisions
         are Regulations 2 and 7 of  the  Regulations."   This  is  a  clear
         misdirection in law however it is important to read the decision as
         a whole and to see whether or not as  a  matter  of  substance  the
         judge has in fact applied this  error  to  his  assessment  of  the
         evidence."

 8. That was clearly an erroneous self-direction.

 9. At paragraph 52 the judge stated that:

         "I therefore find that  the  Appellant  has  failed  adequately  to
         answer the evidence I have  found  justified  reasonable  suspicion
         that his marriage to [Ms G] was one of convenience.   I  find  that
         the Respondent has discharged the burden on him of showing that the
         marriage was one of convenience."

10. This would on the face of it appear to be corrective of  the  error  in
    paragraph 15. However, going  back  to  paragraph  19  of  the  judge's
    decision and despite the reference to Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage
    of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC) (the essential reasoning
    of which was approved by the Court of Appeal in Rosa  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    14), the judge has in my view misdirected himself  in  law  by  stating
    that once a reasonable suspicion had been  raised  by  the  Respondent,
    there was then an evidential burden on the  Appellant  to  address  the
    evidence underpinning that reasonable suspicion and it was  "then"  for
    the Appellant to "rebut" that reasonable suspicion.  A  failure  to  do
    so, stated the judge, would lead  to  the  Respondent  discharging  the
    legal burden by default as it were.

11. In marriage of convenience cases it is not a  question  of  whether  an
    Appellant can "rebut" evidence raising a  reasonable  suspicion.   That
    term gives rise to the  possibility  that  there  is  some  sort  of  a
    presumption against an Appellant where reasonable suspicion is shown to
    exist: that would clearly be wrong. Alternatively, there is nothing  by
    way of explanation on the  judge's  part  to  suggest  what  level  the
    rebuttal had to achieve in order to  prevent  the  legal  burden  being
    discharged by the Respondent by default, as it were.

12. Reading paragraphs 50 and 51 of the judge's decision, my  concerns  are
    not allayed.  I note that at  the  end  of  paragraph  51,  and  having
    referred to various items of evidence adduced  by  the  Appellant,  the
    judge states that, "I find that [the evidence in question] does not tip
    the scales in the Appellant's favour.   The  stronger  evidence  I  had
    militates against the success of the Appellant's claim."   In  my  view
    that compounds my concern as to the misdirection in law indicating that
    there was something akin to a legal burden (or at  least  too  high  an
    evidential burden) being placed upon the Appellant in this case.

13.  In light of my conclusions, the numerous adverse credibility  findings
    are rendered unsustainable.  I do not agree  with  Mr  Avery  that  the
    outcome was inevitable on any view. Where an assessment of  a  marriage
    is undermined by a fundamental legal misdirection, the outcome of  that
    assessment cannot be considered sound.

14. Given that the marriage of convenience  was  the  core  issue  in  this
    appeal the error was clearly material, and the judge's decision must be
    set aside.

15. The appropriate course in this case  is  to  remit  the  appeal  for  a
    complete rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal. In so concluding,  I
    have had particular regard to para 7.2 of the Practice Statement. Here,
    there needs  to  be  extensive  fact-finding  in  the  context  of  the
    applicable legal framework.

16. No findings of the judge are to be preserved.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1) This appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
      rehearing with no finding preserved;



   2) The remitted hearing shall not be  conducted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Malone;



Signed   [pic]         Date: 24 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
