
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07996/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2017                   |On 13 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Delwin Dacalos Adenic
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person, not represented
For the respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Delwin Dacalos Adenic,  date  of  birth  5.11.75,  is  a
    citizen of the Philippines.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Handley promulgated 12.9.16, dismissing his appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State, dated 30.6.16,  to  refuse  his  application
    made on 30.1.16 for an EEA Permanent Residence Card.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 30.8.16.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    8.11.16.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 13.1.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Handley should be set aside.

 7. The application made to the Secretary of State  for  an  EEA  Permanent
    Residence Card, pursuant to  regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006, as amended, was on the basis that the appellant
    was the third-country family  member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK, namely Ms Michelle Margaret  Blass,  a  German
    national.

 8. The appellant alleged that the EEA sponsor had been working in  the  UK
    since 2007. The appellant claims to have arrived himself in the  UK  in
    2010.

 9. As  is  clear  from  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  the
    appellant's application was refused because it is alleged he failed  to
    provide sufficient evidence that his EEA sponsor  had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK for a continuous period of 5  years,  and  also
    because he failed to submit sufficient evidence to demonstrate that  he
    had resided in the UK for a continuous period of 5 years.

10. The appeal was decided in the First-tier Tribunal on  the  papers.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge thus had only those documents within the case
    file on which to decide the appeal.

11. Judge Handley noted at [5] of the decision that he had taken account of
    the documents in the respondent's bundle and a bundle of documents from
    the appellant. At  [13]  and  again  at  [16]  he  noted  that  further
    documents had been submitted with the Notice of  Appeal.  At  [16]  the
    judge observed that none of the  further  documents,  which  are  there
    listed, supported the claim that the sponsor had been exercising Treaty
    rights in the UK for a continuous period of 5 years. At [17] the  judge
    noted that various HMRC documents relating to both  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor covered the periods 2008/2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012, but did
    not show that either of  them  had  been  residing  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of 5 years.

12. At [19] the judge concluded  that  the  appellant  failed  to  properly
    address the issues detailed in the refusal decision and had  not  shown
    that the sponsor had been exercising Treaty rights  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of 5 years.

13. The handwritten grounds of application for permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal assert that documents were submitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal covering the whole period of the  sponsor's  employment  since
    2007. In particular, it is asserted that there are  P45  and  P60  HMRC
    documents covering the sponsor's employment in the period 2013 to 2015,
    and documents covering the  appellant's  employment  between  2013  and
    2016, as well as council tax documents  covering  the  period  2012  to
    2016. The appellant also stated that he has a 10-year-old son for  whom
    they have been receiving child benefits and who has attended  Northgate
    Primary School since 2009.

14. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Woodcraft noted that the onward
    grounds of appeal enclose further documents which were not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, "but also argue  that  more  documents  were
    sent to the Tribunal than recorded by the judge at paragraph 17 of  the
    determination. The extra documents not taken into account are  said  to
    fill in the gaps to show 5 years continuous working."

15. Judge Woodcraft continued, "A perusal of the file appears to show  that
    this latter contention may be  correct.  Whilst  it  would  not  be  an
    arguable error for the Judge to fail to  take  into  account  documents
    that were not before him, it is arguably an error to fail to take  into
    account documents that were before him. As these documents  might  have
    made a difference to the outcome I grant permission to  appeal  on  all
    grounds. It may be a good idea for the appellant to send copies of  all
    of these documents to the respondent before the error of law hearing in
    the Upper Tribunal to see whether  there  is  a  measure  of  agreement
    between the parties in the case."

16. The Rule 24 reply of the Secretary of  State,  dated  30.12.16,  states
    that the outcome of the appeal can only be resolved with  reference  to
    the Tribunal's file in order to ascertain what documents were served on
    the First-tier Tribunal.

17. I have carefully examined the case file and find that there is a loose,
    unpaginated and unindexed bundle of documents, containing various  HMRC
    employment and tax documents. Whilst it is difficult to assess, because
    of the disorganised way in which the bundle is organised, I accept that
    there is evidence showing employment of the sponsor covering  a  period
    of at least 5 years preceding the date of  application,  i.e.  back  to
    2011.

18. However, the documents that relate to the appellant's presence  in  the
    UK remain insufficient. There are council tax demands, dated  26.10.12,
    2.3.13, 20.8.14, 29.9.15, and 27.2.16, which names both of them.  There
    are also P60 and P45 documents for the appellant covering the tax years
    ending 2013, 2014, 2015, and  2016,  and  various  leaving  work  dates
    within those years. However, whilst there are tax credit awards  to  Ms
    Blass for the period 27.1.11 to 4.5.12, which name the appellant, these
    do not demonstrate the appellant was actually present and  resident  in
    the UK at those  times.  I  do  not  see  any  documents  covering  the
    appellant's residence in the UK in the period between 2011 and 2012  so
    as to demonstrate a  continuous  period  of  residence  of  five  years
    preceding the application made in January 2016.

19. In assessing whether there was an error in the making of  the  decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  cannot  take  account  of  documents
    submitted subsequently to the decision, some of which are mentioned and
    listed in the application for permission to appeal.

20. In oral evidence and submissions Mr Adenic accepted that there  was  no
    employment records for him from 2011 and 2012. He stated  that  it  was
    because the business closed down and they have been  unable  to  obtain
    the records. However, that explanation cannot be taken into account  in
    this error of law decision.

21. It follows from the above that whilst Mr Adenic may have been in the UK
    since 2010, as claimed, the evidence put before the First-tier Tribunal
    failed to demonstrate that and thus even  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was in error  in  relation  to  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    employment and even if there was sufficient evidence to  show  she  had
    been exercising Treaty rights for a full and continuous 5 year  period,
    the appeal still fails because of insufficient evidence to show that Mr
    Adenic has resided in the UK for a continuous 5 year period.

22. The appellant may well be able to make a further application addressing
    the issues set out above. It would also be helpful if the documentation
    was better marshalled, with a paginated bundle and index.

Conclusions:

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been dismissed and the  appeal
in the First-tier Tribunal was also dismissed.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

