

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07222/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th February 2018                 |On 21st February 2018                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                              BEANT SINGH BRAR
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Direct Access Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of India who argues that he  is  entitled
       to remain in the UK as an extended family member of an EEA  national
       citizen, namely his uncle Gurpiar Singh Brar.  His  application  was
       refused by the respondent in a decision dated  3rd  June  2016.  His
       appeal against the decision was rejected  by  Designated  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Shaerf in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  3rd
       August 2017 on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
       jurisdiction following the guidance of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
       case of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411.

    2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Birrell on the 24th December 2017 the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in  deciding  that  there
       was no jurisdiction as Sala was arguably wrongly decided.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. Mr Karim argued that the decision was clearly wrong in law following
       the decision of the Court of Appeal in Muhammad Yasir  Khan  v  SSHD
       [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.

    5. Mr Bramble accepted that this was the finding of the Court of Appeal
       but argued that this appeal should be adjourned pending the decision
       of the Supreme Court in SM (Algeria) v Entry Clearance Officer which
       was expected shortly, and which would address the  validity  of  the
       decision of the Court of Appeal in Khan.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. I refused to adjourn the hearing as the Upper Tribunal is  bound  by
       the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Khan,  and  so  it  was  not
       appropriate to adjourn  the  hearing  pending  the  decision  in  SM
       (Algeria).

    7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in refusing  to
       accept it had jurisdiction to hear this appeal for the  reasons  set
       out by the Court of Appeal in Khan, which the Supreme  Court  upheld
       in their decision in SM (Algeria) UKSC [2018] 9 at paragraphs  38  -
       39.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  it  had  no
      jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

   3. I remit the remaking of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   19th  February
2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

