
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/07177/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2018                            |On 29 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                    [M C]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Dr Mynott, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.    The appellant is a citizen of Canada.  She is married to a British
       citizen ('the sponsor').  She has appealed against a decision of  the
       First-tier  Tribunal  ('FTT')  dismissing  her  appeal  against   the
       respondent's decision dated 7 August 2018, refusing  her  application
       for residence card on the basis that she was a  family  member  of  a
       British citizen who has exercised  his  Treaty  rights  by  genuinely
       living in Ireland, an EEA state,  on  the  basis  of  the  principles
       established in R v IAT and Surinder Singh (C-370/90)  [1992]  ECR  I-
       04265.

    2.    At the hearing before me Mr McVeety conceded  that  the  FTT  made
       material errors of law, such that its decision should  be  set  aside
       and remitted to the FTT.  I indicated at the hearing that Mr  McVeety
       was entirely correct  to  make  the  concession  he  did  and  I  can
       therefore set my reasons out briefly.  The FTT  failed  to  take  the
       following material evidence into account:

             i)    The appellant was granted a family  permit  by  an  entry
                clearance  officer  on  11  October   2016,   following   an
                application to be admitted to the UK on  the  basis  of  the
                Surinder Singh principles.  As Mr McVeety observed this  was
                important because it demonstrated that  the  respondent  was
                prepared to accept that certain aspects of regulation  9  of
                the relevant EEA Regulations were met as at the date of  the
                family permit, which preceded the residence card application
                by mere months.  Both representatives observed that  it  was
                very rare to find a case in which  a  Surinder  Singh-issued
                family permit was followed by a refusal of a residence  card
                based on the same Surinder Singh route.  Indeed, neither  of
                these experienced representatives had ever come across  such
                a case.

            ii)  There  was  written  evidence  from  the  sponsor's  former
                employer to confirm his evidence that  he  was  offered  his
                post in Ireland very quickly in June 2015, having been head-
                hunted for the position.

    3.    Further,  contrary  to  the  FTT's  indication  at  [11(vi)],  the
       appellant did not enter the UK as a visitor but denied a visitor visa
       and only permitted temporary admission, rendering it  more  plausible
       that she was prepared to move to Ireland with such haste - the family
       were unable to remain as a family unit in the UK.

    4.    This failure to take into account material  evidence  renders  the
       FTT's reasons for finding that the sponsor did not  genuinely  reside
       in Ireland unsafe.  Fresh findings of fact are required.   Given  the
       likely extent of the fact-finding process and bearing  in  mind  para
       7.2 of the relevant Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  I  have
       decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.

Decision

    5.    The FTT decision contains an error of law and is set aside.    The
       decision shall be remade by the FTT.

Directions

        1)    The respondent shall  reconsider  the  appellant's  case  and
           provide an updated position statement within 14 days of  today's
           date.

        2)    The matter will then be case managed by the FTT.


Signed        Dated
M. Plimmer    22 October 2018

Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
