
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07041/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision and Reasons promulgated   |
|On 25 October 2018                    |On 14 November 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                NYIMA SANYANG
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer instructed by Ison Harrison Solicitors.

For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Mensa, promulgated on 14  May  2018,  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal under the EEA regulations.






Background


     2. The appellant was born on 19 March 1979 and applied for a residence
        card as the family member of an EEA national through marriage.  The
        Judge noted in a previous application the respondent  had  assessed
        that the marriage was a marriage of convenience.
     3. The Judge noted at [6] that the appellant was ill in hospital which
        had led to previous adjournments and that  her  representative  was
        not pursuing a further adjournment on that basis as he was not able
        to say the appellant will be in a position to attend  even  if  the
        adjournment was granted. The  matter  proceeded  on  the  basis  of
        submissions only.
     4. The Judge notes at [8] that  the  two  issues  in  the  appeal  are
        whether the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting marriage  with
        her husband and  whether  he  was  exercising  treaty  rights.  The
        appellant's representative argued that even though the  appellant's
        husband's  employment  ended  in  January  2016  if  he  had   been
        exercising treaty rights  the  appellant  will  be  entitled  to  a
        retained right of residence.
     5. The Judge notes a previous determination dated 1  October  2015  by
        First-Tier Tribunal Judge Wilson who concluded 'I no  more  believe
        the sponsors  various  accounts  of  the  alleged  genuineness  and
        subsistence of the marriage then I did the appellant's shifting and
        unreliable accounts'. Both were found not to be witnesses of  truth
        and Judge Wilson found the appellant had failed to demonstrate  the
        sponsor had resided in the UK for a continuous period  of  5  years
        whilst exercising treaty rights.
     6. The Judge considered the evidence made available before  concluding
        at [16]:

             16.  Taking that limited evidence and weighing it against  the
                  far greater  evidence  before  Judge  Wilson  I  find  the
                  appellant  has  failed  to  demonstrate  with  this  fresh
                  evidence that the findings  of  Judge  Wilson  should  not
                  stand. In fact the weight of the findings by Judge  Wilson
                  has in my view remain completely unaffected  by  the  weak
                  evidence filed before me. I find the appellant has  failed
                  to demonstrate she was ever in a  genuine  and  subsisting
                  relationship with the sponsor. In  those  circumstances  I
                  dismiss the appeal as there is no need to consider further
                  whether the sponsor was a qualified person as  a  marriage
                  of convenience is a complete bar to status under  the  EEA
                  regulations.

     7. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 13 June 2018 on the grounds the Judge appears  to  have
        confused  the  issue  of  whether  a  marriage  is  a  marriage  of
        convenience under the EEA Regulations with whether  a  marriage  is
        genuine  and  subsisting,  as  did  Judge  Wilson  in  the  earlier
        decision.



Error of law


     8. The Judge was right to refer  to  the  earlier  decision  of  Judge
        Wilson in accordance with the Devaseelan  principles  which  formed
        the starting point of the deliberations in this appeal.
     9. Judge Wilson set out in that decision the issues that Tribunal  was
        asked to consider at [5] in the following terms:

             5.   The respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for
                  reasons detailed in the  refusal  letter.  In  summary  he
                  stated that the appellant failed to meet regulation 15  of
                  the 2006 regulations and that she was unable to  show  her
                  EEA national sponsor, claimed to be  a  Spanish  national,
                  had resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
                  2006 regulations. This is because there  were  significant
                  gaps amounting to 2 years in  his  proven  United  Kingdom
                  employment history. Furthermore, the appellant's claim  to
                  be lawfully married to the sponsor  was  unproven  to  the
                  extent that she was unable to show that the  marriage  was
                  genuine within the terms of the 2006 regulations.

    10. Judge Wilson sets out findings of fact from  [9]  of  the  decision
        under challenge. Mr Greer accepted that this appeal is not a second
        appeal against the decision of Judge Wilson, but it is important to
        set out findings made in that earlier decision which  were  clearly
        considered to be also determinative of the current appeal.
    11. Judge Wilson finds at [9] the two issues lying at the heart of  the
        appeal are whether or not the sponsor was resident in this  country
        in accordance with the 2006 regulations and secondly whether or not
        she was genuinely married to the  sponsor.  At  [10]  Judge  Wilson
        states "I remind myself that the  burden  of  proof  lay  upon  the
        appellant to show that she was lawfully married to the sponsor  and
        that she has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the
        2006 regulations for a continuous period of 5 years. However having
        examined the whole of the evidence I am satisfied that  she  failed
        to discharge this burden by some distance. This is because she  not
        only failed to show  that  she  came  within  the  requirements  of
        regulation 15 but also the evidence in support of  the  application
        and the appeal was both confused  and  inconsistent  and  in  parts
        completely implausible".
    12. Having examined the evidence of both the appellant and the  sponsor
        Judge Wilson writes:

             25.  I find that as with the appellant, the sponsor was not  a
                  witness of truth. I find that he  was  not  a  witness  of
                  truth in relation  to  Amie  Bojang's  application  or  in
                  relation to the marriage certificate that showed  that  he
                  was  married  to  her,  or  in  relation  to   the   other
                  documentation brought into question by the  respondent.  I
                  find that the evidence was that he  was  untruthful  about
                  whom he married, about his relationships and  about  other
                  key issues in relation to both of these  matters.  I  find
                  that the evidence clearly pointed to him living with  Amie
                  Bojang and not with the appellant  because  he  was  in  a
                  relationship with Amie Bojang and not with the  appellant.
                  It furthermore follows from all of my findings that I find
                  the appellant's evidence was equally  untruthful  for  the
                  reasons given when I addressed her evidence.  Crucially  I
                  am satisfied that the respondent was in  possession  of  a
                  marriage  certificate  showing  that  the  appellant   was
                  married to the sponsor, and  further  satisfied  that  the
                  respondent  was  in  possession  of  a   second   marriage
                  certificate showing that the sponsor was married  to  Amie
                  Bojang, this presented on 10 July 2014  in  support  of  a
                  separate application relating to Amie  Bojang,  with  whom
                  the sponsor was still living at the time  of  the  instant
                  application and at time of  the  hearing  before  me.  The
                  second marriage certificate  was  submitted  less  than  3
                  months before  the  appellant's  application  was  lodged.
                  Consequently I conclude from all the  evidence  before  me
                  that the appeal fails under the 2006  regulations  because
                  the appellant failed to  show  that  she  resided  in  the
                  United Kingdom with the sponsor  in  accordance  with  the
                  2006 regulations for a continuous period  of  5  years.  I
                  find that she demonstrably failed to show that her claimed
                  marriage  to  the  sponsor   was   lawful,   genuine   and
                  subsisting.

    13. There are two issues relevant to this application being firstly the
        correct test if the  allegation  is  that  a  marriage  is  a  sham
        marriage or a marriage of convenience,  and  secondly  the  correct
        test for establishing whether a marriage is genuine and  subsisting
        which is a term that appears in  the  immigration  rules  which  is
        separate from the question of whether a marriage is a  marriage  of
        convenience which can be a valid marriage and therefore genuine  in
        terms of the  legal  requirements  but  not  recognised  under  the
        Regulations as a result of the purpose for which the  marriage  was
        entered into.
    14. Although the 2016 regulations define a marriage of convenience this
        was not the position under the  2006  regulations.  The  definition
        was, however, considered in cases such as Papajorgji (EEA spouse  -
        marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038(IAC) (Blake J) in
        which the Tribunal held that "Although neither  the  Directive  nor
        the Regulations define it, as a matter of ordinary parlance and the
        past experience of the UK's  Immigration  Rules  and  case  law,  a
        marriage of convenience in this context is  a  marriage  contracted
        for the sole or decisive purpose of gaining admission to  the  host
        state. A durable marriage with children and co-habitation is  quite
        inconsistent with such a definition".
    15. The 2016 regulations (reg 2) now define a marriage of  convenience:
        "marriage of convenience" includes a marriage entered into for  the
        purpose of using these Regulations, or any other right conferred by
        the EU treaties, as a means to circumvent - (a)  immigration  rules
        applying to non-EEA nationals (such as any  applicable  requirement
        under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter or remain in  the  United
        Kingdom); or (b) any other criteria that the party to the  marriage
        of convenience would otherwise have to meet in  order  to  enjoy  a
        right to reside under these Regulations or the EU treaties."
    16. In Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 it was held that the focus  in  relation
        to a marriage of convenience ought to be on the  intention  of  the
        parties at the time the marriage  was  entered  into,  whereas  the
        question of whether a marriage was subsisting looked to whether the
        marital relationship was a continuing one. Nonetheless, the FtT was
        correct to look at the evidence concerning the relationship between
        the Claimant and the Sponsor after the marriage itself, since  that
        was capable of casting light on their  intention  at  the  time  of
        marriage.
    17. In Sadovska v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]
        UKSC 54 it was found that the objective  to  obtain  the  right  of
        entry and  residence  must  be  the  predominant  purpose  for  the
        marriage to be one of convenience  and  a  marriage  could  not  be
        considered to be  a  marriage  of  convenience  simply  because  it
        brought an immigration advantage.  "Should  the  tribunal  conclude
        that Mr Malik was delighted to find an EU  national  with  whom  he
        could form a relationship and who was willing to  marry  him,  that
        does not necessarily mean that their marriage was  a  "marriage  of
        convenience" still less that Ms Sadovska was abusing her rights  in
        entering into it".
    18. In relation to the burden standard of proof, in Rosa  it  was  held
        that the legal burden was on the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
        Department to prove that an otherwise valid marriage was a marriage
        of convenience so as to justify the refusal  of  a  residence  card
        under the EEA Regulations. The legal burden of proof in relation to
        marriage lay on the Secretary of State, but if she adduced evidence
        capable of pointing to the conclusion that the marriage was one  of
        convenience, the evidential burden shifted to the applicant  (paras
        24 - 27).
    19. In Agho v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]  EWCA
        Civ 1198 it  was  held  that  where  an  applicant  sought  an  EEA
        residence card on the basis that he was married to an EEA national,
        he simply had to produce his marriage certificate and his  spouse's
        passport. As a matter of principle, a spouse  established  a  prima
        facie case that he was the family member  of  an  EEA  national  by
        providing the marriage certificate and his sponsor's passport.  The
        legal burden was on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  show  that  any
        marriage thus proved was a marriage of convenience and that  burden
        was not discharged merely by showing  'reasonable  suspicion'.  The
        evidential burden might shift to the applicant by  proof  of  facts
        that justified the inference that the marriage was not genuine. The
        facts giving rise to the inference included a failure to  answer  a
        request for documentary proof of the genuineness  of  the  marriage
        where grounds for suspicion had been raised: Papajorgji (EEA spouse
        - marriage of convenience) [2012] UKUT 38  (IAC)  considered  (para
        13).
    20. That the burden of proof is on the respondent  is  now  put  beyond
        doubt by Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54 an appeal  from  the  First
        Division of the Inner House of the Court of Session, see above.
    21. The statement by Judge Wilson at [10] that the burden lay upon  the
        appellant to show she was lawfully married  is  true  if  the  only
        issue was  whether  a  valid  lawful  marriage  ceremony  had  been
        undertaken which is normally  evidenced  by  the  production  of  a
        genuine marriage certificate. That is not the position in  relation
        to a case alleging a marriage is a marriage of convenience.
    22. If the Judge was therefore considering whether the marriage  was  a
        sham marriage the burden of proof would fall upon the Secretary  of
        State to establish the same.
    23. A marriage can be a genuine marriage in terms of the fulfilment  of
        legal requirements but then break down at  a  later  stage  to  the
        extent it no longer can be said  to  be  a  genuine  or  subsisting
        marriage. A subsisting marriage is one that  must  be  valid  which
        continues thereafter. Considering whether person enjoys  a  genuine
        and subsisting relationship, unless the word genuine  is  taken  as
        referring  to  the  assertion  the  marriage  is  a   marriage   of
        convenience, is arguably applying the wrong test as argued  in  the
        grounds seeking permission to appeal. If genuine does relate to the
        question of whether this is a  marriage  of  convenience  then,  in
        accordance with the case law above, the burden would fall upon  the
        Secretary of State to prove this although  consideration  of  facts
        after the date of the marriage may be of relevance.
    24. It was accepted on behalf the Secretary of State that the appellant
        had established arguable legal error material to the decision under
        appeal. Although Judge Wilson's decision has not  been  challenged,
        matters have moved on in terms of the appropriate  legal  test  and
        manner in which such cases much be considered;  admitting  arguable
        error in the reliance of the Judge upon  Judge  Wilson's  decision,
        which reversed the burden of proof, rather than  in  assessing  the
        matter for herself in accordance with the accepted position.
    25. Although there are a number of concerns arising from  the  evidence
        recognised by the Judge it is not made out at this stage  that  the
        decision will be exactly the same  if  the  proper  legal  test  is
        applied and evidence considered. I set the decision  of  the  Judge
        aside on the basis of the accepted error. As  the  Judge  does  not
        appear to have considered the matter properly it is  necessary  for
        extensive findings of fact to be made. To this end, considering the
        Presidential guidance on the issue of remittal, I find  this  is  a
        case in which it is appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-
        tier Hearing Centre at Bradford for the matter to be  heard  afresh
        by a judge other than Judge Mensah.


Decision

    26. The Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the decision of  the
        original Judge. I remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        sitting at Bradford to be heard a fresh by a judge other than Judge
        Mensah appointed by the Resident Judge.

   Anonymity.


    27. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 2 November 2018












