
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
EA/07041/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 28 October 2019                       | On 26 November 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                NYIMA SANYANG
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Greer
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Gambia and was born on 19 March 1979.
    She first entered the United Kingdom as a student in January 2010.  She
    married a Spanish citizen, Mr Sanyang (the sponsor), in November  2009.
    By a decision dated 4 May 2016, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for a residence card as the family member of an
    EEA national exercising  Treaty  Rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  dismissed  her
    appeal. Following a successful appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the appeal
    was  returned  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on an 11 June 2019, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, did not seek to oppose  the  appeal.  I  shall  therefore  be
    brief. The First-tier Tribunal at [45] found that the  sponsor  or  was
    only working for six hours per week. He found that this period of  work
    was too short to amount to the exercise of Treaty Rights as  a  worker.
    The appellant now relies upon Genc v Land Berlin (Case: 14/09) in which
    it was established that as little as five hours per week at a very  low
    hourly wage might amount to work for the purposes of  the  exercise  of
    Treaty Rights. Moreover,  the  judge  found  that  the  sponsor's  work
    appeared to be 'ancillary.' I accept the  appellant's  submission  that
    the determination of the possible ancillary nature of work depends,  at
    least in part,  upon  an  examination  of  an  individual's  employment
    history. No such examination is carried out in this instance. I  accept
    also the submission that, in the absence of other evidence,  there  was
    no reason to doubt the  appellant's  assertion  that  the  sponsor  had
    returned to work following cancer treatment because he needed  to  earn
    money in order to support himself. His motivation was,  therefore,  not
    seriously in doubt.

 3. With the agreement of both representatives, I set aside the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision. I was informed that the appellant is critically  ill
    and, in the circumstances, I have proceeded to remake the decision. The
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    4 May 2016 is allowed.



    Notice of Decision



    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I have remade the
    decision. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 4 May 2016 is allowed.



          Signed                             Date 2 November 2019


          Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
