
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07044/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 June 2019                      |On 20 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR EUGENE [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:        Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr N Garrod, counsel instructed by Gordon &
Thompson Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hembrough, promulgated on 19  March  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 8 May 2019.




Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

   3. The respondent last entered the United Kingdom  on  5  May  2008  with
      entry clearance as a visitor.   He  customarily  married  a  Slovakian
      national called [DB] on 30 December 2010.  On  8  February  2012,  the
      respondent was issued with an EEA residence card, valid for  5  years.
      The respondent separated from Ms [B] in May 2015 and he was granted  a
      divorce on 15 August 2016.

   4. On 8 February 2017, the respondent applied for permanent residence  on
      the basis that he had resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with
      the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  for  a
      continuous period of 5 years and had retained the right  of  residence
      as the former spouse of an EEA national. That application was  refused
      on 26 July 2017. In the reasons for refusal letter of the same date it
      was explained that there was insufficient  evidence  relating  to  the
      sponsor's exercise of Treaty rights between April  2011  and  December
      2012. In addition, in relation to the salary  deposited  in  a  Lloyds
      bank account from September 2011 and February 2012 and from April 2012
      to 2015, there was no evidence on the sponsor's HMRC employment record
      and nor was there any evidence of self-employment.  It  was  therefore
      not accepted that Ms [B] had exercised Treaty rights for a  continuous
      5-year period prior to the divorce  nor  that  adequate  evidence  was
      provided that she was a qualified person in the United Kingdom  as  at
      the "date of the termination" of the marriage. Reference was  made  to
      evidence of employment from March 2016 until  June  2016,  nonetheless
      the Secretary of State noted the lack of  evidence  that  Ms  [B]  was
      exercising Treaty rights on the date of the divorce in August 2016. In
      addition, the Secretary of State had been informed  that  Ms  [B]  had
      married Mr Talwinder Singh in September  2014  and  supported  another
      application while residing at the same address at which the respondent
      claimed to be residing.  Consequently,  the  Secretary  of  State  had
      doubts as to the genuineness  of  the  respondent's  relationship  and
      divorce certificate.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. This matter first came before Judge Hembrough on 5 February  2019  when
    he adjourned the appeal in order for the Secretary  of  State  to  make
    available the Home Office file relating to Mr Singh in order to  ensure
    that it was  the  same  Ms  [B]  who  had  married  Mr  Singh  and  the
    respondent. That file was not available at the resumed hearing and  the
    judge decided to proceed as  the  matter  had  already  been  adjourned
    twice. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  uncontested
    evidence was that the respondent's marriage to  the  EEA  national  was
    dissolved by a customary court  in  Nigeria  on  15  August  2016.  The
    respondent nonetheless produced evidence relating to the EEA  residence
    card application made by Mr Singh, which was supported  by  Ms  [B]  as
    well as the decision dated 11 December 2014 allowing Mr Singh's  appeal
    against the refusal of that application.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal judge was not satisfied that it  was  the  same
    woman who married the respondent and  Mr  Singh,  concluding  that  the
    Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of  proving  that  the
    respondent's marriage to Ms [B] was not genuine. In addition, the judge
    found that the sponsor was continuously exercising Treaty  rights  from
    December 2010 until the point of the divorce.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The single ground of challenge was that the judge  made  a  mistake  of
    fact and misdirected himself. Reference  was  made  to  the  presenting
    officer's appeal hearing minute (not  enclosed  with  the  grounds)  in
    which it was stated that the judge's attention was drawn  to  the  same
    National Insurance (NI) number being used in relation to both  sponsors
    and as such the marriage was not genuine. There was said to be a  clear
    failure by the judge to consider all the evidence in the round. It  was
    contended that even if the respondent was not aware or an active  party
    to the deception, the facts "render the application obsolete."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought, with Judge Parkes
    commenting that "it is not clear  how  a  non-Nigerian  national  could
    validly contract a customary marriage."

 9. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

The hearing

10. Mr Lindsay confirmed that he was relying on the reasons  for  appealing
    which concerned a single, narrow, issue. He did not seek to rely on the
    comments of the judge granting permission about the customary marriage,
    which was not a matter raised in the Secretary of State's grounds.

11. Mr Lindsay stated that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  found  that  the
    person involved in the marriage with Mr Singh was not the  same  person
    as the sponsor in the instant case because the  judge  considered  that
    the photographs did not look sufficiently alike.  He  argued  that  the
    judge was handed the residence card application made by Mr  Singh.  The
    Secretary of State's submission was that the two people were  the  same
    and if the judge  had  accepted  that,  the  outcome  might  have  been
    different and impacted the credibility of the relationship.

12. The minutes of the presenting officer referred to in the  grounds  were
    submitted during the hearing. Mr Garrod having seen them shortly before
    the hearing commenced.  Mr Lindsay submitted that the  minute  referred
    to the National Insurance numbers being the same and that the judge had
    failed to have regard to this matter which was capable of changing  the
    judge's view of credibility.  Mr Lindsay was unable to  identify  where
    in the material this NI number might be because Mr Singh's  application
    was not on the Home Office file. He was hopeful it was on the IAC file.






13. Mr Lindsay accepted that the presenting officer did not put  the  issue
    of the NI numbers to the judge, however he maintained  that  the  issue
    should have been looked at with greater care and that it  rendered  the
    decision of the judge unsafe. He went further, arguing  that  had  that
    point been considered, it could have made a difference to  the  judge's
    decision not to adjourn the appeal and also to  his  finding  that  the
    wives were not the same person.

14. Mr Garrod started his submissions by pointing out an inaccuracy in  the
    presenting officer's minute (regarding a  gap  in  the  receipt  books)
    which was not the case but  immaterial  to  the  issue  before  us.  He
    contended that there was not a great deal of evidence  to  substantiate
    the NI point, even if reference to it could be found.  He  argued  that
    there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision. In response to Mr Lindsay's submission that the  judge  might
    have adjourned the appeal if he  had  considered  the  NI  numbers,  he
    reminded us that the  matter  had  been  adjourned  twice  already.  He
    submitted that the Secretary of State was seeking to rely on  an  issue
    which was not brought to the judge's attention.   In  the  alternative,
    even if the NI number was the same for both women, he  argued  that  it
    did not prove much. He argued that the use of the name, date  of  birth
    and NI number of the respondent's  former  wife  might  have  indicated
    identity theft, which had not  been  considered.  He  argued  that  the
    evidence did not  establish  that  the  respondent's  former  wife  was
    complicit or involved in the marriage to Mr Singh. He  emphasised  that
    the addresses used regarding  each  relationship  were  different,  the
    judge found that the photographs were of two different women  and  this
    would be far more reliable evidence.  Mr Garrod argued that even if the
    wife in each case was the same, the Secretary of State had provided  no
    evidence that the respondent entered into a  marriage  of  convenience.
    On the contrary, the other marriage took place 5 years  after  that  of
    the respondent and it was hard to see how  post-marriage  events  could
    prove  a  marriage  of  convenience.  He  drew  our  attention  to  the
    enforcement visit paid to the respondent and his former wife, following
    which he was granted a residence card, which indicated that  it  was  a
    subsisting relationship.

15. In reply, Mr Lindsay submitted that unlike a name and date of birth,  a
    NI number was unique and that if the judge  had  considered  that,  the
    outcome might have been different. In response to our query as to  what
    difference it would have made even if the two wives were  one  and  the
    same, he contended that the judge's  attention  would  have  turned  to
    whether it was a marriage  of  convenience,  as  the  NI  evidence  was
    capable of raising such a suspicion.

16. At the end of the hearing, we announced that we  detected  no  material
    error of law in the  decision  in  question  and  upheld  the  findings
    therein. Our reasons are set out below.









Decision on error of law

17. It is useful to remind ourselves of the contention made in the  grounds
    of appeal, the substance of  which  was  set  out  in  paragraph  2  as
    follows.

         "2.  Specifically as per the PO's Appeal Hearing Minute, the  Judge
         was specifically drawn attention to the NI number pertaining to the
         appellant's former EEA spouse - which is the  same  as  that  which
         corresponded to a previous marriage to a Mr Singh. This shows  that
         the sponsor had also been married to another individual at the same
         time of marriage to the appellant."

18. As indicated above, the minute referred to was not  enclosed  with  the
    application for permission to appeal.  A cursory glance at the note  of
    Sarah Gledhill, who was the presenting officer  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal indicates that the claim in the grounds is far from accurate.

19. In the minute, Ms Gledhill comments that she  produced  a  copy  of  Mr
    Singh's application and determination  and  that  the  judge  "was  not
    convinced that this was the same woman ...as the photos  did  not  look
    similar."

20. After noting that the judge reserved the decision, Ms Gledhill made the
    following note in her minute:

         "NB: after hearing noticed evidence that it IS the same woman as NI
         numbers matched. This NI number  was  in  the  application  that  I
         handed up to the IJ though I had not  drawn  his  attention  to  it
         specifically."

21. According to that minute, the  presenting  officer  did  not  draw  the
    judge's attention to the matching NI numbers despite the judge  clearly
    indicating  during  the  hearing  that  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    photographs were of the same woman. Permission to appeal was granted on
    the understanding that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  evidence
    "specifically" drawn to his attention, when this was not  in  fact  the
    case. As indicated above, Mr Lindsay was unable to draw  this  evidence
    to our attention either, as it was not in his file. The NI evidence was
    not readily  identifiable  among  the  hundreds  of  documents  on  the
    respondent's IAC case file, which included the  many  loose,  unindexed
    documents relating to Mr Singh. The inaccuracy of the claim made in the
    single ground of challenge is reason enough to dismiss the Secretary of
    State's appeal.

22. In the alternative, we have considered the position even  were  the  NI
    evidence to have been drawn to the judge's attention and find  that  it
    would have in all likelihood made no difference to the outcome  of  the
    appeal for the reasons argued by Mr Garrod.  Essentially,  the  judge's
    unchallenged finding that the photographs of  the  respondent's  former
    wife and Mr Singh's wife  were  not  the  same  is  not  likely  to  be
    disturbed by the revelation that the person who married  Mr  Singh  was
    using the same NI number as well as the same name and date of birth  as
    the woman who married the respondent.

23. For completeness, we have considered whether  the  conclusions  of  the
    judge might have been different had he accepted that  the  respondent's
    wife underwent a bigamous marriage  to  Mr  Singh.  We  could  find  no
    support for the contention that the respondent's relationship with  his
    former spouse which lasted from 2008 to 2016 was  one  of  convenience,
    particularly when  an  unannounced  enforcement  visit  by  immigration
    officers  in  2012,  during  which  the  respondent  and  Ms  [B]  were
    interviewed, revealed no cause for concern.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Signed                                  Date: 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


