

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/07628/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Rolls Building, London      |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 February 2018                  |            On 25 April 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                       mohammed farzan mohammed fuward
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, instructed by Kothla & Co, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Owens that was promulgated on 20 September 2017.
     Judge Owens dismissed the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal  for  want
    of jurisdiction.  Judge Owens followed the Upper Tribunal's decision in
    Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 411.

 2. Ms Heybroek requested that Judge Owen's decision be set  aside  because
    Sala had been found to be not good law (see Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ
    424).  Ms Heybroek pointed me to the respondent's rule 24  response  in
    which the issue was conceded and the  Upper  Tribunal  was  invited  to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 3. Mr Melvin informed me that he was instructed to withdraw  the  rule  24
    response and to seek an adjournment to await the outcome of the Supreme
    Court  in  the  pending  case  of  SM  (Algeria)  v  ECO  (no  citation
    available).  He suggested that the Supreme court  was  looking  at  the
    same issue and it was reasonable to await the outcome  before  deciding
    how to deal with this appeal.

 4. I decided that there was no need to adjourn the appeal.  There  was  no
    explanation why the application to adjourn had not been made  prior  to
    the hearing, the Supreme Court having reserved judgment in SM (Algeria)
    some time ago.  I also indicated that for similar reasons (even  though
    not raised by Mr Melvin), there would be no reason to await  the  Court
    of Justice's decision in Banger v  SSHD  (case  no  c-89/17)  which  is
    pending.  Ms Heybroek indicated that the Advocate General's opinion was
    expected in March 2018, so final judgment is some time off.  To adjourn
    would be to delay the appeal unjustifiably.  At  the  very  least,  the
    parties are entitled to have findings of fact made  which  may  resolve
    the concerns raised.

 5. Mr Melvin accepted my decision and indicated he could not  argue  there
    was no error of law in Judge Owens' decision.  He did not object to  me
    remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh  hearing.
    The First-tier Tribunal will be required to make findings  of  fact  on
    the question of whether the appellant satisfies regulation 8  (extended
    family members) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

 6. I announced my decision at the hearing and this  decision  and  reasons
    statement merely confirms my decision and gives my reasons.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal succeeds.

FtT Judge Owens' decision contains an error on a point of  law  and  is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision.


Signed                                       Date         13 February 2018

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Postscript - NB: This is not part of my decision and reasons

By coincidence (and I say that because neither  representative  informed  me
that the Supreme Court was about to hand down  its  judgment),  the  Supreme
Court handed down its judgment in SM (Algeria) v ECO UK Visa Section  [2018]
UKSC 8 the day after the hearing.  The Supreme Court  upheld  the  Court  of
Appeal's judgment in Khan and overruled Sala.
