
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07748/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2018                          |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                          Waqas Shoukat Imran Raja
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not
represented.
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Notice of hearing was sent on 16 August 2018. When it was convenient to
    deal with the case at about 11.15 am the appellant was neither  present
    nor had he offered any explanation for his absence. In the  absence  of
    any such explanation I considered it just to continue with the hearing.

 2. This is an appeal by a litigant in person against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him a residence card as the husband  of  an
    EEA national.

 3. Essentially there were  two  points  taken.   The  first  is  that  the
    Secretary of State found that the marriage was one of convenience.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge misdirected  himself  when  considering  that
    part of the case and does not seem  to  have  been  familiar  with  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in Sadovska and  Another  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 54 which I respectfully draw to his  attention  but  the  apparent
    error is immaterial because the point was resolved in  the  appellant's
    favour.

 4. The second point concerned the failure to  show  that  the  appellant's
    wife had been exercising treaty rights at the material time.  There was
    quite simply no evidence before the Tribunal on which the  judge  could
    possibly have come to the conclusion that the wife had been  exercising
    treaty rights.  If it is available then  it  should  have  been  served
    before the hearing.  Standard directions were sent to the appellant  on
    3 October 2017 telling him how evidence  had  to  be  served  and  made
    available for the Tribunal.  For some reason he did  not  do  that  but
    that is his loss and the judge cannot be criticised  for  deciding  the
    case on the evidence that was there when the appellant had been told to
    produce the evidence on which he chose to rely and he did not do as  he
    was told.

 5. The points taken in the grounds are that the judge  acted  unfairly  by
    going ahead in the absence of the appellant.  The  appellant  complains
    that he was not well enough to get to the hearing.  It  is  rather  odd
    that that case was listed for a First-tier Tribunal hearing in  Newport
    when the appellant was living in Slough.  Nevertheless this is what was
    done and the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  rightly  directed  his  mind
    carefully to the application for an adjournment and  noted  no  medical
    evidence that the appellant was unfit to attend.  It may very  well  be
    that the appellant was suffering from a bad back.  Bad  backs  are  not
    necessarily reasons not to attend.  If a person is so disabled that  it
    is not possible to travel by public transport or any other means to the
    hearing centre then he should produce medical evidence to confirm that.
    In the absence of it a judge is likely to take the view that the person
    could attend and the judge here is not to be criticised for making  the
    decision that he did.

 6. It follows therefore that I see no merit in these grounds.   The  basic
    criticism is misconceived and there was no evidence before the Tribunal
    upon which the Tribunal could have allowed the appeal properly.

    Notice of Decision

 7. It follows that I dismiss this appeal because I see no  material  error
    in the decision.






|Signed                                 |                                  |
|Jonathan Perkins                       |                                  |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal            |Dated 6 November 2018             |





