
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07330/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th March 2019                            |On 29th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                mr Umar Hayat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel, instructed by Ahmad &
Williams
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  seeking  to  appeal  against  a
    decision dated 28th July 2017, refusing to grant him a residence  card
    as a former spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant contracted a valid marriage to an  EEA  citizen  on  19th
    July 2013.  They separated in September 2015.  Proceedings for  divorce
    were issued on 19th April 2016 and a decree absolute  granted  on  20th
    February 2017.

3.    The  reasons  for  refusal  were  that  the  appellant  had   provided
    inadequate evidence that he had retained a right of  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom following the end of his marriage to  the  EEA  national
    partner.  It was further said that he had failed  to  provide  evidence
    that the EEA national family member  was  a  qualified  person  in  the
    United Kingdom at the time of the termination of the marriage.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision,  and  his  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie at a hearing on  25th  June
    2018.  In a decision promulgated on 3rd July  2018  the  Judge  made  a
    clear finding in paragraphs 17 and 18 of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant's wife was working and exercising treaty rights at  the  time
    of the termination of the marriage.  Further, sufficient  and  reliable
    evidence had also been provided to show that the appellant was  working
    throughout and thus that Regulation 10(6) of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (henceforth the  EEA  Regulations)  was
    met.

5.   However, it was the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the
    appellant failed to meet the requirement set out in at  10(5)(d)(i)  of
    the EEA Regulations and accordingly the appeal was dismissed.

6.   A challenge was made to that decision on the basis that it  was  unfair
    that the appellant should be prejudiced in his entitlement to remain in
    the United Kingdom by reason of the date upon which divorce proceedings
    were instituted.  It was contended that interpretation was in any event
    in contravention of the relevant European Union legislation.

7.   It was accepted on behalf of the respondent by Ms Isherwood that  there
    was a possible  conflict  and/or  ambiguity  within  the  framework  of
    Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations such that the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and the matter be reheard.

8.   Thus the appeal came before us to determine that issue.

9.   Regulation 10(5) gives a retained right of residence to  a  person  who
    had

    (a)  ceased to be a family member of a  qualified  person  ...  on  the
         termination of the marriage;


    (b)  was residing in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
         Regulations at the date of termination;


    (c)  satisfied the condition in paragraph (6); and


    (d)  (i) prior to the initiation proceedings for the termination of the
             marriage the marriage had lasted for at least three years  and
             the parties to the marriage had resided in the United  Kingdom
             for at least one year during its duration.

10.  That particular paragraph was considered in  detail  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in the decision  of  Baigazieva  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1088.   Lord
    Justice Singh considered the context in which this provision of the EEA
    Regulations came  to  be  framed,  that  being  Article  13(2)  of  the
    Directive 2004/38/EC.

11.  Directive 2004/38/EC at Article 13(2)(a) indicates in clear terms  that
    prior  to  initiation  of  the  divorce  or  annulment  proceedings  or
    termination of the registered partnership referred to in point 2(b)  of
    Article 2, the marriage or registered partnership must have  lasted  at
    least three years, including one year in the host member state.

12.  It is clear to us and seemingly accepted by all parties before us  that
    Regulation 10(5) is a faithful transposition of  what  is  set  out  in
    Article 13(2).  Indeed, the Court of Appeal noted  that  Article  13(2)
    had been properly transposed into domestic law by Regulation 10 of  the
    EEA Regulations.

13.  There  can  be  little  doubt  as  to  when  divorce  proceedings  were
    instituted and that of course was by the filing of the divorce petition
    and its registration with the appropriate court on 19th April 2016.

14.  Mr Kannangara sought to argue on behalf of the appellant that the  date
    of  the  divorce  proceedings  should  be  when  the   certificate   of
    entitlement to a decree was issued, that being 28th October 2016.

15.  For our purposes we can see no merit in that submission.  Clearly  that
    was a finding made by the Family Court at Bury St Edmunds on the  basis
    of what had been provided in the petition.  It is the divorce  petition
    that was lodged which we find instituted these proceedings.

16.  It  is  unfortunate  indeed  that  the  appellant  fails  to  meet  the
    requisite three year period prior to  the  institution  proceedings  by
    some two months.  Had his wife delayed in presenting her petition by  a
    few months then the requirement in Regulation 10(5) would  indeed  have
    been met, but that did not happen in this case.

17.  The possibility  of  a  tension  between  the  various  sub-clauses  in
    Article 13(2) was considered by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Baigazieva,
    particularly at paragraph 12 thereof, but the Court of Appeal concluded
    that there was in fact no tension.  Article  13(2)  takes  effect  upon
    divorce but the precondition for its taking effect is set out as dating
    back from the institution of divorce  proceedings.   As  the  Court  of
    Appeal indicated there is no great evidential difficulty in determining
    when divorce proceedings had been initiated.

18.  Unfortunately for the appellant he  fails  to  meet  the  precondition.
    Accordingly he fails to satisfy all the requirements as set out in  the
    appropriate Regulation.

19.   In  those  circumstances  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal under the EEA Regulations is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley                               Date 24th April 2019

p.p. Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

