

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ea/07380/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Royal Courts of Justice                 |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on    26.11.2018                              |on 04.12.2018                |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                              Jahangir shahzad
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Amanda Jones (counsel instructed by Farani Taylor,
Ilford)
For the respondent: Mr Nigel Bramble

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Rita Sethi), sitting at Taylor House on 20 June, to  an
    EEA appeal by a citizen of Pakistan, born 1985. The appellant was  here
    with leave as a student from 2010 - 14; but in 2011 he met  a  Romanian
    lady some 17 years older  than  him,  with  whom  he  went  through  an
    unrecognized religious ceremony of marriage in December 2015, and lived
    together, according to him, at least  since  then.  That  ceremony  was
    followed by a duly registered civil marriage on 25 August 2016.

 2. In 2016 the appellant applied for a residence card on that basis, which
    was refused. In 2017 he applied once more;  but,  following  interviews
    with both him and his wife on 22 August, that was refused the same day,
    on the basis that theirs was a marriage of convenience, and on the 24th
    he gave notice of appeal. The refusal letter had set out the  interview
    passages relied on; but on 16  October  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave
    directions for the filing and service of evidence, including  the  full
    transcript of the interviews.

 3. This never happened, despite requests from the appellant's  solicitors:
    there was a handwritten summary at annex E in the  appeal  bundle,  but
    this gave the answers, without the questions. Quite rightly, the  judge
    began the hearing by taking this up with the  presenting  officer:  the
    presenting officer had taken the trouble to go into her office early to
    find out what had happened to the transcript; but there was nothing  to
    be found. The judge  expressed  her  surprise,  and  referred  to  Miah
    (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT  515  (IAC).
    That decision, as the long title makes obvious,  involved  specifically
    the disclosure of the document recording  the  interviewer's  comments,
    but the general importance of having a full transcript  is  clear,  and
    was clear to all concerned at the hearing.

 4. However, there was no application for an adjournment  by  either  side,
    and the hearing went on its way. As a  result  of  questions  asked  in
    cross-examination (see paragraph 16), the judge took the point up again
    with the presenting officer, who asked  for,  and  was  given  a  short
    adjournment to consult a senior  case-worker.  The  presenting  officer
    came back and told the judge that audio recordings had been found,  but
    not transcribed: she asked for an adjournment for that to be done. Miss
    Jones opposed that, given the stage which the hearing had reached,  and
    suggested that a similar application by an appellant  would  have  been
    refused. The judge went on to record (paragraph 17) that

       She considered  that  the  respondent's  summary  transcript  of  the
       marriage interviews together with the matters particularised  in  the
       [refusal letter] served  to  identify  the  respondent's  key  points
       against the  appellant  and  accordingly  the  hearing  could  justly
       proceed.

 5. The judge went on at 18  to  say  that  she  agreed  with  counsel:  an
    adjournment was inappropriate at that stage, especially given what  had
    happened following the directions given, and her own inquiry. The judge
    noted that counsel "... did not seek to contend that the appellant  had
    been deprived of an opportunity to know the 'essential elements of  the
    case against him'", since only the points referred to  in  the  refusal
    letter, based on the summary, were to be relied on, and she refused the
    application.

 6. The case went on its way, with oral evidence from  both  the  appellant
    and his wife. In due course the judge gave  her  decision.  At  36  she
    noted this from the judicial head-note to Miah, from which  the  phrase
    she referred to at 18 had been drawn)

       (i) A decision that a marriage is a marriage of convenience  for  the
       purposes of regulation 2(1) of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
       Area) Regulations 2006 is a matter of some moment. Fairness  requires
       that the affected person must be alerted to the essential elements of
       the case against him.

 7. At 37 the judge considered for herself what had happened, with  obvious
    care, and came to the view that she could fairly go on  to  decide  the
    case. At 38 she  began,  quite  understandably,  by  dealing  with  the
    discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  evidence  and  hios   wife's,   as
    identified by the respondent. She gave full weight to the  explanations
    put forward, and, as Mr Bramble pointed out, made  a  number  of  other
    reasoned credibility findings against the appellant, not  dependent  on
    the contents of the interview.



 8. Miss Jones did not criticize the judge's decision to  go  on  with  the
    hearing (which would certainly have been hard, since she had encouraged
    her to do so), nor the way she had decided the case, given the basis on
    which it had proceeded. The grounds of appeal  (paragraph  13)  say  in
    terms  "Miss  Jones  in  opposing  the  late  adjournment   application
    considered the appeal could justly proceed without the full  transcript
    of the couple's respective interviews".

 9. While this is not made clear at that stage, which may have  involved  a
    summary of the judge's decision, the grounds go on at 21 to say this:

       The Appellant's submissions, which are  not  fully  included  in  the
       determination, were not that the matter could proceed on the  limited
       Home Office evidence, but that the hearing ought to  proceed  on  the
       basis that the Secretary of State  had  failed  to  make  prompt  and
       proper  disclosure  of  the  relevant  material,  and  that  selected
       elements could not properly be considered as evidence against him.

10. Further general points about the importance of disclosure, in the light
    of Miah, were made at 22 - 26. Permission to appeal was  given  on  the
    basis that it was "... open to argument  that  the  judge  should  have
    adjourned  the  matter  in  order  to  obtain  the  marriage  interview
    transcript or otherwise placed little or no weight on the summary".

11. Miss Jones argued before me that  the  judge  had  misled  herself,  in
    considering Miah, into thinking that paragraph 1 of the judicial  head-
    note referred to the hearing, whereas it is  headed  'Conduct  of  pre-
    decision interviews', to which it clearly refers. So far the judge  may
    have been wrong.

12. There was no  request  for  a  transcript  of  the  judge's  record  of
    proceedings, and the permission judge may  not  have  appreciated  from
    paragraph 21 of the rather prolix grounds that one would be  desirable.
    However, if counsel really  was  arguing  before  the  judge  that  the
    hearing should proceed, not on the evidence before her as it  was,  but
    by excluding any reference to the interviews at all, then  it  was  her
    responsibility to make this quite clear at the time.

13. If counsel had made the submissions suggested at paragraph  21  of  the
    grounds, then it should have been clear when the judge dealt with  them
    whether the hearing was to go ahead with or without  reference  to  the
    interviews. If it was not, then it was counsel's responsibility to  ask
    the judge to make it clear.

14. The judge was obviously under the impression that the hearing was to go
    ahead on the basis of the evidence before her, including the  interview
    summary and the references to it in the refusal  letter,  and  that  is
    what happened. It is clear from the judge's decision (see 19) that  the
    appellant was cross-examined about the contents of both interviews.  If
    counsel had been under the impression that the hearing was to go  ahead
    without any such reference, then again it  was  her  responsibility  to
    object at that point, so that the judge had an opportunity to  consider
    what she had really argued.





15. Counsel clearly said nothing of the kind at any of  these  stages,  but
    took the point, as she understood she had made it, in  her  grounds  of
    appeal. Whatever counsel understood had happened, this laid her open to
    suspicion of what may politely be described as opportunism,  in  taking
    the point at that stage.

16. While the judge may have been wrong to consider  what  was  said  about
    'essential elements of the case against him', in  paragraph  1  of  the
    judicial head-note to Miah, as applying to disclosure for the  hearing,
    as opposed to disclosure for  the  interview,  she  was  faced  with  a
    situation where the Home Office had been in serious  default  of  their
    obligations, which they were making a late  attempt  to  put  right  by
    asking for an adjournment for a full transcript.

17. Miss Jones for the appellant, on the other hand, was asking  the  judge
    to go ahead with the hearing. The judge was well aware that this  would
    involve doing the best she could in the circumstances, and made a  fair
    decision on what was before her. She was not wrong in law  to  consider
    the extracts from the interviews, since  it  was  never  properly  made
    clear to her that she was being asked not to.

18. It follows that this appeal is dismissed; but that is not to  run  down
    the importance of the Home Office paying proper attention to directions
    from the Tribunal, and providing the appellant's representatives with a
    full transcript of any interview relied on  in  good  time  before  the
    hearing. It ought to be standard practice for one to be made,  as  soon
    as a notice of appeal is received.

19. While the Procedure Rules provide no specific sanction for  failure  to
    comply with directions, if on another occasion  a  transcript  had  not
    been provided, it would be fully open to those acting for the appellant
    to ask that the Home Office should be forbidden to  rely  on  extracts.
    They might however like to consider whether that should be done by  way
    of an application in advance of the hearing, so that the hearing  judge
    was not presented with the difficult potential task  of  considering  a
    case on its merits, after excluding evidence they had already seen.

Appeal
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                               Date 30.11.2018
