
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07700/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 October 2018                             |On 14 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Najwa, instructed by UK Immigration Advisers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  S  P  J  Buchanan  promulgated  on  6  March  2018
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  1
    September 2017 to refuse to issue a residence card confirming  a  right
    of residence.

 2. The facts of the case  are  straightforward.   The  appellant  and  her
    husband met in Canada, were married and came  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    They then transferred to Ireland where the appellant's  husband  worked
    for approximately a year before returning to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    seeking a residence permit on the basis that  the  appellant's  husband
    was a returning resident pursuant to Regulation 9  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 3. So far as is relevant Regulation 9 provides:-

         9.-  (1) If the conditions in paragraph (2)  are  satisfied,  these
             Regulations apply to a person who is the family  member  ("F")
             of a British citizen ("BC") as  though  the  BC  were  an  EEA
             national.

             (2)  The conditions are that-

                  (a)  BC-

                      (i)  is residing in an EEA State as a  worker,  self-
                      employed person, self-sufficient person or a student,
                      or so resided immediately  before  returning  to  the
                      United Kingdom; or

                      (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence in
                      an EEA State;

                  (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

                  (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.

             (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
             or was genuine include-

                  (a)  whether the centre of BC's life  transferred  to  the
                  EEA State;

                  (b)  the length of F and BC's joint residence in  the  EEA
                  State;

                  (c)   the  nature  and  quality  of   the   F   and   BC's
                  accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is  or  was
                  BC's principal residence;

                  (d)  the degree of F  and  BC's  integration  in  the  EEA
                  State;

                  (e)  whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with  BC
                  was in the EEA State.

             (4)  This regulation does not apply-

                  (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                  was as a means  for  circumventing  any  immigration  laws
                  applying to non-EEA nationals to which F  would  otherwise
                  be subject (such as any applicable requirement  under  the
                  1971 Act to have leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
                  Kingdom); or

                  (b)  to a person who is only eligible to be treated  as  a
                  family member as a result  of  regulation  7(3)  (extended
                  family members treated as family members).

 4. There are two elements to be shown there.  Effectively  it  has  to  be
    shown that there is a genuine residence in the  country  in  which  the
    couple lived including a consideration of  whether  there  has  been  a
    transfer of the centre of the British citizen's life to the country  in
    which there has been residence, and second, following Regulation  9(4),
    this must not have been as a means of circumventing immigration laws.

 5. The judge set out the evidence from paragraph [5.1] onwards.  What  the
    judge then did was to address  first  at  paragraph  5.17  whether  the
    purpose  of  living  and  residing  in  Ireland  was  with  a  view  to
    circumventing  immigration  laws  which  otherwise  would   have   been
    applicable, and then went on to make a number  of  findings  about  the
    circumstances in which they ceased to live in Dublin which, in summary,
    was that there were difficulties  about  extending  the  lease  in  the
    property in which they were living. The judge  concluded  at  paragraph
    5.29 that he was not satisfied that the reasons for leaving Dublin  had
    been truly established and he concluded that, as the appellant and  her
    spouse were fully aware that the  financial  requirements  which  would
    otherwise apply to an EEA spouse were not met, he was persuaded by  the
    respondent  that  the  period  of  time  was  with  the  intention   of
    circumventing the Immigration Rules applying to  non-EEA  nationals  to
    which the appellant would otherwise be subject.

 6. The appellant then sought permission to appeal on the grounds that  the
    judge had misdirected himself:

         (i)  in placing a burden of proof on the  appellant  to  show  that
         there had been an abuse of rights contrary to the decision  of  the
         Court of Justice in Emsland-Starke [2000] EUECJ C-109/99;

         (ii) in failing to make proper findings as  to  whether  there  had
         been a transfer of the centre of the partner's life; and

         (iii)    in reaching his conclusions about the  intentions  of  the
         parties to the marriage, had concerned himself only with one aspect
         of the case, that being the issues regarding the intentions derived
         from the findings about the ending of the tenancy  agreement;  and,
         had failed properly to take into account the other factors set  out
         in Regulation 9(3).

 7. Many of the issues in this case have been helpfully  addressed  by  the
    Inner House of Court of Session in AA v Secretary of State [2017]  CSIH
    38.  It makes the point that  as  the  Regulations  in  this  case  are
    designed to give effect in domestic law to the decisions  of  the  CJEU
    particularly in the case of Surinder Singh and O and B [2014] EUECJ  C-
    456/12, and that interpreting the Regulations must be done in the light
    of the relevant jurisprudence.

 8. The judge does not appear to have directed himself properly as  to  the
    fact that he should  consider  first  whether  the  appellant  and  her
    husband had established themselves in  Ireland  and  then  gone  on  to
    consider whether the Secretary of State had shown that  notwithstanding
    that all the relevant requirements have been  met  there  had  been  an
    abuse of rights.

 9. We conclude that this was an error and that this may then have led  the
    judge to reach findings which were not open to him.  There are a number
    of factors set out in this case, not least of which is  the  length  of
    time spent in the Irish Republic, the fact that the appellant's husband
    was employed, the fact that the  Irish  state  had  in  fact  issued  a
    residence document indicating that the  appellant's  partner  had  been
    exercising treaty rights, that there was no  proper  assessment  as  to
    whether there had in fact been  an  establishment  of  the  parties  in
    Ireland and in this case we make particular reference to what was  said
    in AA Nigeria at [47] and [48]:

         [47] The appellant relied on these paragraphs to argue that as long
         as the residence in question lasted for at least three months,  the
         terms of the article had been  met  and  were  sufficient  for  the
         purposes  of  Regulation  9.   However,  that  argument  fails   to
         recognise the context in which the discussion takes place.   It  is
         central to the decision in O and B that for "residence in" the host
         state it is a "genuine residence" which requires to be established,
         not a residence of any specific duration.  Of course, duration  may
         be a relevant factor, but it is only one factor.  As the Court went
         on to say in O and B


             "57. It is for the referring court to determine  whether  [the
             sponsors],  who  are  both  Union   citizens,   settled   and,
             therefore, genuinely resided in  the  host  member  state  and
             whether, on account of living as a family during  that  period
             of genuine residence [the spouses] enjoyed a derived right  of
             residence in the host member state.


             "59. In that  regard,  short  periods  of  residence  such  as
             weekends or holidays spent in a member state other  than  that
             of which the citizen in question  is  a  national,  even  when
             considered together, fall within the scope  of  article  6  of
             Directive 2004/38 and do not satisfy those conditions."


         Elsewhere the Court stated that on  return,  the  conditions  which
         apply should not be any more strict than those which apply when the
         citizen  has  exercised  his  right  of   movement   by   "becoming
         established" in a host state (para 61).


         [48] The reference to "becoming established"  echoes  the  approach
         taken in Metock v Minister for Justice,  Equality  and  Law  Reform
         [2009] QB 318.  In that case, the Court rejected an  argument  that
         the spouse's derivative right to reside in the host state  depended
         on that spouse having previously been lawfully  resident  within  a
         member state.  Faced with an argument that this would have  serious
         immigration consequences for member states, the Court  went  on  to
         say (para 73):


             "On this point, the answer must be, first, that it is not  all
             nationals of non-member countries who derive rights  of  entry
             into and residence in a member state from  Directive  2004/38,
             but only those who are family members, within the  meaning  of
             article 2(2) of that Directive, of a  Union  citizen  who  has
             exercised  his  right  of  freedom  of  movement  by  becoming
             established in a member state other than the member  state  of
             which he is a national."


10. Further because of the confusion in making findings in what is  a  two-
    stage process, we cannot discern how  the  judge  considered  that  the
    abuse of rights points was made out.  It is also not clear whether  the
    judge was aware that in order to  establish  an  abuse  of  rights  the
    actions taken must be at least the primary reason for  undertaking  the
    change, which in this case would mean moving to Ireland for  a  year  -
    see Sadovska[2017] UKSC 54  and O. and B at [58]-[59].

11. Further, and in any event, the assessment of the  facts  is  flawed  in
    that the judge has failed properly to take account of any factors  over
    and above the ending of the tenancy agreement from which all the issues
    about motive appear to have been derived, other than the  apparent  and
    last minute reference to the fact that the appellant  and  partner  may
    not have met the financial requirements  set  out  in  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. We do not consider that this was a sufficient basis for  the  judge  to
    conclude that there had been no  genuine  establishment,  and  we  find
    there had been no proper evaluation of all the facts as a  whole.   For
    these reasons we conclude that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law and we set it aside.

13. We heard evidence from the appellant and her  husband.   The  appellant
    adopted her witness statement, and in cross-examination, said that they
    had been to Ireland for 1 week in the past, and it was  recalling  that
    later that they had liked it. She said she had  not  applied  to  be  a
    supply teacher in Ireland as she had not been able to  find  the  right
    job. She denied not applying as it was not part of the long-term  plan.



14. The appellant said that she had twice returned to  the  United  Kingdom
    during the year they had spent in Ireland, and  that  her  husband  had
    looked for a job in the United Kingdom after the  problems  with  their
    lease had arisen.

15. The appellant's husband adopted his witness statement, adding in cross-
    examination that he had first worked for Sky in a sales  position,  but
    had then moved to the retention team, and had  progressed  through  the
    company to new customer sales and was now mentoring new employees.   He
    said he had been aware of the income limits  on  immigration  in  2013.
    He said that the ease of movement to Ireland had been a factor.

16. In response to our questions the  appellant's  husband  said  that  his
    current earnings were now in excess of �20,000 per annum including  his
    bonus.

17. In assessing whether the appellant meets the  requirement  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, we have approached the requirements of considered  Reg.  9
    sequentially.  We are satisfied on the evidence  that  the  appellant's
    husband is a British Citizen and that he and the appellant  resided  in
    Ireland for approximately a year.

18. Was the stay in Ireland genuine? The respondent  submits  it  was  not,
    given the relatively brief time spent there, if they  had  intended  to
    settle, the nature of the accommodation, the lower pay and the lack  of
    family or other ties to Ireland. It was submitted that it  was  unusual
    for a young couple to have a live-in landlady, and  that  it  had  been
    accepted that they were aware of the income requirement in  the  United
    Kingdom. It was submitted that looked at  holistically,  there  was  no
    genuine stay in the sense of strengthening roots or  family  life,  and
    that it had not been shown to be genuine  establishment.  It  was  also
    submitted that inferences could be drawn from the fact  that  this  was
    the first EEA state in which the couple had lived, and  that  they  had
    lived in Ireland to circumvent immigration control.

19. Ms Najwa submitted that the witnesses were credible and had shown  that
    they had genuinely established themselves in  Ireland.   The  appellant
    had not worked, but it was not a requirement that she do  so,  nor  was
    having family or ties in Ireland. There was no intention to  circumvent
    immigration control, and it was  evident  that  family  life  had  been
    strengthened in Ireland.

20. As noted above, the Regulations must be interpreted in the light of the
    case law on which it is based and we consider that the issue of whether
    there has been genuine establishment  in  Ireland  must  be  approached
    holistically.

21. We consider that, as the appellant's husband said, they  had  lived  in
    rented accommodation in the United Kingdom and had not  retained  that,
    or any other accommodation in this country when they went  to  Ireland.
    We accept that the husband obtained a job, and, notably, paid  tax  and
    was issued with a registration certificate in Ireland.  These  are,  we
    consider, strong indicators that the centre of the  couple's  life  had
    moved to Ireland.  The contract of employment was not of a  fixed  term
    and they retained no residence in the United Kingdom or elsewhere.

22. We accept that the accommodation was of a temporary nature, and not  on
    a long lease but we do not consider  that  adverse  inferences  can  be
    drawn from that.  Nor is it clear that the landlady was resident in the
    property as Mr Whitwell submitted, but equally the  appellant  and  her
    husband do not as a couple, have a large income. Their  choices  as  to
    accommodation are thus limited.

23. Contrary to the First-tier  Tribunals  observations,  we  find  nothing
    unusual in the circumstances in which the couple found themselves;  the
    property was in disrepair and  the  landlady,  perhaps  understandably,
    decided not to renew the lease.  Viewing all of the  evidence  on  this
    issue, we do not consider any adverse inferences can be drawn. What  is
    recorded by the judge at [5.25] to [5.29]  is  mostly  speculative  and
    fails to take into account that as tenants not on  a  long  lease  they
    were not in a good bargaining position. No thought seems to  have  been
    given to how putative rights could  have  been  enforced  in  practice.
    Having heard the appellant and her partner give evidence, we  conclude,
    considering the evidence as a whole, that  that  have  told  the  truth
    about how and why the lease came to an end, and that they were not able
    to secure accommodation at short notice, and that they then decided  to
    return to the United Kingdom as their costs would be lower.

24. We conclude also, viewing the evidence as a whole, that the couple  had
    initially decided to move  to  Ireland  for  an  indefinite  period  as
    opposed to a fixed period.  We draw no inferences from  the  fact  that
    they had only been there once for a week and had not lived in any other
    EEA State.  In the context of the  Citizenship  Directive  facilitating
    free movement of workers, that is not anything which is  surprising  or
    from which adverse inferences could be drawn.  We  draw  no  inferences
    from the fact that the appellant and her  partner  were  aware  of  the
    income threshold for the appellant to obtain  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom. We note that the partner has been promoted  within  Sky
    and now earns more than the threshold.

25. We accept that the appellant was not employed in Ireland but there  was
    no requirement for her to take a job. We accept that  she  concentrated
    on her art. We do, however, accept that the  family  life  between  the
    couple was strengthened by their living together in Ireland.

26. Taking all of these factors into account, and viewing the evidence as a
    whole, we are satisfied that the appellant and her husband's  residence
    in Ireland was genuine, and that therefore the requirements of reg 9(3)
    are met.

27. Further, we are satisfied that, on the proper construction of reg  9(4)
    in the light of the case law above referred to, that the purpose of the
    couple was to establish themselves in Ireland, and that  their  purpose
    was not a means to circumvent the immigration laws.

28. For these reasons, we are satisfied that the appeal is  to  be  allowed
    under the EEA Regulations.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

 2. We remake the decision by allowing the appeal on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was contrary to EU law



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 8 November 2018

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

