

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/07407/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decisions & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                 |
|On 4 January 2019                            |On 15 January 2019          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                        Bamigbe Ebenezer ogungbamila
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill of Counsel instructed by Liberty and Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. This appeal comes before me following my decision of 13 August 2018
         to set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow of 31
         January 2018.


      2. The appellant challenges the respondent's decision of 2  June  2016
         to refuse to issue him with a permanent residence card  under  reg.
         15(1)(f) of the EEA Regulations.


      3. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on  10  October  1981.
         There is no evidence of his claimed entry  in  2005.  Although  the
         respondent maintained that his marriage to an EEA  national  was  a
         sham, he failed to adduce the evidence he relied on in that respect
         and that allegation has not, therefore, been  made  out.  The  only
         issue remaining is whether the  appellant  can  show  a  five  year
         period during which he has been exercising treaty rights as  an  EU
         national, including evidence of his ex-wife's work up to the  point
         of the commencement of divorce proceedings.


         The Hearing


      4. The appellant  attended  the  hearing  and  gave  his  evidence  in
         English. He confirmed that the contents of  his  witness  statement
         were true and accurate. He stated that he worked as a  Health  Care
         Assistant at the Royal Free Hospital and had done  so  since  2015.
         There was no cross examination. I then heard submissions.


      5. For the respondent, Mr Mills submitted that the respondent had been
         entitled to make the decision as at the time the decision was made,
         the evidence had not covered a five-year period and the evidence of
         the sponsor's work had been insufficient. However, time  had  since
         passed, and the matter had to be assessed as at  the  date  of  the
         hearing. There was documentary evidence of the sponsor's employment
         from January 2014 up to the divorce in March 2015. There  was  then
         evidence of the sponsor's employment up to  the  present  time.  He
         submitted that the appellant appeared to have  benefited  from  the
         delay in the resolution of his appeal.


      6. For the appellant, Ms Revill relied on her  skeleton  argument  and
         submitted that there was evidence  to  cover  a  five  year  period
         working back from  the  date  of  the  hearing  to  show  that  the
         appellant  had  been  in  employment  and  that  at  the  date   of
         commencement  of  divorce  proceedings  his  sponsor  had  been  in
         employment and indeed had been going  back  to  January  2014.  Her
         skeleton argument set out  the  specific  documentary  evidence  to
         corroborate the submissions made. The five  year  period  had  been
         demonstrated and the appeal should be allowed.


      7. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give with reasons.


         Findings and Conclusions


      8. Reg. 10 (5) states:



         "The condition in this paragraph is that the person ("A")-


             (a) ceased to be a family member of a qualified person  or  an
             EEA national with  a  right  of  permanent  residence  on  the
             termination of the marriage or civil partnership of A;


             (b) was residing in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
             these Regulations at the date of the termination;


             (c) satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and


             (d) either-


                  (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for  the
                  termination of the marriage or the civil partnership,  the
                  marriage or civil partnership  had  lasted  for  at  least
                  three years and the  parties  to  the  marriage  or  civil
                  partnership had resided in the United Kingdom for at least
                  one year during its duration; ..."

      9. Reg. 6 states:

         "The condition in this paragraph is that the person-


             (a) is not an EEA national but would, if the  person  were  an
             EEA national, be a worker, a self-employed person or  a  self-
             sufficient person under regulation 6..." (added emphasis).

     10. Whilst there does appear to be a lack of clarity as to  whether  it
         is the date of the termination of the marriage that should be taken
         into account or the commencement of the divorce  proceedings,  this
         matter was clarified  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Baigazieva  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1088 so
         that the right to reside is only retained on the termination of the
         marriage, but the criteria for retention are to  be  considered  at
         the time of the initiation of divorce proceedings.


     11.  There  was  agreement  between  the  parties  that  although   the
         respondent could not be criticized for the decision  made  in  June
         2016, as  regards  the  issue  of  employment/self-employment,  the
         evidence for the five years preceding the present date  of  hearing
         clearly showed that the sponsor had been  working  between  January
         2014 and the time the divorce proceedings commenced  in  June  2014
         and that the appellant had been in employment  since  then.  Having
         considered Ms Revill's helpful skeleton argument  setting  out  all
         the evidence and period covered, in accordance with my  directions,
         I must concur with that view.


     12. Bundle 1 contains evidence of the sponsor's employment with Newgate
         Finance from January 2014-March 2015 in the form of pay  slips  and
         P60s. The respondent accepted  in  the  decision  letter  that  the
         appellant had been working between March 2015 and October 2015  and
         Bundles 2 and 3 contain evidence of employment from October 2015 to
         the present date in the form of payslips and P60s.


     13. This seems to me to be  adequate  evidence  that  the  sponsor  was
         exercising treaty rights up until the date that divorce proceedings
         commenced. I am satisfied that the appellant has  adduced  adequate
         documentary evidence to show  that  his  sponsor  was  a  qualified
         person at the time the divorce proceedings  commenced.  It  follows
         that he is entitled to retain his rights of residence.


         Decision


     14. The appeal is allowed under the EEA Regulations.


         Anonymity


     15. I was not asked to make an anonymity order and there is  no  reason
         to make one.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 4 January 2019






