
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07952/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 November 2018                  |On 04 January 2019                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr baljit [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foulkes-Jones, which was promulgated  on  6  August
    2018 following a hearing at Taylor House on 20 July 2018.  For ease  of
    convenience I shall throughout this decision refer to the Secretary  of
    State who was the original respondent as "the Secretary of  State"  and
    to Mr [S] who was the original appellant as "the claimant".

 2. The background can be stated briefly.  The claimant is  a  national  of
    India who was born in February 1981.  He applied for a  residence  card
    pursuant to Regulation 16(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2016
    on the basis that he was the primary carer of a child who was a British
    citizen.  It is not  disputed  that  his  child  is  indeed  a  British
    citizen.  The application was refused because the  Secretary  of  State
    did not accept that the claimant was a primary carer.

 3. As already noted the claimant appealed against this decision and it was
    this appeal which was considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foulkes-
    Jones.

 4. The claimant was served with notice of the hearing at  his  last  known
    address but  did  not  attend  and  was  not  represented.   The  judge
    nonetheless made findings of fact which included that the claimant  was
    the primary carer of a British citizen child as had been asserted.  The
    judge did not consider the claimant's Article 8 position having  regard
    to the decision  of  this  Tribunal  in  Amirteymour  and  Others  (EEA
    Appeals: human rights) [2015] UKUT 466.

 5. The Secretary of State has been given permission to appeal against this
    decision the basis of the grant of permission being that it is arguable
    that in the absence of witness statements  and/or  any  other  evidence
    from the claimant, there was  no  basis  upon  which  the  judge  could
    properly have found that the claimant had satisfied  the  burden  which
    was on him to establish that he was a primary carer  of  the  child  as
    claimed.

 6. The claimant has not appeared  before  this  Tribunal  either,  and  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State Mr Clarke has  informed  the  Tribunal
    that the Secretary of State has no knowledge of where he  now  may  be.
    However, I am satisfied that  this  Tribunal  made  attempts  to  serve
    notice of the hearing on  the  claimant  by  serving  it  at  what  was
    believed to be his  last  known  address.   Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provide as follows:

         "Hearing in a party's absence

         38.  If a person fails to attend the hearing,  the  Upper  Tribunal
             may proceed with the hearing if the Upper Tribunal -

             (a)  is satisfied that the party  has  been  notified  of  the
                  hearing or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify
                  the party of the hearing; and

             (b)  considers that it is  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
                  proceed with the hearing."

 7. Although I obviously cannot be satisfied that the claimant has in  fact
    been notified of the hearing, I am satisfied that  this  Tribunal  took
    reasonable steps to try to notify him of the hearing.   To  the  extent
    that the claimant has removed himself from where it was  believed  that
    he was living, this is a  decision  he  has  made  and  it  is  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the case.  In the judgment of this
    Tribunal this claimant has had more than adequate  opportunity  to  put
    whatever case he wanted to put before not just the First-tier  Tribunal
    but also this Tribunal.

 8. I set out  the  relevant  parts  of  Regulation  16  of  the  2016  EEA
    Regulations, which provide as follows:

         "Derivative right to reside

         16 -

         (1)  a person has a derivative right to reside during any period in
             which a person -

             (a)  is not an exempt person; and

             (b)  satisfies  each  of  the  criteria  in  one  or  more  of
                  paragraphs (2) to (6) ...

         (5)  The criteria in this paragraph are that -

             (a)  the person is  a  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen
                  ("BC");

             (b)  BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and

             (c)  BC would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or  in
                  another EEA state if the person left  the  United  Kingdom
                  for an indefinite period ...

         (8)  A person is the "primary carer" of another person ("AP") if -

             (a)  a person is a direct relative or a legal guardian of  AP;
                  and

             (b)  either -

                  (i)  the person has primary responsibility for AP's  care;
                      or

                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility for AP's care  with
                      one other person who is not an exempt person.

         (9)  In paragraph ... (5)(c), if  the  role  of  primary  carer  is
             shared  with  another  person  in  accordance  with  paragraph
             (8)(b)(ii), the words 'the person' are to  be  read  as  'both
             primary carers' ..."

 9. As was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State during the hearing
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  onus  was  and  remains  on  an
    applicant to establish his or her right to a residence card.  In  other
    words, it was incumbent upon this claimant to  provide  evidence  which
    was capable of being accepted that he was indeed  a  primary  carer  as
    alleged and that he was thereby  entitled  to  a  derivative  right  to
    reside pursuant to this Regulation.  As he did not attend the  Tribunal
    (and accordingly was not available for cross-examination and there  was
    no way of testing his claim) and further did not provide evidence  even
    in the form of a witness statement, there was in the judgment  of  this
    Tribunal no proper basis upon which  absent  such  evidence  the  judge
    properly could have found that he had satisfied  the  burden  of  proof
    which was on him.  It follows that the decision will have to be remade.

10. Any applicant before this Tribunal is  under  a  duty  to  make  proper
    disclosure to the Tribunal and it now appears that  the  finding  which
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge made, that this claimant was one  of  the
    primary carers together with his wife, was not correct because  at  the
    relevant time he was not looking after his child at all.  This does not
    have a direct outcome  on  the  decision  because  in  the  absence  of
    evidence the claimant would be bound to lose in any event, but  it  now
    appears that even had  the  claimant  been  available  to  give  honest
    evidence to this Tribunal, there would have been no basis upon which he
    could now honestly claim that he was a primary carer of his  child.   I
    make this observation because I have been provided  with  the  extracts
    from the Secretary of State's file whereby it is evident that his wife,
    the mother of this child, has now been granted leave to remain  on  the
    basis of her exceptional circumstances which are  set  out  within  the
    Secretary of State's file as follows:

         "BASIS OF APPLICATION

         On  29  September  2017  you  made  a  human  rights  claim  in  an
         application for leave to remain in the UK  on  the  basis  of  your
         child ... and private life.   In  addition,  you  stated  you  have
         suffered domestic violence from your husband  to  include  physical
         and mental torture and rape.  You state you have reported  this  to
         the police, you left your husband and now reside with  friends  and
         family who are supporting you emotionally and financially.

         You state you have lived in the UK for almost  thirteen  years  and
         you and your family have developed strong emotional attachments and
         ties in the UK.  You state you have integrated into  the  community
         and have become rooted and settled in the UK.

         You state you have lost  contact  with  most  of  your  family  and
         friends in India and consider your only family to be in the UK.

         Based  on  the  applicants'  special  circumstances  they  will  be
         considered under:

             Ten-year parent route;

             Ten-year private life route;

             Exceptional circumstances."

11. I am told that the applicant's wife  has  now  been  granted  leave  to
    remain.

12. Accordingly, on the basis first that the claimant has not provided  any
    evidence in support of his claim to be entitled to a  derivative  right
    of residence and secondly because in any  event  it  appears  that  the
    facts are very far from what has been asserted within  the  grounds,  I
    have no hesitation  when  remaking  this  decision  in  dismissing  the
    claimant's appeal and I so find.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foulkes-Jones  as
containing a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  refusing
him a residence card is dismissed under the 2016 EEA Regulations

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 27 December 2018

