
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07081/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Teams via Field House     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th June 2021                  |On 13 July 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FARAN AL AZIZ
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None

Interpretation:  Mr N Mursalin in the Urdu language


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 26th October 1980.  He
       applied for an EEA family permit to come to the UK  as  an  extended
       family member of his sponsor and uncle, Asghar Hussain Chaudhry, who
       is a German citizen, under the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2016.
       The application was refused on 25th October 2019. His appeal against
       the decision was allowed on the papers by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Trevaskis in a determination promulgated on the 10th December 2020.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary  of  State  and  I
       found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law for the  reasons
       set out in my decision at Annex A to this decision.

    3. The matter came before me to remake the appeal. In light of the need
       to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19 and  with  regard
       to the overriding object set out in  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
       Rules this hearing took place via Teams, a format to  which  neither
       party  raised  objection.  There  were  no  significant  issues   of
       connectivity or audibility  during  the  hearing,  although  due  to
       internet problems the claimant was only able to join  by  telephone.
       His connection was lost at the point when  the  appeal  hearing  had
       just terminated but I was satisfied that by then he  had  understood
       my willingness to consider any further evidence with respect to  the
       sponsor's exercise of Treaty Rights, if submitted within 14 days, in
       my determination of the appeal. It was lawful for  the  claimant  to
       participate in these  proceedings  from  Pakistan  because  Pakistan
       raises no legal or diplomatic objection to this happening, and so it
       is permissible under the Hague Convention.

    4. I found in my error of law decision that the First-tier Tribunal did
       not err in law in finding that the claimant  was  dependent  on  his
       sponsor. The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
       claimant, supported with documentary  evidence,  that  he  had  been
       reliant for his basic needs on the sponsor who had  paid  his  rent,
       provided money for groceries, medical fees and school fees.  It  was
       accepted that the sponsor had substantial  financial  resources  and
       was in a position to  do  this.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  properly
       directed itself that it was irrelevant why this state of  dependency
       existed, so long as a true state of dependency existed. As there was
       no error of law in the findings of dependency I preserved paragraphs
       18 to 20 of the First-tier Tribunal.

    5. The outstanding question that must  be  answered  in  this  remaking
       appeal is whether the sponsor is residing in the  UK  in  accordance
       with EU Regulations and thus whether  12(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2016 is met.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    6. The evidence for the claimant was that at the time of application in
       2019 his uncle and sponsor, Mr Asghar  Hussain  Chowdhry,  lived  in
       Germany and had intended to travel to the UK to  set  up  a  grocery
       business in which he was intending to work when  he,  the  claimant,
       was granted entry clearance. This is  supported  by  the  affidavits
       before the entry clearance officer. The affidavit at page B31 of the
       respondent's bundle states: "I confirm that I intend  to  travel  to
       the United Kingdom in the company of the applicant within two  weeks
       of the issuance of the visa which I expect will  be  issued  in  two
       weeks." The sponsor's affidavit of 7th October  2020  found  in  the
       claimant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal gives  a  Pakistani
       address in Rawalpindi for the sponsor, and sets out that "I want  to
       start a grocery store business in the United  Kingdom  and  want  to
       shift my above nephew (the appellant) there, who can stay  and  look
       after my business. As soon as I get his approval I would move to  UK
       for a quick business set up for him."

    7. The sponsor has now provided an  updating  statement  which  asserts
       that he came to the UK prior to  31st  December  2020,  has  applied
       under the EU settlement scheme and intends to remain in the UK on  a
       long-term basis. In addition he has provided a licence to  occupy  a
       property in London dated 1st June 2020, a number of receipts for the
       period  September  to  November  2020,   an  acknowledgement  of  an
       application to remain in the UK under the EU  settlement  scheme  on
       1st June 2021 and a letter regarding  his  obtaining  pre-settlement
       under that scheme dated 10th June 2021.

    8. In answer to questions from Mr Clarke the  claimant  explained  that
       the sponsor is currently in the UK having come recently, and also on
       a couple of previous visits last year. He said that the sponsor  was
       not going to attend the  hearing  as  he  was  not  well,  had  gone
       somewhere and had sent his documents. The claimant did not know  how
       long the sponsor's visits to the UK had lasted. He said he  believed
       that he was working in the UK and has started a business. He said he
       did not understand why he was being asked about the details of  this
       business as his understanding of the last hearing was that he had to
       show simply that his sponsor was in the  UK,  and  he  had  provided
       evidence to show that this  was  the  case.  He  believes  that  his
       sponsor has medical insurance. His answers made it clear that he had
       not understood what evidence of the  sponsor  exercising  EU  Treaty
       rights, as referred to in the first direction of my decision of 28th
       April 2021, meant.

    9. Mr Clarke for the Secretary of State argued that  the  claimant  has
       not shown that Regulation 12(1)(a) of the  EEA  Regulations  is  met
       because he needs to show  that  the  sponsor  is  exercising  Treaty
       rights, for instance working, being self-employed or being  a  self-
       sufficient person with comprehensive sickness insurance for  himself
       and the claimant, and the documentary  evidence  provided  does  not
       show this and the claimant's  oral  evidence  with  respect  to  the
       sponsor's activities was simply too vague. To obtain  limited  leave
       under the EU Settlement Scheme there is  no  requirement  to  submit
       evidence of the exercise of  Treaty  rights  as  the  scheme  simply
       requires  presence  in  the  UK.  A  grant  of  leave   under   this
       discretionary scheme is not  therefore  an  acknowledgement  by  the
       Secretary of State that the sponsor is exercising Treaty  rights  in
       the UK. As a result, he submits, the appeal should be dismissed.

   10. The claimant appeared annoyed as he had felt, following the previous
       error of law hearing, that all that he needed to show was  that  the
       sponsor was present in the UK, and evidence of his  travel  had  now
       been provided. He argued that as  the  sponsor  was  within  the  "3
       month" period he did not need to comply with any conditions. He felt
       that what was required in terms of evidence  of  presence  had  been
       provided so he ought to be allowed to win the appeal as otherwise it
       would be unfair.

   11. In light of the claimant's contention that the  hearing  was  unfair
       because he had not understood the evidence needed and as he  clearly
       felt the Upper Tribunal was now raising a new matter, and  with  the
       agreement of Mr Clarke, I directed that the claimant had a period of
       14 days from today to email to myself and Mr Clarke  via  the  email
       addresses he had used to provide the other evidence any evidence  of
       his sponsor's work/self-employment/self-sufficiency  in  the  UK  or
       other exercise of Treaty rights. I directed  that  Mr  Clarke  would
       have 7 days after receipt of any evidence from the claimant to  make
       submissions on that evidence. I would  determine  the  appeal  after
       this time had elapsed  in  light  of  any  additional  evidence  and
       submissions by the parties and in the context of the totality of the
       evidence.

   12. As a result of my directions at the conclusion of the hearing, which
       gave the claimant an opportunity to submit evidence that the sponsor
       was exercising Treaty rights  the  claimant  submitted  two  further
       documents  by  email  dated  24th  June  2021:  a   certificate   of
       incorporation of AH Chaudhry Traders Ltd dated 23rd June  2021,  and
       an undated letter from this company confirming that the sponsor,  Mr
       Asghar Hussain Chaudhry had been  working  as  a  director  of  that
       company and was engaged in" various business activities".

   13. In response Mr Clarke submitted in written email  submissions  dated
       30th June 2021 that the documents did not show that the sponsor  was
       exercising Treaty rights in the UK. This was because the company had
       only been incorporated on 23rd June 2021 and so it was only possible
       for Mr Chaudhry to have been working as a director for  it  for  one
       day, and further the letter is signed on behalf of him and so is not
       independent evidence of any exercise of Treaty rights, and fails  to
       particularise what the business  activities  are  or  provide  other
       independent  evidence  of  them  such  as  invoices,   receipts   or
       contracts, and thus  fails  to  meet  the  tests  for  demonstrating
       genuine and effective employment in Raulin C-357/89 at paragraphs 21-
       30 and Jany v Staatssecretaris van Justite C-268/99 at paragraph 37.



Conclusions - Error of Law

   14. Regulation 12 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, which deals
       with the issuing of family permits, requires at Regulation  12(1)(a)
       that to issue a family  permit  to  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
       national that EEA national should either be residing in  the  UK  in
       accordance with the EEA Regulations or it must be  shown  that  they
       "will be travelling to the United Kingdom within six months  of  the
       date of the application and will be an EEA national residing in  the
       United Kingdom in accordance with these Regulations  on  arrival  in
       the United Kingdom".

   15. This application was made in October 2019 and there is  no  evidence
       that the sponsor travelled to the UK within 6 months of that date so
       my focus is whether the sponsor is currently residing in the  UK  in
       accordance with the EEA Regulations.

   16. The contention is that he is residing in the UK as a worker, working
       as a director of AH Chaudhry Traders Limited which  from  affidavits
       submitted by the sponsor with the application in 2019  and  in  2020
       would appear to have intended, at  that  time  at  least,  to  be  a
       grocery store. There is evidence which demonstrates that the sponsor
       Mr Chaudhry has been in the UK and has obtained limited leave  under
       the discretionary pre-settlement scheme, and I accept  that  he  has
       been periodically present, perhaps in the summer or autumn  of  2020
       and in 2021. However, from the totality of  the  evidence  submitted
       but I do not find that the sponsor has shown that he  is  exercising
       Treaty rights as a working as a director in the UK for the following
       reasons. As Mr Clarke has submitted all of  the  evidence  going  to
       this issue is extremely vague: the appellant was  able  to  tell  us
       nothing about it in his oral evidence. It is  not  even  clear  what
       type of business AH Chaudhry established on 23rd June 2021 operates,
       as opposed to his plans in 2019/2020. There is no  particularisation
       of any work done by Mr  Chaudhry  in  the  undated  letter  from  AH
       Chaudhry Traders Limited and no supporting  documentation  for  that
       business. The only document is the letter signed by someone  or  his
       behalf and so is not independent evidence, and the company was  only
       established one day prior to the letter being written.

   17. As a result I find that the claimant cannot show that  he  can  meet
       the requirements of  Regulation  12(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration  EEA
       Regulations 2016 as he has not shown on the balance of probabilities
       that the sponsor is exercising Treaty rights in the UK and so is not
       entitled to a family permit.

    Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
       appeal under the EEA Regulations.

    3. I remake the appeal by  dismissing  it  under  the  Immigration  EEA
       Regulations 2016.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  3rd July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
Annex A: Error of Law Decision

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 26th October 1980.  He
       applied for an EEA family permit to come to the UK  as  an  extended
       family member of his uncle, Asghar Hussain Chaudhry, who is a German
       citizen,  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)   Regulations   2016.   The
       application was refused on 25th October 2019. His appeal against the
       decision was allowed on the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Trevaskis in a determination promulgated on the 10th December 2020.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by  Judge
       of the First-tier Tribunal Martin on 25th January 2021 on the  basis
       that it was arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in  law  in
       finding the claimant entitled to an EEA family permit to come to the
       UK when his sponsor was residing in Germany.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. In light of the need to take  precautions
       against the spread of Covid-19 and with  regard  to  the  overriding
       object set out in the Upper Tribunal Procedure  Rules  this  hearing
       took place via Skype for Business, a format to which  neither  party
       raised objection. There were no significant issues  of  connectivity
       or audibility during the hearing, although  the  claimant  was  only
       able to join via audio as he did not have a camera on his phone.  It
       was lawful for the claimant to participate in these proceedings from
       Pakistan because Pakistan raises no legal or diplomatic objection to
       this happening, and so it is permissible under the Hague Convention.



Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The Secretary of State  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the  oral
       submissions of Mr Avery argues firstly that the First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in law because it failed to engage  with  the  fact  that  the
       claimant's sponsor lives in Germany and is not settled or exercising
       Treaty rights in the UK. It is argued that this is determinative  of
       the appeal.  This  is  because  under  Regulation  12(1)(a)  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 to  issue  a  family  permit  the
       sponsor  must  be  residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with   the
       Regulations or be travelling to do so within 6 months.  This  issue,
       even though not raised by the entry clearance  officer,  had  to  be
       satisfied for the appeal to be allowed under the EEA Regulations. Mr
       Avery argued that notwithstanding the evidence in the  bundle  which
       indicated that the sponsor did intend to travel to the UK  with  the
       claimant there needed to be a decision that he would be remaining in
       accordance with the EEA Regulations if he did this.

    5. Secondly,  it  is  argued  for  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
       conclusion that the claimant was dependent on the sponsor due to his
       claimed  inability  to  work  and  back  problems  was  inadequately
       reasoned as the sponsor says he will employ him in the  UK  when  he
       opens a business here, and so it looks as if the claimant is capable
       of work and will no longer be dependent on the sponsor as he will be
       working for him in the UK.

    6. The claimant issued no  formal  Rule  24  notice  but  in  an  email
       response to the hearing stated that his sponsor was currently unwell
       and residing in Pakistan and had been for the past two  months,  but
       that when he recovered he intended to go to the UK to sort  out  the
       claimant's status there. The claimant said  in  oral  argument  that
       there was nothing contesting whether the sponsor would travel to the
       UK and be a qualifying person in the refusal notice  and  there  was
       evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, in the  affidavits  of  the
       sponsor and his affidavit and  in  the  additional  information  and
       sponsor's details on the application form, which made it clear  that
       the sponsor intended to go  with  him  to  the  UK  to  establish  a
       business once he, the claimant, had entry clearance to travel too.

    7. I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by failing  to
       consider whether the claimant's sponsor was going to travel  to  and
       remain in the UK as a qualified person with him and make findings on
       this issue for the reasons I set out below. I set aside the decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  but  preserved  the
       findings with respect to dependency which, for the reasons I set out
       below, I did not find erred in law. I decided that the  appeal  will
       be remade in the Upper Tribunal at  the  first  available  date  via
       Skype for Business. The parties attention was drawn to the fact that
       the UK had now left the EU, and the transition period  had  elapsed,
       so the remaking would have to consider how the sponsor was now  able
       to re-enter the UK and become a  qualifying  person  under  the  EEA
       Regulations.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The First-tier Tribunal notes at paragraph 17 of the  decision  that
       the evidence of the claimant is that his sponsor lives  in  Germany,
       and wants to start a grocery business in the UK and to  appoint  the
       claimant to manage that business. The intentions of the sponsor with
       respect to travel to the UK and what he planned  to  do  if  he  did
       travel here are not dealt with at all in the decision  however.  The
       First-tier Tribunal failed  to  engage  with  the  evidence  in  the
       sponsor's affidavit  at  B31  of  the  respondent's  bundle  and  in
       application form at B27 in  the  sponsor's  details  and  additional
       information about the sponsor's intention to travel to the UK.

    9. I find that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
       consider the evidence and make findings on this issue as  to  decide
       the appeal this was necessary. Regulation 8(2)(b) of the Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations 2016 requires that the extended family  member  is
       accompanying the EEA national to  the  UK  or  has  joined  the  EEA
       national in the UK. Further Regulation 12 of the  Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations 2016, which deals with the issuing  of  family  permits,
       requires at Regulation 12(1)(a) that to issue a family permit to the
       family member of an EEA national that EEA national should either  be
       residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations or it must
       be shown that they "will be travelling to the United Kingdom  within
       six months of the date  of  the  application  and  will  be  an  EEA
       national residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
       Regulations on arrival in the United Kingdom".

   10. Nothing was said about this issue in the refusal notice  however  it
       was a necessary component of the Regulations on which  the  claimant
       relied and therefore the claimant had to show  that  he  could  meet
       these requirements on appeal for that appeal to be allowed under the
       EEA Regulations, and so  it  was  necessary  that  they  had  to  be
       addressed in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   11. I do not find, however, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in
       finding that the claimant was dependent on his sponsor.  The  First-
       tier Tribunal accepted the evidence of the claimant, supported  with
       documentary evidence, that he had been reliant for his  basic  needs
       on the sponsor who had paid his rent, provided money for  groceries,
       medical fees and school fees. It was accepted that the  sponsor  had
       substantial financial resources and was in a position  to  do  this.
       The  First-tier  Tribunal  properly  directed  itself  that  it  was
       irrelevant why this state of dependency existed, so long as  a  true
       state of dependency existed. As there is no  error  of  law  in  the
       finding of dependency I preserve the findings at paragraphs 18 to 20
       of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
       appeal under the EEA Regulations but preserve the findings that  the
       claimant is dependent on his sponsor at paragraphs 18 to 20  of  the
       decision.

    3. I adjourned the remaking hearing.

Directions:

    1.  The claimant may file an updating statement or affidavit  from  the
       sponsor, with any relevant supporting evidence, with respect to  any
       past time spent exercising EU Treaty rights in the UK; any preserved
       EU right to reside in this country; and/or future plans to travel to
       the UK to exercise EU Treaty rights explaining how this is  lawfully
       possible in light of the UK having left the EU.

    2. Any such statement must be filed with the Upper Tribunal and  served
       on the Secretary of State  within  28  days  of  the  date  of  this
       decision.

    3. The remaking hearing will take place via Skype for Business  at  the
       earliest available date.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  28th April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

