




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07601/2018 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2020                      |On 6 August 2020                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                               WASIM UL GHANI.
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national  of  Pakistan.  On  28  September  2018  he
    applied for a permanent residence card as a former family member of  an
    EEA National.  His application was refused  on  21  November  2018.  He
    appealed against this decision and his appeal was dismissed  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Brewer in a  decision  promulgated  on  10  October
    2019.

2.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Brien on 31 January 2020 but granted by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Frances on 18 March 2018.

3.   On 12 May 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  made  further  directions,
    having come to the view that in the light of the Corona Virus Pandemic,
    it would be appropriate to determine whether there had been an error of
    law on the papers. On 20 May 2020 the Appellant's solicitors  wrote  to
    the Respondent  asking  whether  it  would  be  possible  to  reach  an
    agreement between the parties in relation to the issues to  be  decided
    at the error of law hearing. They did not  receive  a  reply  from  the
    Respondent and, therefore, they made two further submissions which they
    sent to the Upper Tribunal and to the Respondent  on  1  June  2020.  I
    extend time for them to do so in the light of the restrictions imposed,
    as a result of the current pandemic.

4.   On 8 June 2020 the Respondent wrote  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
    Appellant's solicitors stating that she did not oppose the  Appellant's
    application for permission to appeal and inviting the Upper Tribunal to
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  re-hearing.  I  have
    extended time for the Respondent  to  reply  to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Canavan's directions in recognition of the difficulties faced  by  Home
    Office Presenting Officers at the start of the current pandemic.

5.   Meanwhile, it appears that the Appellant's further submissions had  not
    reached the Upper Tribunal file and on 30 June 2020  the  Listing  Team
    wrote to the Appellant's solicitors again. They replied on 6 July 2020,
    attaching the further submissions previously sent to the Upper Tribunal
    and giving details of the email sent on 1 June 2020.

6.   The Appellant opposed the error of  law  hearing  being  heard  on  the
    papers on the basis  that  an  oral  hearing  was  necessary  to  fully
    interrogate the facts and law on  which  he  relied.  However,  in  her
    directions Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan explicitly invited the  parties
    to seek to reach an agreement and the Respondent has  now  stated  that
    she does not oppose the grounds  on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
    sought. Therefore, there are no issues which could be  explored  at  an
    oral error of law hearing.

7.   I have read and taken into account the  detailed  submissions  made  in
    the Appellant's submissions, dated 31 May 2020  and  agree  that  these
    will need to be explored at an oral hearing but in  the  light  of  the
    concessions made by the  Respondent  in  relation  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal, I find that the appropriate venue for such  a  hearing  is  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Therefore, I have proceeded to deal with the error
    of law issue on the papers, so that there can be a  swift  remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

8.   I have taken into account the detailed grounds of appeal drafted by  Mr
    Mustafa and dated 22 October 2019 and  also  his  further  submissions,
    dated 31 May 2020. For the reasons given in these documents, which  are
    not opposed by the  Respondent,  I  agree  with  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Frances that First-tier Tribunal Judge Brewer erred in  his  assessment
    of whether the Appellant was a qualified person for the  required  five
    year period.

9.   Therefore, I find that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brewer's  decision
    contained material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Brewer's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to be heard de novo  by  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judges Brewer and O'Brien.

Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 30 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

