
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07835/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 4 March 2019                      |On 5 April 2019                         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                            Ekene Anthony Iyiegbu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene, Counsel instructed by Direct Public
Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Nigeria against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State on 5 November 2017 to refuse his application  for  a
    residence card as a former family member of an EEA national.

 2. The decision is unsatisfactory in many ways.  The  appellant  may  well
    not be entitled to a residence card.  It is not clear if he is in  fact
    the former family member of the EEA national who has retained rights of
    residence and, even if he has, he has created a difficulty for  himself
    by reason of his being convicted of the offence of supplying controlled
    drugs of class A and sentenced to sixteen months' imprisonment.

 3. There was a dispute about whether the appellant was in fact married  to
    an EEA national.  This has  been  resolved  in  his  favour  apparently
    because  the  marriage  was  accepted  for  the  purposes  of   divorce
    proceedings.  The judge says at paragraph 18:

         "However, as the marriage certificate was accepted by the UK courts
         for the purposes of the  divorce  proceedings,  I  am  prepared  to
         accept on the balance of probabilities  that  this  was  a  genuine
         marriage and therefore he can meet the requirements of Regulation 7
         of the EEA Regulations."

 4. I do not  understand  that  point.  The  fact  that  the  marriage  was
    recognised for the purpose of  divorce  proceedings  where  presumably,
    neither party to the marriage wanted to deny  it,  does  not  establish
    that the parties to the marriage were "spouses" for the purposes of the
    Regulations where parties to a marriage of convenience are excluded.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that the appellant  had
    been exercising treaty rights.  He said at paragraph 19:

         "The issue in this case is firstly as to whether he has retained  a
         right of residence under Regulation  10  of  the  EEA  Regulations.
         There is an issue as to whether his ex-wife was  exercising  Treaty
         Rights at the time of the divorce proceedings.  The  appellant  has
         had difficulties in obtaining all the relevant documents  regarding
         his ex-wife's employment record, and has an outstanding query as to
         her HMRC records.  There are pay slips of May and June 2016,  which
         appear to follow those last issued in 2014, which would suggest  on
         the balance of probabilities that she was still  exercising  Treaty
         Rights.  Bearing in mind that the respondent had concluded that the
         previous employment records had not been genuine when they  refused
         the previous application in October 2013 as set out in paragraph 22
         of the refusal letter), I am not persuaded that she was  exercising
         Treaty Rights on the balance of probabilities."

 6. This is a startling finding.   It  is  not  clear  precisely  what  was
    established on the previous occasion.  The Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    relating to that application has not been produced.  Further it is  not
    clear what judicial consideration was given to that  finding.   In  any
    event it does not follow that because a person has  lied  once  he  has
    lied again.  The only reason given by the judge  in  paragraph  19  for
    disbelieving evidence that he otherwise seemed  to  find  credible  was
    that "the respondent has concluded that the previous employment records
    had not been genuine".  It is not even  a  case  where  the  judge  has
    concluded the previous records were not genuine.  That is  an  entirely
    unsatisfactory reason and should not be relied upon.

 7. Further the First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  reasoned  decision  on  the
    requirements  of  Regulation  27(5)(c)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 that "the personal conduct of a  person
    must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society, ...".  This is a
    prerequisite of any lawful decision to remove a person who can rely  on
    EEA rights and no explanation has been given for the  judge's  apparent
    finding that the threat exists here.  Given that the conviction was now
    some time ago and is as far as  I  know  an  isolated  example  of  bad
    character and the sentencing judge and indeed a close relative  of  the
    appellant found the conduct surprising it is by  no  means  a  foregone
    conclusion that the appellant is a present threat.

 8. It follows therefore that on  the  assumption  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled  to  EEA  residence  rights  but   for   his   behaviour   the
    determination is flawed because the reasons are unlawful.

 9. I have reflected carefully on the complaint that the Tribunal erred  by
    not agreeing to adjourn for an Amos direction.  This  is  a  very  fine
    point.  The matter has been allowed to fester for some time but  it  is
    undesirable that cases are not decided on the best  available  evidence
    and on balance I am persuaded that the judge should have adjourned  and
    made  an  Amos  direction  if  appropriate.   If  there  is  a  further
    application for an Amos direction this is something to bear in mind but
    the fact that there is still further time  lapsed  means  that  thought
    must be given to the appropriate decision.

10. Mr Whitwell accepted there were faults in the  decision.   He  did  his
    best to say that they were immaterial and I have considered what he had
    to say but I am not persuaded.  There is  little  about  this  decision
    that shows the right approach and I set it aside in its entirety.   The
    decision will be made again in the First-tier Tribunal and no  findings
    of fact are preserved.

    Decision

11. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its  decision  and  I
    direct that the appeal be determined again in the First-tier Tribunal.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 3 April 2019                   |







