
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07417/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 17 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              mrs Saroj Kumari
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khurram, Solicitor of Khurram & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national  of  India,  date  of  birth  21  July  1952,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision of 18 May 2016 to  refuse  a
    residence card.  The appeal against that decision  came  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge P J Holmes (the Judge) who  on  12  September  2017
    dismissed the appeal under  the  2006  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).

2.   The position was that the Appellant and her Sponsor son had made  plans
    to go to work in the Republic of Ireland.  It  was  intended  that  the
    family would remove to the Republic of Ireland.  At the  outset  it  is
    clear that the  intended  removal  of  the  family  had  commenced  but
    ultimately the position was that the children of  the  family  did  not
    take up, despite it being planned, life in Ireland.  Nor it  seems  did
    the Sponsor's wife take up employment in Ireland.  The Sponsor took the
    view or through the family took the view that  the  Appellant  did  not
    enjoy or wish to make a life in the Republic.  The  question  therefore
    arose whether or not there was the  entitlement  to  a  residence  card
    either by reference to the  2006  Regulations  or  as  they  should  be
    understood in the light of the case of O and B v the Netherlands  EUEJC
    C-456/12.  The arguments largely centred on whether or not the exercise
    that had been intended and partly undertaken, because it  was  accepted
    that  the  periods  of  time  had  been  sufficient  to  establish   an
    entitlement  to  the  residence  card  under  the  provisions  of   the
    Regulations.

3.   Mr Khurram who appeared  before  the  Judge  has  provided  a  skeleton
    argument essentially presenting his case and arguing that  the  Judge's
    real error when he did not make any adverse findings on credibility, or
    criticise the generality of the evidence  given  for  the  purposes  of
    resolving the issues in the appeal, had  failed to concentrate  on  the
    correct issue, had become fixed upon the issue of whether  or  not  the
    issue of permanent residence or principal residence  had  been  decided
    correctly and failed in the light of that issue to properly  assess  in
    the round, as O and  B  indicated,  the  evidence  that  needed  to  be
    interpreted to decide whether or not the issue of transference  of  the
    parties' lives to another EEA state had actually occurred.

4.   The Judge concluded at paragraph 25 of the decision:

         "I have considered what 'the centre of P's life'  might  be  for  a
         worker who is also a family man.  I  consider  that  the  essential
         features of such  a  person's  life  would  naturally  include  his
         family, his work and his  home.   I  take  into  account  that  the
         Sponsor was a worker in Ireland continuously  for  just  over  five
         months and also the fact that he gave up employment with McDonald's
         in mid-July 2015 which is  before  he  became  aware  of  an  issue
         concerning his mother; and that  his  employment  with  HCL  was  a
         contract for a six month fixed term  that  was  due  to  expire  in
         November 2015.  I take into account that when he went  to  Ireland,
         his family remained behind in the family home which as far as I  am
         informed they still to this day occupy, while he rented a furnished
         flat in Dublin.  I find that that flat never became  the  Sponsor's
         principal residence.  The children never went to school in  Dublin,
         and there is no evidence that the Sponsor's wife ever took  up  the
         employment there, that she had  made  enquiries  about.   Upon  the
         evidence before me I am not satisfied on a balance of probabilities
         that the conditions stated  in  Regulation  9(2)(c)  (of  the  2006
         Regulations) was ever met."


5.   For these reasons he continued at paragraph 26:


         "As at the date of appeal I am not satisfied that the Sponsor is  a
         qualified  person  for  the  purposes  of  the  2006   Regulations.
         Consequently the Appellant has not shown that she  is  entitled  to
         the issue of a residence card under Regulation 17."

6.   Having considered carefully Mr Khurram's argument it seemed to me  that
    the Judge had plainly got the right Regulation in mind, applied  it  in
    the light of the evidence which he heard, assessed and reached the view
    that he did.  On the face of it I might not have reached the same  view
    but that is not a basis to interfere with this decision.  It is only if
    there is a demonstrable error of law. It did not seem to me that  there
    was such an error which made any material difference to the outcome.  I
    conclude, whilst another Tribunal might well have reached  a  different
    decision that does not demonstrate an error of law.  I  concluded  that
    the Judge did what was required  of  him  and  therefore  it  would  be
    inappropriate to interfere with that decision.


DECISION

7.   The appeal is dismissed.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity direction was previously made.

Signed                                  Date 7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 7 December 2008
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


P.S. The promulgation of this decision has been  delayed  because  the  case
    file was miss-located.

