
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/07326/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 June 2019                         | On 25 June 2019                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR Farhad Ali shaiwe
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Newland
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.  However, for the sake of clarity, we shall use the  titles
    by which the parties were known before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with
    the Secretary of State referred to as "the respondent" and Mr Shaiwe as
    "the appellant".

    The First-Tier Tribunal decision

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal before Judge Fowell (the 'FTT') promulgated  on  11
    April 2019.   The  FTT  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 26 October 2018, refusing his application  for
    a permanent residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016
    (the 'regulations') as the spouse  of  a  British  national,  Agnieszka
    Lucjan, (the 'sponsor'),  who  asserts  that  she  retains  her  Polish
    nationality, which was not lost by virtue of her  naturalisation  as  a
    British citizen in March 2014.

 3. By way of chronology, Mr Clark accepts that the sponsor was  exercising
    her EU rights as a worker in the United Kingdom from 4 April 2009 until
    3 April 2014, during which time she married the appellant on  23  March
    2012.

 4. Importantly, the  FTT  identified  the  narrowness  of  the  issues  in
    paragraph [4] of her decision, as follows:

         "4.  This appeal came before me with  witness  statements  from  Mr
             Shaiwe and Mrs Lucjan, and a  bundle  containing  her  expired
             Polish ID card and a copy of her  British  passport.   It  was
             common ground that the only issue was whether or not  she  had
             retained  her  Polish  nationality.   That  could  have   been
             demonstrated by renewing her ID card or Polish  passport,  but
             nothing of that sort had been done.  It was not necessary  for
             her to show that she had in fact got such a  document,  merely
             that she had not lost the legal right to acquire it, and since
             the appeal turned on this point - a point which  ought  to  be
             readily ascertainable - I put the case back in the list for Mr
             Johal  [the   appellant's   representative]   to   make   some
             enquiries."

 5. The sole issue that the FTT was  asked  to  consider  was  whether  the
    sponsor's  Polish  nationality  had  been  lost,  by  virtue   of   her
    naturalisation as a British citizen.  The FFT found that the  sponsor's
    Polish citizenship had not been lost.  In doing so, the FTT referred to
    evidence, the admission of which was not challenged by  the  respondent
    at the hearing, from the website of the  Polish  Embassy,  recorded  at
    paragraph [5] of the FTT decision:

         "5.  ...on the website of the Polish  Embassy,  under  the  heading
             'Consular  Information  and  Citizenship',  it   states   that
             according to the  Constitution  a  person  cannot  lose  their
             Polish citizenship except at their own request, a request that
             has to be approved by the  President  of  the  country.   This
             information had been shared with Mr Tasnim [the FTT Presenting
             Officer] before we resumed and she had been  able  to  confirm
             that this information was indeed provided on the website."

 6. The FTT concluded at paragraph [9] of her decision:

         "9.  Since this is the only issue, it follows that I simply have to
             decide on the balance of  probabilities  whether  or  not  Mrs
             Lucjan has retained  her  Polish  nationality.   The  evidence
             provided was indeed very last-minute, but there is no  dispute
             as to the information provided by the Embassy and it seems  to
             me most unlikely that they would get  this  wrong.   The  Home
             Office's own guidance directs applicants to check the position
             with their Embassy and there is no obvious reason to obtain  a
             letter from them to confirm what is in the public  domain.   I
             therefore accept that Mrs Lucjan retains her  EEA  nationality
             and so the appeal is allowed."

     The grounds of appeal

 7. The respondent's grounds  of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  raised  wider
    issues.  The first ground is that the FTT erred in assessing the Polish
    Embassy website evidence  as  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  sponsor
    retained her Polish citizenship. It is that bare assertion  alone  that
    is contained within the  grounds,  without  further  explanation.   The
    second ground is that:

         "The FTT has further erred in assessing that  the  appellant  meets
         the requirements of  the  Regulations  for  a  permanent  right  of
         residence when it is clear that  in  addition  to  the  requirement
         outlined above, the appellant needed to demonstrate the spouse  had
         been a qualified person for the precedent 5 year period.   The  FTT
         has not given any consideration to this issue in the determination,
         and this is clearly material as both  conditions  (nationality  and
         being a qualified person) must be fulfilled."

     Clarification of issues at the Upper Tribunal hearing

 8. We concluded  that  Judge  Scott-Baker,  as  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, when granting permission to appeal to this Tribunal on 21 May
    2019, did not seek to limit the scope of the appeal.  We did not accept
    Mr Kannangara's submission that in commenting  on  the  merits  of  the
    first ground, that Judge Scott-Baker was excluding that as a ground  of
    appeal.  Had she intended to grant permission on only limited  grounds,
    she would have said so in the grant of permission.

 9. On seeking clarification from Mr Clark on the second ground  of  appeal
    and the basis for the  respondent  disputed  that  the  sponsor  was  a
    'qualified person' for  the  5  years  prior  to  the  application  for
    permanent residence, he asserted that there was not sufficient evidence
    that the sponsor was present in the United Kingdom (the 'UK') after her
    naturalisation as a British citizen, so that  the  permanent  residence
    that she had acquired during the period from 4 April 2009 until 3 April
    2014, may have been lost by virtue of the  sponsor's  possible  absence
    from the UK from 3 April 2014 until 2016.

    Conclusion on the assertion of loss of permanent residence (the  second
    ground of appeal)

10. We reject the assertion that the FTT  erred  in  law,  for  3  reasons.
    First, we do not accept that the issue of permanent residence  was  one
    which was raised in the respondent's refusal  decision  of  26  October
    2018.  In arguing this point, Mr Clark referred, at page  [67]  of  our
    bundle, to a paragraph of the refusal decision which recited a list  of
    required evidence, including that  as  the  family  member  of  a  dual
    British national who is an EEA national,  the  appellant  must  provide
    evidence that the dual British-EEA national is a qualified person or  a
    person with a right of permanent residence in the UK immediately before
    they became  British;  and  the  sponsor  must  continue  to  meet  the
    definition of a  qualified  person  who  has  not  lost  the  right  of
    permanent residence  through  absence  from  the  United  Kingdom;  and
    retained their original EEA nationality.  Mr Clark argued that  it  was
    implicit in the passage that the refusal decision had raised this as an
    issue.  We do not accept that submission, which treats that passage  in
    isolation and does not take into account  the  next  paragraph  in  the
    refusal decision, which states that  the  appellant  has  not  provided
    adequate evidence that the sponsor  has  retained  their  original  EEA
    nationality.   Having  recited  a  general  list  of  requirements  and
    identified the issue of concern, ie. retained EEA nationality, there is
    no reference in the refusal decision to the loss of permanent residence
    though absence from the UK.

11. Second, Mr Clark's assertion that the respondent's decision was  based,
    in part, on a loss of permanent residence through absence from  the  UK
    between 2014 and 2016, was contradicted in a passage on the  same  page
    of the refusal decision, where it says:

         "We have considered the other documentary  evidence  provided  with
         your application and accept that your sponsor has  been  exercising
         treaty rights for a period of five years. However in order for your
         application to be successful, you must provide adequate evidence to
         show that your sponsor has retained their original EEA nationality.
          Your application has been refused for this reason.".

12. The refusal decision was dated 26 October 2018. Assuming that the five-
    year period referred to relates to the period immediately preceding the
    letter, acceptance that the sponsor was exercising treaty rights in the
    five-year period between 2013 and October 2018 is not  consistent  with
    Mr Clark's assertion that the sponsor  may  have  been  absent  in  the
    period from April 2014 to 2016.  Mr Clark's submission  now  made  that
    the five years related to an earlier period was not  specified  in  the
    refusal decision, and is not consistent with clear wording which states
    that the appellant's application was refused  for  'this  reason',  ie,
    retention of EEA nationality.

13. Third, and most importantly, this was simply not raised as a live issue
    before the FTT and bearing in mind that we are an  appellate  Tribunal,
    the FTT cannot be said to have erred in law on an issue  that  she  was
    never asked to consider.

    Conclusion on the ground of  retained  Polish  nationality  (the  first
    ground of appeal)

14. As we have already noted, this ground was merely a bare assertion  that
    the FTT had erred in treating the Polish Embassy  website  evidence  as
    sufficient to find retention of Polish nationality.   The  ground  does
    not explain why this is an error of law. If the respondent asserts that
    a party has lost their nationality, it is for the respondent to explain
    the basis of that assertion, with any  relevant  evidence,  beyond  the
    bare assertion.

15. More important was the FTT's admission of website evidence, without any
    dispute as to its admission, in support of the sponsor's  retention  of
    Polish nationality.  The ground merely suggests that such evidence  was
    insufficient.  We conclude that the FTT applied the correct standard of
    proof, in concluding at paragraph [9] of  her  decision  that  "on  the
    balance  of  probabilities"  the  sponsor  had  retained   her   Polish
    nationality.  She  found  it  "most  unlikely  that  they  [the  Polish
    Embassy] would get this wrong."   The  FTT's  conclusion  discloses  no
    error of law, in treating that evidence as  sufficient.   The  contrary
    assertion  was  no  more  than  that,  a  bare  assertion,  without  an
    explanation for what the error of law is said to be.  The  FTT  applied
    the appropriate standard of proof and there is no error of law  in  the
    FTT's decision.

    Postscript

16. Although not referred to either in the refusal decision or at  the  FTT
    stage of this  appeal,  the  issue  of  derivative  rights  leading  to
    permanent residence in the  context  of  the  case  of  Lounes  v  SSHD
    (Article 21 TEEU - Directive 2004/38/EC) Case C-165/16 may be an aspect
    that requires further consideration.  The point was not raised  in  the
    decision letter or before  the  FtT.    At  paragraph  [62],  the  CJEU
    stated:

         "... Directive 2004/38 must be interpreted as meaning  that,  in  a
         situation in which a `Union citizen (i) has exercised  his  freedom
         of movement by moving to and residing in a Member State other  than
         that of which he is a national, under Article 7(1) or Article 16(1)
         of that directive, (ii) has then acquired the nationality  of  that
         Member State, while also retaining his nationality of  origin,  and
         (iii) several years later, has  married  a  third-country  national
         with whom he continues to reside in that Member State, that  third-
         country national does not have a derived right of residence in  the
         Member State in question on the basis of  Directive  2004/38.   The
         third-country national is however eligible for a derived  right  of
         residence under Article 21(1) TFEU, on conditions which must not be
         stricter than those provided by Directive 2004/38 for the grant  of
         such a right to a third-country national who is a family member  of
         a Union citizen who has exercised his right of freedom of  movement
         by settling in a Member State other than the Member State of  which
         he is a national."

17. We should emphasise that this does not form part  of  our  reasons  for
    rejecting the respondent's appeal,  and  is  added  merely  by  way  of
    assisting the parties when they consider the wider legal  picture,  for
    future reference. We express no view on the applicability of Lounes  to
    the appellant's circumstances, and as it did  not  form  part  of  this
    appeal, there is no need for us to do so.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  of  law,
such that the decision must be set aside.  The Secretary of  State's  appeal
is dismissed.

Signed                                       Date         21 June 2019

J Keith

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
