
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA 07514 2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2019                            |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Jasper [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of  India.   He  is  married  to  an  EEA
       national.  On 16 June 2016  he  was  refused  a  residence  card  as
       confirmation of his claimed right to reside in the  United  Kingdom.
       He had previously been granted a residence card but that expired  in
       December 2015.

    2. The difficulty with this case is that the evidence he provided about
       his wife's employment showed that she had been a jobseeker for  more
       than twelve  months.   The  Secretary  of  State  decided  that  the
       appellant's wife was not exercising treaty rights and therefore that
       the appellant did not have a consequential right of residence.   The
       First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal against that  decision  but
       permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  who
       found it arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  misdirected
       himself.

    3.  I  have  found  the  judge's  determination  and  reasons   to   be
       particularly clear.  He explained as follows: "

  12.         When the appellant made his first application for a Residence
  Card his wife was working and evidence of this was provided to  the  Home
  Office.  Unfortunately after a few years she began to suffer from  mental
  health issues and was unable to work full-time.  For a while she was able
  to work a few hours but when depression became worse she  was  unable  to
  work.  As a result of  her  being  considered  temporarily  incapable  of
  working by the DWP in their assessment she received benefits in the  form
  of employment support and allowance.
  13.         The sponsor's GP has confirmed in a short  letter,  dated  28
  November 2017, that she  has  been  on  treatment  for  depression  since
  November 2012.  The treatment is still continuing and as a result of this
  she is experiencing mood swings and anxiety due to which she is unable to
  work."

    4. The judge then said at paragraph 21:"

  21.         The witness statement of the appellant and also that  of  his
  wife, the EEA national, refer to her depression and mental health  issues
  being a temporary impairment to her working.  They  refer  to  her  still
  being a jobseeker.  However in his  oral  evidence  today  the  Appellant
  confirmed that his wife last worked in 2010 or 2011.  At  that  time  she
  was working part-time as a cleaner for a company.  I find and accept that
  the evidence that the appellant has given today is credible.

  22.         The situation therefore is that the EEA national has not been
  working for the past 7-8 years and there has been no  evidence  that  she
  has been a genuine jobseeker.  She has not been able to  show  she  is  a
  qualified person pursuant to Regulation 6 of the 2006  Regulations.   Her
  inability to work is not temporary and the passage of 7-8 years in  which
  she has not worked shows that this is a permanent situation, or at  least
  has been permanent for this period."

    5. The judge dismissed the appeal.

    6. The decision complained of was made as long ago as 13 June 2016  and
       was made, appropriately, under the  Immigration  (European  Economic
       Area) Regulations 2006 and particularly Regulation  15(1)(b).   This
       provides for the acquisition of a permanent right  of  residence  by
       the family member of an EEA national "who has resided in the  United
       Kingdom with the EEA national in accordance with  these  Regulations
       for a continuous period of five years".  It was not doubted that the
       appellant's wife resided with the EEA national but not accepted that
       she had resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the
       Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

    7. The difficulty for the Secretary of  State  in  this  case  is  that
       Regulation  5(7)(b)  provides  that,  subject   to   certain   other
       Regulations, a period of  inactivity  due  to  illness  or  accident
       "shall be treated as periods of activity as  a  worker".   The  only
       relevant qualification is at paragraph 6(2) which  provides  that  a
       person "no longer working shall not cease to be treated as a worker"
       if he is "(a) temporarily unable to work as a result of  an  illness
       or accident".

    8.  This  regulation  was  considered  in  FMB  (EEA  Reg   6(2)(a)   -
       "temporarily unable to work") Uganda [2010] UKUT 447 (IAC) which led
       to the less than  startling  judicial  headnote  that  "A  state  of
       affairs is 'temporary' if it is not permanent".  The point is  that,
       for the purposes of  the  Regulation,  a  very  long  break  is  not
       necessarily a permanent break.  A very long break is not the same as
       a permanent break and a break that is not permanent is temporary.

    9. Mr Melvin argued that the First-tier Tribunal had made a finding  of
       fact and the finding determined the appeal.  I agree. That  is  what
       happened but that I am satisfied that the finding  of  fact  is  not
       lawful.  There is nothing in the decision that suggests to  me  that
       the First-tier Tribunal considered the possibility of the long break
       being a temporary break.  It follows that I set aside the First-tier
       Tribunal's decision.

   10. The appellant was found to be credible by the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       He said  unequivocally  that  his  wife  suffers  from  a  temporary
       illness.   He  supported  that  contention  with  reference  to  her
       conduct. She was presently employed on a zero-hours  contract.   She
       was not doing any work and was not required to  do  any  work  under
       that contract but he submitted that having the  contract  was  clear
       evidence of an intention or willingness to work.  More significantly
       she was on benefits.  They were benefits  appropriate  for  somebody
       who was temporarily unable to  work.   She  had  at  times  received
       Employment Support Allowance which is a payment made to  people  who
       are employed but not earning very much money rather than someone who
       was out of work.  Further she was not receiving benefits appropriate
       to someone who was not going to work again.  Her benefits were  paid
       on the basis that she was temporarily unavailable for work.

   11. It is by no means impossible for different departments of government
       to have different definitions of  "temporary"  but  there  is  clear
       evidence here that this appellant's wife is not  permanently  unable
       to work and has not given up the intention of working.  I  am  quite
       satisfied that this appeal ought to have been allowed.

   12. Further I think it is at  least  possible  that  the  appellant  has
       established a right to be in the United Kingdom because his wife has
       established a right to be here by reason of exercising treaty rights
       for more than five years.  That is an additional element of the case
       that both parties might need to think about.  My reason for allowing
       the appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  misdirected  itself  and
       the credible evidence supports a different conclusion.  I set  aside
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I substitute a  decision
       allowing the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

   13. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law. I set aside its decision and I
       substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 April 2019                  |



