
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07546/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th January 2019                 |On 20th February 2019                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                             mr Shafayhat Anwar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Hossain, Solicitor of City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  seeking  to  make   an
    application under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  for  an  EEA
    residence card as an extended family member of an EEA national,  namely
    the sponsor.  The application was refused  by  a  decision  dated  24th
    December 2015.

2.   The appellant appealed against that decision.  Initially, by reason  of
    the decision in Sala, the First-tier Tribunal was not  able  to  accept
    jurisdiction but that position changed.  Thus it was  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal became able to deal with such  applications  and  on  6th
    November 2018 the appeal came for hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Watson.

3.   At the hearing an application was made for an adjournment on the  basis
    that the sponsor was unwell and unable to  attend.   In  the  event  an
    adjournment was not granted and the case proceeded.   The  Judge  in  a
    detailed determination found the  evidence  of  relationship  with  the
    sponsor  to  be  unsatisfactory  and  that  the  evidence  relating  to
    dependency  also  unsatisfactory.   Accordingly  the  application   was
    dismissed.

4.   The appellant  seeks  to  challenge  that  decision  on  the  basis  of
    unfairness that an adjournment ought to have been granted in order  for
    his key witness to be able to attend.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was granted on that matter.  It  is  this  matter  which
    comes before me to determine the issue.

5.   The Judge records the application for an adjournment at paragraph 3  of
    the determination in this way:-

         "The sponsor did not attend.  The appellant's representative stated
         that the sponsor was suffering from diarrhoea  and  was  unable  to
         attend.  He made an application for an adjournment.  I offered more
         time for the sponsor to be contacted and for medical evidence to be
         produced but the respondent did not wish for the  case  to  be  put
         back to the afternoon and I refused the application  for  a  longer
         adjournment and proceeded to hear the case.  I decided that further
         delay was not in the interests of justice and that offering further
         time on the day to allow the sponsor to attend or  produce  medical
         evidence for his non-appearance was appropriate  and  proportionate
         in  the  circumstances  and  in  accordance  with  the   overriding
         objective Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules."

6.   Mr Hossain in his submissions relies upon the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

7.   The decision highlights that the  Tribunal  should  act  fairly  rather
    than reasonably.

8.   That was a case in which the appellant did not  appear  rather  than  a
    witness.  It was made clear that the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 should be construed and applied by reference  to
    the overriding objective enshrined in Rule 4, which provides:-

         "The  overriding  objective  of  these  Rules  is  to  secure  that
         proceedings before the Tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly  and
         efficiently as possible; and where appropriate that members of  the
         Tribunal have responsibility for ensuring this, in the interests of
         the parties to the proceedings and in the wider public interest."

9.   The Tribunal  went  on  to  indicate  where  a  party  applies  for  an
    adjournment of the hearing, the Tribunal is obliged, in every case,  to
    consider whether the appeal can be "justly determined"  in  the  moving
    party's absence.  The Tribunal  went  on  in  paragraph  5  to  say  as
    follows:-

         "This  means  that  in  principle  there  may  be  cases  where  an
         adjournment should be ordered notwithstanding that the moving party
         has failed to demonstrate  good  reason  for  this  course.   As  a
         general rule, good reason will have to be demonstrated in order  to
         secure  an  adjournment.   There  are  strong  practical  and  case
         management reasons  for  this,  particularly  in  the  contemporary
         litigation culture with its emphasis on efficiency and  expedition.
         However, these considerations, unquestionably important though they
         are, must be tempered and  applied  with  the  recognition  that  a
         fundamental common law right, namely the right to every litigant to
         a fair hearing, is engaged."

10.  The Tribunal went on in paragraph 6 to say as follows:-

         "In  cases  where  the  Tribunal  considers  that  an   adjournment
         application is  based  on  spurious  or  frivolous  grounds  or  is
         vexatious, the requirement of demonstrating good reason will not be
         satisfied.  However, this will not be determinative of the question
         of whether refusing an adjournment  request  would  compromise  the
         right to a fair hearing of the  party  concerned.   In  some  cases
         adjournment  applications  based   on   particularly   trivial   or
         unmeritorious grounds may give  rise  to  an  assessment  that  the
         process of the Tribunal is being  misused  and  will  result  in  a
         refusal.  Tribunals should be very slow to conclude that the  party
         concerned has waived its right to a fair hearing  or  any  discrete
         aspect thereof.  Where any suggestion of this kind arises, it  will
         be preferable to  evaluate  the  conduct  of  the  party  concerned
         through the lens  of  abuse  of  process  and  it  will  always  be
         necessary to give effect to both parties' right to a fair hearing."

11.  The  Tribunal  went  on  to  recognise  the  pressure  and  demands  of
    workloads  and  time  constraints   but   indicated   "in   determining
    applications for adjournments, Judges will always be guided by focusing
    on the overarching criterion enshrined  in  the  overriding  objective,
    which is that of fairness".

12.  It seems to me that this  matter  has  two  overriding  concerns.   The
    first is whether the Judge acted fairly in refusing the adjournment and
    secondly whether there is a lack  of  fairness  or  perceived  fairness
    resulting therefrom.

13.  It is important for the Judge to bear in mind the need to progress  the
    appeal particularly as it had been waiting for  so  many  years  to  be
    heard.  No doubt there would have been a significant delay from listing
    to hearing in any event.

14.  The Judge did not dismiss the application out of hand but offered  more
    time for the sponsor to be contacted and for  medical  evidence  to  be
    produced. The simple statement that on  the  morning  the  sponsor  was
    suffering from diarrhoea gives little indication as  to  the  state  of
    health generally of the sponsor.  It is not clear for  example  whether
    he had been unwell for some time or whether this was an affliction that
    had suddenly come upon him.  If the latter  it  may  be  reasonable  to
    consider whether that condition would have improved in  the  course  of
    the day.  There has been no further clarification as to the  health  of
    the sponsor in support of this appeal.  Indeed I note that the  sponsor
    attended with the appellant at the hearing before  me.   I  invited  Mr
    Hossein to clarify what had been the overall problem with the sponsor's
    health at the time but received little clarification from  my  question
    other than that diarrhoea was enough and that it was not reasonable  to
    expect a medical certificate to be produced for that ailment.   I  find
    such to be singularly unhelpful in the context of this appeal.  It  was
    clear that the Judge was motivated to try and find out more  about  the
    problem and if possible to see whether the sponsor could attend in  the
    afternoon.

15.  For my part I  find  nothing  wrong  with  that  approach.   The  Judge
    clearly had taken the matter seriously and wanted  further  information
    from the sponsor concerning the difficulty.

16.  For whatever reason the representative did not wish for the case to  be
    put back to the afternoon.  It is  not  entirely  clear  why.   In  the
    event, given that the matter was not further clarified nor the offer to
    do so taken up, it is entirely understandable why the  Judge  proceeded
    to hear the case.  There needs to be a balance between the interests of
    the appellant and the interests of justice to get a timely  hearing  of
    the issue.  I find no criticism of the Judge nor any unfairness in  the
    Judge's approach.

17.  However there is a wider  consideration,  as  was  made  clear  in  the
    decision of Nwaigwe, namely the overall fairness of  procedures  and/or
    the perceived fairness.

18.  In terms of relationship with the sponsor the Judge found the  evidence
    relating to that to be wholly unsatisfactory.  The sponsor is variously
    described as nephew, cousin and  distant  cousin  and  that  there  are
    various nationality certificates largely unexplained.

19.  The Judge at paragraph 21 said as follows:-

         "I find that  the  appellant  has  not  shown  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities that he is related to the sponsor  as  claimed.   The
         sponsor  did  not  attend  for  cross  examination  so   that   the
         relationship  could  be  examined  and  the  production   of   four
         nationality certificates are not sufficient to show me the  claimed
         relationship."

    Clearly by such remarks  the  Judge  would  seem  to  accept  that  the
    presence of the sponsor may  have  been  of  assistance  in  clarifying
    issues.

20.  In terms of dependency the Judge looked at a number  of  documents  and
    concluded  understandably  that  they  did  not  support  the  case  as
    advanced.  The Judges concludes at paragraph 27 in these terms:-

         "There was no satisfactory evidence  of  current  dependency.   The
         appellant's oral evidence was that the sponsor would send  cash  to
         him via friends who travelled from Sweden to Bangladesh and that he
         gives cash to him now and since he has been in the UK.  There is no
         supporting documentary evidence in the form of bank  statements  or
         other witnesses.  The one bank  statement  produced  comes  nowhere
         near the necessary level of proof to  show  a  dependency  and  his
         assertion in oral evidence and in the witness  statement  that  the
         sponsor gives him food and pocket money now is unsupported  in  any
         way and I do not find it likely given the  whole  of  the  evidence
         before me."

21.  It is entirely obvious that from first to last the sponsor is  the  key
    witness  for  the  appellant  and  the  chief  source  of  evidence  or
    clarification  on  his  behalf.   The  absence  of   the   sponsor   is
    specifically referred to in the analysis of the evidence.

22.  As I have indicated, it remains unclear why the representative was  not
    willing to spend some time to clarify the situation  with  the  sponsor
    and to ascertain whether he could come later in the day  or  indeed  to
    clarify the full nature of his disability.  Had that time been taken it
    may well be that the Judge might have  been  persuaded  with  a  cogent
    account of the sponsor's difficulties to adjourn or not.  It is not the
    convenience of the representative that is important  in  such  hearings
    but the fairness to represent the interests of the appellant.  It seems
    to me that, prima facie, the reluctance of the representative to accede
    to the request of the Judge to  delay  matters  for  investigation  was
    wholly unreasonable and unjustified.

23.  That being said, it is not for the appellant to be  prejudiced  by  the
    actions of his representative, particularly as matters evolved  at  the
    hearing it would have been potentially of significance for the  sponsor
    to have attended to give evidence.  Given the centrality of the sponsor
    to the case as presented it is  understandable  that  there  may  be  a
    perceived feeling of unfairness on the part of the appellant by  reason
    of the sponsor not being there.

24.  Following the indication of the case  of  Nwaigwe  it  does  seem  that
    fairness is an overriding criteria in these matters.

25.  Given the fact that the Judge  expressed  the  concern  that,  had  the
    sponsor been present, there may have been some clarification  with  the
    evidence, it seems to me that on the basis of overall fairness  of  the
    proceedings and certainly upon the basis that justice should be seen to
    be done as well as being  done,  I  with  some  reluctance  uphold  the
    concerns that have  been  expressed.   Given  those  circumstances  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall be set  aside  in  order  for
    there to be a full hearing of matters with the sponsor present.

26.  In the circumstances therefore the appellant's appeal before the  Upper
    Tribunal succeeds.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be
    set aside to be remade by the First-tier Tribunal at a de novo hearing.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 18 Feb 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
