
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07502/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2019                           |On 2 December 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                          miss helia maria de souza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Norman instructed by Sterling & Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brewer promulgated on 1 July 2019, dismissing her appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 2  October  2018,
    to refuse her application made on 7  May  2018  for  an  EEA  permanent
    residence  card  as  the  former  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK  who  has  retained  a  right  of
    residence following the end of her sponsoring son's marriage to the EEA
    national, a Miss Lobo.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on
    2  September  2019  stating  that  it  was  arguable   that   a   wider
    interpretation of and a purposive approach to the relevant  Regulations
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 should have been  adopted.



 3. For the reasons set out below I find no error of law in the  making  of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require the decision
    to be set aside.

 4. The relevant background can be summarised as follows.  The appellant, a
    Brazilian national, first arrived in the UK in June of 2014  on  a  six
    month visit visa.  She was then permitted to remain  with  leave  as  a
    student.  Later she left the UK and re-entered on  a  six  month  visit
    visa in 2008, to live with her Brazilian son and his wife.  In  May  of
    2013 she was granted an EEA residence card valid to  May  2018  as  the
    dependent family  member  of  her  EEA  national  daughter-in-law.  The
    marriage of her son to the EEA national apparently took place  in  2004
    but broke down in July of 2017 when the parties separated.  The divorce
    was finalised in February of 2016.  After her son's separation from the
    EEA national the appellant continued to reside with  her  son  but  not
    with the EEA national. It is not asserted that she  remained  dependent
    on the EEA national daughter-in-law.

 5. The application made in May of 2018 for a permanent residence card  was
    refused following consideration of Regulations 15(1)(b) and 7(1)(c)  of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, on the basis that she failed to
    demonstrate that she had remained the dependent ascendant  relative  of
    the EEA national for a continuous period of five years as  required  by
    Regulation 7(1)(c).  As the residence card was issued in  May  of  2013
    and the appellant ceased residing with and being dependent on  the  EEA
    national from 2014, five years had not elapsed.

 6. At the outset of the hearing Ms Norman sought leave to  add  a  further
    ground of appeal, one which had been raised,  she  claims,  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. She referred me to paragraphs  13  to  14  of  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. She says  the  judge  did
    not deal with this issue, which was that was that  both  the  appellant
    and her son had already acquired a permanent right of residence. I  was
    referred to a letter of  28  December  2018  from  the  daughter-in-law
    confirming that the appellant had lived with them from December 2008 to
    July 2014, the date of separation.  She had provided the appellant with
    financial support, food and accommodation.

 7. I am not satisfied it is necessary to grant permission in the interests
    of justice to add this further ground, a ground which was  not  pleaded
    in the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal and a  ground  on  which
    permission was not considered or granted, however the five  year  issue
    is part and parcel of the overall  considerations.  In  particular,  Ms
    Norman submitted in her arguments before me that  the  judge  erred  by
    looking at whether the appellant had acquired five years  as  a  family
    member of her daughter-in-law  from  the  date  of  the  issue  of  the
    residence card in 2013 but did not look  at  whether  she  had  already
    acquired or accumulated five years relevant residence.

 8. In the course of submissions, I was referred to  Regulation  10(5).  Ms
    Norman's argument was that this should be read  purposively  so  as  to
    include family members. However, as set out below, it  is  quite  clear
    that that is not the way in which the Regulation is drafted.

 9. Assuming that the appellant had resided with her daughter-in-law  since
    December of 2008 the argument is that the necessary period was complete
    in December 2013, in other words before the breakdown of  the  marriage
    the following year.  Judge Brewer concluded that the appellant had  not
    retained a right of residence as she  had  not  resided  with  the  EEA
    national "in accordance with the Regulations" for a  continuous  period
    of five years.  At the date of the  application  she  could  not  be  a
    dependent direct relative in the ascending line  of  the  EEA  national
    because she and her son had separated from the  household  of  the  EEA
    national before the date of the application.

10. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal focus on what in effect  is
    a misinterpretation of the Regulations  and  in  particular  Regulation
    10(5).  Regulation 10(5) addresses the issue of a family member who has
    retained the right of residence. However, to  meet  the  condition  the
    person "A" must have ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
    or an  EEA  national  with  a  right  of  permanent  residence  on  the
    termination of the marriage or civil partnership  of  "A".   The  other
    provisions are that "A" must be residing in the UK in  accordance  with
    the Regulations at the date of termination of  marriage  and  that  the
    marriage or civil partnership must  have  lasted  for  at  least  three
    years, during which time the parties to the relationship had resided in
    the UK for at least one year.

11. Further, the condition under Regulation 10(6) must  be  met.   This  is
    that:-

      a) the person is not an EEA national but would if the person  were  an
         EEA national, be a  worker,  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-
         sufficient person under Regulation 6; or

      b) is a family member of a person who falls within paragraph 10(6)(a).

12. The difficulty for the appellant's argument in relation  to  Regulation
    10 is that it is clear that it is the termination of  the  marriage  or
    civil partnership of the person "A" which is required.   The  appellant
    cannot be the person "A"  as  Regulation  10(5)  makes  clear  that  it
    applies only to a person whose own marriage  to  an  EEA  national  has
    terminated.  Neither did she cease to be a family  member  of  the  EEA
    national on the termination of the marriage; she ceased to be a  family
    member when her son's relationship with the EEA national  broke  up  in
    2014.  Neither was there evidence to show that she herself was a worker
    or self-sufficient person etc. under Regulation 10(6).

13. Neither has it been shown that the EEA national had herself a right  of
    permanent residence on the termination of the marriage and in fact,  it
    is not even clear that the former daughter-in-law was exercising treaty
    rights on the termination of the marriage in February of 2016.

14. At paragraph 15 of  the  decision  the  judge  addressed  the  question
    whether the appellant was a family member who  retained  the  right  to
    residence and the judge stated:-

         "I simply had no evidence, not even a witness statement,  from  the
         appellant to evidence that she had resided in  the  United  Kingdom
         with her EEA national sponsor, her daughter-in-law,  in  accordance
         with these Regulations for a continuous period of five years".

15. It follows there is no evidence of any of the relevant requirements  of
    the Regulations have been  met,  least  of  all  Regulation  10(5).  Ms
    Norman's interpretation  would  require  an  entire  reworking  of  the
    Regulation to bring the appellant within it's terms.

16. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the argument  raised  by  Miss
    Norman cannot succeed  and,  on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, could not have succeeded.  In the  circumstances  I  find  no
    error of law in this decision.

Decision

17. The making of the decision the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law, such that the decision should  be
    set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.

                    No anonymity direction is made.



     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 12 November 2019







To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 12 November 2019

