
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07296/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th June 2019                    |On 12th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                           BABAR HAMID KHAN NIAZI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal the decision  of
            First-tier Tribunal Judge Monaghan dismissing his appeal, after
            consideration of the papers only, against  a  decision  of  the
            respondent refusing to issue him with  a  residence  under  the
            Immigration (European Economic Are) Regulations 2016.  Mr Niazi
            is a Pakistani Citizen and is married to a British Citizen  who
            has exercised Treaty  Rights  in  another  European  Country  -
            Spain.


         2. The reason given by the respondent for refusing  the  residence
            card was that the appellant had failed to show he was  residing
            in the UK in accordance with the Regulations;  the  essence  of
            that decision being that the  appellant's  wife  had  not  been
            available to answer any telephone calls  and  therefore,  given
            the lack of evidence that she was working or self-employed, the
            respondent was not satisfied she was exercising Treaty Rights.

         3. The appellant sent two bundles of documents to the Tribunal  to
            support his appeal, such documents including copy and  original
            evidence that his wife was  indeed  exercising  Treaty  Rights.
            Unfortunately, neither of those bundles were before the  First-
            tier  Tribunal  judge  before  her  decision  was  promulgated,
            despite them being received by  the  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
            Tribunal judge has erred in law in failing to take  account  of
            material evidence.

         4. Ms Jones correctly acknowledged that the decision could not, in
            those circumstances stand.

         5. I set aside the decision.

         6. Ms Jones  did  not  have  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the
            appellant. I handed her the documents[1]  which  she  examined,
            with the appellant. She accepted that the  documents  contained
            relevant and necessary evidence to show that not only  was  the
            appellant's wife exercising Treaty Rights at the  date  of  the
            application and the First-tier Tribunal decision but  was  also
            exercising Treaty Rights today. She acknowledged the appeal had
            to be allowed.

         7. I allow the appeal; the appellant meets the requirements of the
            regulations for the issue of a Residence Card.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.



                                    Date 10th June 2019
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] The documents were retained by the appellant on conclusion of the
hearing.

