
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07236/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2018                           |On 8 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              Mr Edmond Ahmetaj
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Rashid, instructed by Carlton Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS
               (Decision delivered orally on 14 February 2018)


Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania, born 8 August 1984.  He made  an
    application to the Secretary of State for an EEA residence card, as the
    extended family member of Viera Jaupi - the  appellant's  niece  and  a
    national of Slovakia, who was said to be exercising EU treaty rights in
    the United Kingdom. Such application was made pursuant to Regulations 8
    and 17(4) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.   The  application
    was refused on 6 June 2016 for reasons that I need not need to set  out
    herein.



Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. An appeal was lodged to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of
    the 6 June. This came before Resident Judge Zucker on 25th  July  2017,
    who decided it without a hearing in a decision sent out two days later.
    Judge Zucker concluded, following the guidance given by  this  Tribunal
    in Sala  [2016]  UKUT  00411,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction.

 3. The appellant appealed such decision to the Upper Tribunal.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birrell thereafter granted permission, thus  the  matter
    comes before me.

Discussion

 4. Prior to the grant of permission, but not  referred  in  the  grant  of
    permission, the Court of Appeal considered the very issue  in  play  in
    the instant case  -  see  Khan  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. The Court  concluded  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had been wrong in its conclusion and rationale in Sala.  It is
    not in dispute that the effect of the decision in Khan, if  applied  to
    this case, is that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to  conclude  that
    it did not have jurisdiction in this appeal.

 5. For this reason I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    and remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard on its
    substantive merits.

 6. I also observe that this appeal is physically linked, and ought  to  be
    linked in terms of the hearing date,  with  the  appeal  referenced  as
    EA/07238/2016.  I am told that that appeal has a hearing date  set  for
    the 12 June at Taylor House.  It may be that I do  not  have  power  to
    direct the First-tier Tribunal to hear the two appeals together but  if
    I do, then I so direct. If I do not have such power  then  I  make  the
    observation  that  it  seems  to  me  eminently  sensible,  given   the
    interrelated facts of the cases, that they are heard on the same day by
    the same judge.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the first-tier Tribunal.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 O'Connor
  Date: 8 March 2018


