
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/07897/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 16 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                      THE Immigration Officer, STANSTED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MARCIN KWIATKOWSKI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Hilary Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    The sponsor, Ms Fay Dellimore


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The respondent (whom I will refer to as the "claimant") is a citizen of
    Poland who was born on 13 August 1976.

 2. On 5 September 2017, the claimant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  at
    Stansted Airport on a flight from Poland.  Following an interview by an
    Immigration Officer, he was refused admission to the United Kingdom  on
    the grounds of public policy under reg 11 (read with regs 23 and 27) of
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 (SI 2016/1052).   The  basis  of
    that refusal was his previous convictions in the UK  between  2008  and
    2014 when he had been convicted of 42 offences on 24 occasions.

 3. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing,
    Judge Mathews  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal.   He  found  that  the
    claimant no longer had a propensity to reoffend, in effect because  his
    previous offending was related to his drug addiction and  that  he  was
    now "drug free" and had been so for  "a  considerable  period".   As  a
    consequence, the  Immigration  Officer  had  failed  to  establish,  as
    required under reg  27,  that  the  claimant  represented  "a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society".

 4. The Immigration Officer sought permission to  appeal.   Permission  was
    initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on  4  September  2018
    the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Kebede)  granted  the  Immigration  Officer
    permission to appeal.  The basis of that grant of permission is set out
    in para 2 of UTJ Kebede's decision as follows:

         "There is arguable merit in the assertion in the grounds  that  the
         judge's reasoning  in  regard  to  the  risk  of  re-offending  was
         inadequate, in particular in so far as it failed to take account of
         the  limited  period  following  the  appellant's  last   term   of
         imprisonment in the UK and his departure from the UK in the context
         of his lengthy history of offending.  The grounds are arguable".

 5. The appeal was listed  before  me  on  14  December  2018  for  a  Case
    Management Review Hearing.  However, at that hearing  the  sponsor,  Ms
    Dellimore who is the claimant's wife, requested  that  the  hearing  be
    converted to a substantive hearing.   Ms  Aboni,  who  represented  the
    Immigration Officer, indicated that she was in a position to deal  with
    the 'error of law' issue and agreed that the hearing should proceed  on
    that basis.  As a consequence, I heard submissions from  Ms  Aboni  (in
    support of the Immigration Officer's grounds) and from the  sponsor  on
    behalf of the claimant.

Background

 6. As I have already indicated, the claimant is a citizen of  Poland.   He
    lived in the United Kingdom between 2008 and 29  August  2015  when  he
    returned to Poland.  Between July 2008 and September 2014, the claimant
    was convicted on 24 occasions of 42 offences,  mainly  of  theft.   The
    most recent offence, however, was common assault for which he  received
    an eight week  period  of  imprisonment  in  September  2014.   He  has
    committed no offences since September 2014.

 7. The claimant met Ms Dellimore in 2013.  She works in the Prison Service
    with prisoner offenders to support their rehabilitation  and  this  was
    how she met the claimant.  They married in Poland on 2 September  2017.



 8. Having been released from prison in the UK following his conviction  in
    September 2014, the claimant returned to Poland on 29 August 2015 where
    he was arrested for unpaid child maintenance  and  imprisoned  for  two
    years.  Following his release, he sought to return to the UK to be with
    his wife, the sponsor.  It is against the refusal of his  admission  to
    the UK on 5 September 2017 against which the claimant now appeals.

The Judge's Decision

 9. Before Judge Mathews, the sponsor gave oral evidence and  reliance  was
    placed on a number of documents,  in  particular  from  a  psychologist
    (Miloscz Winnicki) and a social worker in Poland.  The  thrust  of  the
    claimant's case before Judge Mathews was that his  offending  had  been
    driven by his drug  addiction  and  that  he  was  now  drug  free  and
    therefore, despite his previous offending, no longer had  a  propensity
    to offend and therefore presented no risk to the public in the UK.

10. The sponsor gave oral evidence, which  the  judge  accepted,  that  the
    claimant had been drug free for over three and a half years.

11. The psychologist knew the claimant through his  residence  at  a  house
    "for men who have reformed their behaviour and are able to commit to  a
    strict no drugs or alcohol policy".  He noted  that  the  claimant  had
    lived in this house since 2 October 2017 and had  "remained  drug  free
    throughout his period  living  at  the  house".   This  was  despite  a
    "difficult period" when  the  claimant  had  been  separated  from  the
    sponsor.

12. In addition, the social worker in her report of 25 January  2018  noted
    that the claimant had regular contact with a social  worker  (following
    his release from prison in Poland) and that he was compliant  with  the
    terms of the "Individual Unemployment Tackling Programme" in  which  he
    was enrolled.  This included positive steps in relation to  his  living
    arrangements, including positive behaviour dealing with conflict in his
    protected housing facility  and  had  made  positive  efforts  to  find
    employment.

13. Judge  Mathews,  in  addition  to  accepting  the  sponsor's  evidence,
    accepted that of the psychologist and social worker.  His  reasons  and
    findings are at paras 15-31 as follows:

         "15. I have given careful consideration to all the documents before
             me.

         16.  Miss Dellimore gave evidence and adopted her witness statement
             as her account.  I note and find from the oral evidence,  that
             she  is  employed  in  assisting  in  the  rehabilitation   of
             offenders, that is how she met the  appellant.   I  find  that
             they met in 2013 and married in September 2017.   The  genuine
             nature  of  the  marriage  has  never  been  doubted  and  was
             confirmed in the evidence I heard, and statements that I read.

         17.  From the oral evidence I find that Miss Dellimore has flown to
             Poland as often as she can while her husband has  been  there,
             visiting at least once a month for over 2 years.

         18.  I have considered the previous convictions for the  appellant,
             they show 24 court appearances from July 2008, until September
             2014.  I accept that they are all offences flowing  from  drug
             addiction, and attempts to steal to fund such addiction.   The
             sole matter of violence, common assault in September  2014,  I
             find consisted of attempting to escape a  security  guard  who
             had detained him.

         19.  I note that there has been no offending since September 2014.

         20.  I have read with care the statement from  the  appellant,  the
             assessment of his social worker in Poland, and  the  statement
             of his psychologist, Miloscz Winnicki, in Poland.

         21.  I am impressed by the references for this  man  in  Poland,  I
             note and find from the statements and evidence that after  his
             release from prison, the appellant secured  accommodation  for
             himself at a hostel in Sopot.  The hostel has a strict ban  on
             drugs or alcohol.  The appellant, I  note,  has  engaged  well
             with his social worker, has complied with  the  rules  in  his
             hostel, and is viewed as a reliable and trustworthy member  of
             the house.  I note that he undertakes work to a high  standard
             and  is  self-sufficient.   He  is  described  as  an  active,
             willing, co-operative and motivated man.

         22.   Mr  Winnicki  speaks  of  the  appellant's   commitment   and
             determination to rebuild his life and be with  his  wife.   He
             confirms that the appellant is not only a rule abiding  member
             of the house in which he lives, but has also shown himself  to
             be able to resolve conflicts between other house members  when
             they have arisen.

         23.  The appellant's drug free status is confirmed, and I find that
             he has been drug free now for over three and a half years,  as
             confirmed by his wife.  I note that that

         24.  I note that he has remained drug-free whilst in the  community
             in Poland, as well as when in  prison  there,  and  during  an
             inevitably difficult period of separation from  his  wife.   I
             find that to be an impressive endorsement  of  his  motivation
             and success in addressing his drug misuse.

         25.  I also accept and find that he now pays child  maintenance  as
             required, and I find that arrears accrued whilst he was in the
             UK, and suffering from his addiction.

         26.  I note that Miss Dellimore, as  a  professional  who  supports
             former offenders in rehabilitation, is well placed to  support
             and help the appellant in the future in maintaining drug  free
             status.

         27.  I accept from the oral evidence that random  drug  testing  in
             Poland  has  confirmed   his   drug-free   status,   this   is
             corroborated by the reports from his accommodation and  social
             worker in Poland.

         28.  Bringing together the findings above I am satisfied that  this
             man has successfully addressed his previous  drug  misuse.   I
             find that he is drug free and  has  been  for  a  considerable
             period.  That progress has been made despite the  difficulties
             of imprisonment and separation from his wife.  I find this man
             to be motivated to build upon the progress that he has already
             made.

         29.  I do not find that he now has a propensity to  reoffend  given
             his successful steps to break drug addiction,  the  length  of
             time for which he has been drug-free, and the  fact  that  his
             previous offending was all the result directly  or  indirectly
             of drug misuse.

         30.  The public interest arguments raised as a bar  to  this  man's
             admission  were  all  prefaced  on  his  perceived   risk   of
             reoffending.  Both parties accepted  at  the  outset  of  this
             appeal that the asserted risk of  reoffending  was  the  issue
             upon which this appeal turned.

         31.  In the circumstances above I am satisfied that  this  man  has
             addressed his drug problem, and no longer has a propensity  to
             offend, accordingly he presents  no  risk  to  the  public  or
             community in the UK, and the public interest does not  lie  in
             his exclusion".

The Submissions

14. On behalf of the Immigration Officer, Ms Aboni relied upon the  grounds
    of appeal.  She submitted that the judge had failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for his finding that the claimant did not represent a "genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat" to a fundamental  interest  of
    society.  She submitted that the claimant had only been in the  UK  ten
    months after his conviction before he went back to  Poland.   That  was
    not a sufficient time to found the judge's conclusion that the claimant
    was "drugs free".  Further, there was  no  OASys  Report  or  probation
    report from the UK nor from Poland.  Relying upon the grounds, Ms Aboni
    submitted that the authors of the references from Poland had  not  been
    available to be cross-examined and that was a matter that went to their
    weight.  She submitted that it was not properly open to  the  judge  to
    find on the basis of the sponsor's evidence and these reports that  the
    claimant was drugs free given the history of his offending.

15. The sponsor relied upon  a  number  of  matters.   She  said  that  the
    claimant's offending was due to his drug addiction and he had not  been
    using drugs or committing any crimes since they had been together.   In
    the nine months before he went back to Poland, after  he  was  released
    from prison in the UK, he was not using drugs and had found  employment
    which was still open to him.  She told me that the  claimant's  offence
    in Poland was of non-payment of child maintenance.  That related to non-
    payment prior to his return to Poland.  On his return, having  been  in
    prison,  Ms  Dellimore  drew  my  attention  to  the  two  reports,  in
    particular that of the psychologist who had knowledge of  the  claimant
    in the context of the housing programme he was on.  She invited  me  to
    conclude that both the psychologist and social  worker's  reports  were
    ones which the judge was entitled to rely upon in reaching his  finding
    that the claimant was drugs free and no longer  a  risk  of  committing
    offences in the UK.

Discussion

16. It was common ground before Judge Mathews that the central issue in the
    appeal was whether the claimant  had  a  propensity  to  reoffend,  and
    therefore  presented  a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat" to a fundamental interest of society under reg 27(5)(c) of  the
    2016 Regulations.

17. The judge's  finding  that  the  claimant  did  not  fall  within  that
    requirement so as to establish  that  his  admission  was  contrary  to
    public policy turned upon a number of factual findings  that  he  made.
    First, the claimant's offending was driven by his drug  addiction.   In
    effect, his offending was acquisitive, that is he stole in order to pay
    for his drug habit.  Second, the claimant had  been  drug  free  for  a
    "considerable period".  That is a finding consistent with the sponsor's
    evidence that the claimant has been drugs free  since  they  have  been
    together and the evidence from the psychologist and  social  worker  in
    Poland.  Thirdly, the claimant has "successfully addressed his previous
    drug misuse"  despite  the  difficult  circumstances  relating  to  his
    separation from his wife (apart  from  visits)  since  he  returned  to
    Poland in August 2015.

18. Whilst, as Ms Aboni drew to my attention,  there  is  no  probation  or
    OASys  Report  concerning  the  claimant's   rehabilitation   and,   in
    particular, his drug misuse that, no doubt, flows from  the  fact  that
    his last period of imprisonment was only for eight weeks, only four  of
    which he would have served in custody.

19. The judge did, however, have the evidence  from  the  psychologist  and
    independent social worker in Poland.   Although  the  grounds  seek  to
    raise the credentials of the authors, the judge was entitled to  accept
    their evidence on the basis of who they stated they were.   Of  course,
    neither gave oral evidence which could, therefore, be tested in  cross-
    examination.   But,  on  its  face,  the  psychologist  report  clearly
    supports the evidence of the sponsor and in relation to the  claimant's
    general behaviour post-release in Poland, that of  the  social  worker.
    It is not clear to what extent  the  reliability  of  the  reports  was
    challenged before the judge.  There certainly does not appear  to  have
    been any challenge to their genuineness and, given that would have been
    a matter which the Immigration Officer would  have  had  to  establish,
    there was no evidence that could have supported a conclusion that  they
    were not genuine.  Given the mutual support the reports  give  to  each
    other, together with that of the sponsor  whom  the  judge  heard  give
    evidence and whose evidence he unequivocally accepted,  the  judge  was
    undoubtedly entitled to treat them as reliable.   The  claimant's  drug
    free status was, therefore, attested to over a longer period  than  his
    release from prison in the UK in late 2014 and his departure for Poland
    in August 2015.  Contrary to what is  contended  in  the  grounds,  the
    judge based his finding upon a longer period  (he  described  it  as  a
    "considerable period") that the claimant was, and continued to be, drug
    free.  The judge was entitled to accept the sponsor's evidence that his
    offending was related to his drug  abuse.   He  was  also  entitled  to
    accept that she believed he had been drug  free  since  they  had  been
    together.  And, as Judge Mathews  found,  the  claimant's  most  recent
    offence did not appear to fall within the acquisitive category  of  his
    earlier offending.  It related  to  a  common  assault  whilst  he  was
    attempting to escape from a security guard who had detained him.

20. On the central, and determinative issue in the claimant's appeal, there
    was an evidential basis for the judge's factual findings which led  him
    to  conclude  that  the  respondent  (and  the  burden  was  upon   the
    respondent) had not established that the claimant had a  propensity  to
    offend and so presented a risk to the public in the UK.  That  ultimate
    finding was not irrational based upon the judge's careful assessment of
    all the evidence, which he  was  entitled  to  accept,  concerning  the
    claimant's rehabilitation despite his previous offending history.

21. For these reasons, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  gave  cogent  and
    adequate reasons for his findings leading  him  to  conclude  that  the
    claimant did not fall within reg 27(5)(c) and that, therefore,  it  had
    not been established that his  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  was
    justified on public policy grounds.

Decision

22. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the claimant's appeal under
    the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 did not involve the making of an
    error of law and that decision stands.

23. Accordingly, the Immigration Officer's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              8 January 2019




