
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/07602/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Thursday 13th June 2019           |On Wednesday 26th June 2019          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                  RESUL [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Evolent Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  Ford  promulgated  on  18  February  2019  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
         dated 19 November 2018 refusing his  application  for  a  residence
         card as the family member (spouse)  of  Ms  [AMC]  who  is  an  EEA
         (Romanian) national.  The Respondent refused the application on the
         basis that the marriage is one of convenience.

      2. The Appellant who is a national of Albania came to the UK in  2016.
         He claimed asylum in July 2016.   His  claim  was  rejected  on  21
         December 2016 and his appeal dismissed on  24  February  2017.   He
         says that he met Ms [C] on 21 January 2018 in  a  park.    She  had
         come to the UK to work in  December  2017.   The  couple  moved  in
         together in March 2018 and married on 13 August 2018.  Ms [C]  gave
         birth to a daughter on 19 December 2018.

      3. The Appellant made an application for a residence card on 21 August
         2018.  The Respondent invited  the  Appellant  and  Ms  [C]  to  an
         interview on 7 November 2018.  Following that interview  and  based
         on inconsistencies in the  answers  given  at  the  interview,  the
         application was refused.

      4. Judge Ford considered the evidence put forward by  the  Respondent,
         including the interview record, and the evidence of the parties  to
         the  marriage.   She  concluded  that  the  marriage  was  one   of
         convenience and dismissed the appeal.

      5. The Appellant raises two grounds of appeal.  First, it is said that
         the Judge failed to give sufficient weight to  the  fact  that  the
         couple have a child together.  Second, it is said that  the  Judge,
         when considering the factors which led her to the  conclusion  that
         the marriage is one of convenience, had  regard  to  factors  which
         were not relevant.

      6. Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Fisher on 3 April 2019 but granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         McGeachy on 21 May 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "2. While the judge set out numerous and  cogent  reasons  for
             the conclusion that the marriage was one of convenience, it is
             unclear why he did not accept that the fact that the appellant
             is named on the child's birth certificate indicated that  this
             might not be a marriage of convenience nor, indeed, why he did
             not resolve the question which is implicit in this case, which
             is whether or not the child is the child of the appellant.

             3.  I therefore grant permission to appeal."

      7. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there is a material
         error of law in the Decision  and  if  so  either  to  re-make  the
         decision or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

    Ground One

      8. The first ground concerns the weight which the Judge  gave  to  the
         fact of the birth of Ms [C]'s child.  It is suggested at [3] of the
         grounds that the Judge accepted that the child is  the  Appellant's
         and failed to give weight to that factor when assessing whether the
         marriage was one of convenience.  It is said that the parentage  of
         the child was not disputed.  That is not a sustainable  reading  of
         the Decision.  In  relation  to  the  child,  the  Judge  says  the
         following:

             "5. On 19 December 2018 the  EEA  national  gave  birth  to  a
             daughter [AC] in the UK.  The Appellant is named on her  birth
             certificate as her father.  The EEA national's name is [AMC].

             ...

             12. I find that the Respondent has discharged  the  burden  of
             establishing that this is indeed a  marriage  of  convenience.
             The evidence that suggests that this is a genuine marriage  is
             as follows:-

                  ...

                  (e)  The Appellant's name appears on the  NHS  records  as
                  the father of the  child  and  he  attended  some  of  the
                  prenatal appointments with her

                  (f)  The EEA national gave  birth  to  a  daughter  on  19
                  December 2018, some 9 months after cohabitation began  and
                  the Appellant is named as the father

             13. The evidence  that  I  consider  suggests  that  it  is  a
             marriage of convenience is as follows:-

                  ...

                  (e)  She was pregnant when the couple was married

                  ...

                  (l)  The Appellant and his wife  chose  to  give  the  EEA
                  national's daughter her  mother's  surname  on  the  birth
                  certificate even though they were married.

             ..."

      9. Although I accept Mr Ahmed's submission  that  there  is  no  clear
         finding that the Appellant is not the father of the  child,  it  is
         evident from those  findings  read  together  that  the  Judge  had
         considerable doubts whether  the  child  was  his.   Certainly,  it
         cannot be said that it was accepted that [AMC] was his child.

     10. Mr Ahmed said that if the Respondent disputed  that  the  Appellant
         was the child's father, then he could and should have asked for DNA
         evidence.  However, that ignores that the child was not born at the
         time of the Respondent's decision and therefore her  parentage  was
         not in issue.  The Appellant was well aware that the Respondent was
         disputing the genuineness of the marriage and it was for him to put
         forward his case to show that the  relationship  with  Ms  [C]  was
         genuine as he asserts.

     11. Mr Ahmed also submitted that if the Judge intended to find that the
         child was not the Appellant's, then that point should have been put
         to the Appellant.  That is not pleaded as part of the  grounds  and
         therefore there is no evidence about the questions  which  were  or
         were not asked  of  the  Appellant  and  Ms  [C]  about  the  child
         including, for example, why the child has Ms [C]'s  surname  rather
         than that of the Appellant.

     12. That the Judge did not  accept  as  fact  that  the  child  is  the
         Appellant's is relevant to the weight which the Judge had  to  give
         that as a factor.  The Judge took into account  the  evidence  that
         the Appellant is the child's father - that he is named as  such  on
         the birth certificate and  in  the  NHS  records  -  but  was  also
         entitled to take  into  account  evidence  pointing  in  the  other
         direction when deciding what weight to give to this factor.

    Ground Two

     13. That then brings me on to ground two which concerns  three  factors
         on which the Judge placed reliance which  the  Appellant  says  are
         irrelevant.  Two of those factors are those set out at [13(e)]  and
         [13(l)] of the Decision which I  have  already  cited  above.   The
         third is at [13(f)] as follows:

             "She came to the UK from Romania to get work and was operating
             on very low margins each month according to her bank statement
             at page 31."

     14. I accept Mr Ahmed's submission that it is difficult to see why  the
         fact that Ms [C] was pregnant before the couple married  points  to
         the marriage being one of convenience.  It might  even  provide  an
         alternative explanation for why the couple decided to  marry  quite
         soon after meeting.  However, the factor relied on  at  [12(f)]  as
         cited above is a more cogent reason for doubting the genuineness of
         the relationship and for doubting that the Appellant is the child's
         father; particularly since Ms [C] said that, until  they  moved  in
         together, the Appellant had not stayed over at  her  house  because
         she  was  not  allowed  guests  (although  the  Appellant's  answer
         conflicted with this).  The inference from [12(f)] and  [13(e)]  of
         the Decision read together is  that  the  Judge  thought  it  quite
         possible that the father of the child was someone  other  than  the
         Appellant.  As such, the fact of Ms [C]  being  pregnant  when  the
         couple married was not an irrelevant factor.

     15. I do not accept Mr Ahmed's suggestion that the Judge at [13(l)] was
         making a cultural assumption about the naming of a child.  He is of
         course right to point out that parents can name their child as they
         wish.  Certainly, if the couple had not been married, then it would
         be unsurprising if the child's mother had given the child  her  own
         surname.  However, since they were married, the fact that the child
         was  not  given  her  father's  surname  at  least  required   some
         explanation which was not given.

     16. Mr Ahmed said that it was difficult to see  any  relevance  of  the
         factor at  [13(f)]  of  the  Decision.   I  disagree.   First,  the
         Appellant of course  had  to  show  that  Ms  [C]  was  in  the  UK
         exercising Treaty rights.  Second, and in any event, the  inference
         from what is there said when read with the remainder of the factors
         at [13] of the Decision is that Ms [C] needed money and might  have
         been encouraged by that need to enter into a marriage for reward.

     17. That then brings me on to a further submission  made  by  Mr  Ahmed
         that whether a marriage  is  one  of  convenience  depends  on  the
         motivation of both parties.  Even if the Appellant might have  been
         motivated by his immigration position, the same was not necessarily
         true of Ms [C].  As a proposition of law, I of course  accept  that
         the Respondent has to show that the intention  of  the  parties  is
         linked to the immigration status to  be  gained  by  the  marriage.
         However, in this case, the findings of the Judge are  that  neither
         party was genuinely committed to the other.  That appears from  all
         the factors at [13] of the Decision when read together.

     18. As Mr Melvin  submitted,  (and  as  Judge  McGeachy  accepted  when
         granting permission), there  were  "numerous  and  cogent  reasons"
         which appear at [13] of the Decision for the conclusion  that  this
         is a marriage of convenience.  As I have indicated, the  Judge  did
         not find that the child is the Appellant's (although I  accept  did
         not make a clear, adverse finding on the point).  However, weighing
         the evidence that the child might not be his against  the  evidence
         that she is, which is confined to what is  contained  in  documents
         themselves based on what the couple have said is the position,  the
         Judge was entitled to reach the view she did on this aspect and  to
         conclude that, based on the overall evidence including the  various
         discrepancies in the interview answers,  the  marriage  is  one  of
         convenience.

Conclusion

     19. For the above reasons, the Appellant's grounds do not establish any
         material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.

DECISION

I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of  Judge  Ford
promulgated on 18 February 2019 does not contain any material error of  law.
I therefore uphold the Decision.


Signed      [pic]      Dated: 25 June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
