
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07175/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th February 2018                         |On 7th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                Mr javed khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 2nd  June
    2016 to refuse his application for a residence  card  as  the  extended
    family member of an EEA national under Regulations 8 and 17(4)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006. Resident Judge Zucker dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 27th July 2017 for want
    of jurisdiction in accordance with the case of  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of
    Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC). The  Appellant  appeals  against  that
    decision with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell
    on 24th December 2017.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell granted Permission to Appeal  on  the
    basis that, given that Sala has since been found to be wrongly decided,
    the grounds disclose an arguable error of law on the basis of OM (AA(1)
    wrong in law) Zimbabwe CG [2006] UKAIT 00077.

 3. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    Appellant.  I was satisfied that the notice of hearing had been sent to
    the Appellant and his representative at the addresses provided  in  the
    application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  was
    therefore satisfied that the Appellant had been notified  of  the  date
    and time of the hearing and that it was in the interests of justice  to
    proceed with the appeal  in  accordance  with  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 4. At the hearing Mr Wilding indicated that the Secretary of State  agreed
    that there had been an error of law in relation to this case  in  light
    of the decision of the Court of Appeal in  the  case  of  Khan  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. Given that the Appellant,  who  had  requested  a
    consideration of his appeal on the papers in the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    had not had any consideration  of  the  substance  of  his  appeal,  he
    considered it appropriate that the case be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In light of the decision in Khan I am satisfied that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal that it did not have jurisdiction to proceed to
    hear this appeal was wrong in law.

 6. Given that the matters involved in this appeal have not been considered
    at all by the First-tier Tribunal, I consider it appropriate  to  remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.

 7. I note that  in  the  Notice  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    submitted in June 2016 the Appellant indicated that he wanted  an  oral
    hearing.  Because of the decision in Sala a direction was issued to the
    parties on 14th June 2017 indicating  that  unless  the  Appellant  put
    forward reasons why the Tribunal had jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal
    the appeal would be determined on the papers.  Although  the  Appellant
    submitted reasons connected with the pending reference in the  case  of
    Banger (Unmarried Partner of British National) [2017] UKUT 125 (IAC) it
    was decided that it was appropriate for the appeal to be heard  on  the
    papers and that is what happened.

 8. Accordingly, the Appellant has not to  date  complied  with  the  usual
    directions as regards the filing of  evidence  to  support  his  appeal
    accordingly the Appellant is reminded that it would be  appropriate  to
    do so in advance of the rehearing of  this  matter  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In these circumstances it  is  appropriate  that  the  matter
    should be listed for an oral hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

11. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No award for costs is made as the matter is  still  outstanding  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

