
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07875/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2019                  |On 3 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                            Nataliia Golichnikova
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Arlington Crown Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Burns,
    promulgated 29.3.19, dismissing her appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent, dated 22.11.18, to refuse her application made  on  20.9.18
    for an EEA Residence Card as the direct  family  member  of  a  British
    citizen who has previously exercised his Treaty  rights  in  other  EEA
    member states, pursuant to regulations 7 and 9 of the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations 2016, as amended (the Regulations).

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Parker  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    8.5.19. However, on renewal of the application to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission to appeal on 29.7.19.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission finding it arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal misinterpreted the Regulations in circumstances
    where the sponsor's wife has already  been  recognised  as  his  family
    member and the sponsor has been 'recognised as an EEA national' for the
    purposes of the Regulations. Judge Smith also  considered  it  arguable
    that  if  the  respondent's  and  the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge's
    interpretation of  regulation  9  is  correct,  it  would  violate  the
    principle of equivalence.

 4. The matter was previously listed before Judge Pickup on 3.9.19. At  the
    outset of the error of law hearing, there was a  discussion  with  both
    representatives as to the principles and  law  involved.  Mr  Pipe  had
    produced a skeleton argument  and  asserted  that  the  issue  had  not
    previously been considered by the Upper Tribunal or any superior court.
    Acting for the Secretary of State, Ms Everett was in some  difficulties
    in obtaining instructions on the points raised by Mr Pipe, but did  not
    make an adjournment application.

 5. Considering that the issues in the appeal were not straightforward  and
    requiring a more careful consideration, particularly on the part of the
    respondent, Judge Pickup concluded that the appropriate course  was  to
    adjourn the hearing with directions enabling the issues to be addressed
    by both sides in skeleton arguments supplemented by case authority.

 6. The appeal came back before the tribunal  on  25.11.19,  listed  before
    ourselves sitting as a panel of the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The Upper Tribunal  has  received  the  respondent's  undated  skeleton
    argument. The appellant continues to rely on Mr Pipe' skeleton argument
    of 29.8.19. In addition,  the  appellant  has  submitted  a  bundle  of
    authorities comprising 36 pages, for which we  are  grateful.  Together
    with the oral submissions we have  carefully  considered  all  relevant
    material and taken into account the arguments advanced on both sides.

EU Law

 8. Article 21(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of  the  European  Union
    (TFEU) provides:

         'Every citizen of the Union shall have the right to move and reside
         freely within the territory of the Member States,  subject  to  the
         limitations and conditions laid down in the  Treaties  and  by  the
         measures adopted to give them effect.'

 9. Recitals 6 of Directive 2004/38 (the Directive) states:

         '(6)      In order to maintain the unity of the family in a broader
         sense and without prejudice to the prohibition of discrimination on
         grounds of nationality, the situation of those persons who are  not
         included in the definition of family members under this  Directive,
         and who therefore do not enjoy an  automatic  right  of  entry  and
         residence in the host Member State, should be examined by the  host
         Member State on the basis of its own national legislation, in order
         to decide whether entry and residence  could  be  granted  to  such
         persons, taking into  consideration  their  relationship  with  the
         Union citizen or any other circumstances, such as  their  financial
         or physical dependence on the Union citizen.'

10. Article 2 of the Directive defines family member as including a  spouse
    or registered  partner  and  the  dependent  direct  relatives  in  the
    ascending line and those of the spouse or partner.

11. Article 3 of the Directive states:

         '1.      This Directive shall apply to all Union citizens who  move
         to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are  a
         national, and to their family members as  defined  in  point  2  of
         Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         2.      Without  prejudice  to  any  right  to  free  movement  and
         residence the persons concerned may have in their  own  right,  the
         host  Member  State  shall,  in  accordance   with   its   national
         legislation, facilitate  entry  and  residence  for  the  following
         persons:

             (a)      any  other  family  members,  irrespective  of  their
             nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2  of
             Article 2 who, in the country from which they have  come,  are
             dependants or members of the household of  the  Union  citizen
             having the primary right of residence, or where serious health
             grounds strictly require  the  personal  care  of  the  family
             member by the Union citizen;

             (b)      the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
             relationship, duly attested.'

The Relevant Regulations

12. The Directive was transposed into UK law by the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006. The current applicable regulations are
    those from 2016, as amended.

13. The regulations relevant to this case are set out below. The  words  in
    square brackets are as amended by by The Immigration (European Economic
    Area Nationals) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 (S.I. 2019/468), which  came
    into force on 28.3.19, the day before the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was promulgated. The amendments extended regulations 7  and  9
    to an Extended Family Member (EFM) of a British citizen.

         "Family member"

         7.-  (1) In these Regulations, "family member" means,  in  relation
             to a person ("A")-

                  (a)  A's spouse or civil partner;

                  (b)  A's direct descendants, or the direct descendants  of
                  A's spouse or civil partner who are either-

                      (i)  aged under 21; or

                      (ii) dependants of A,  or  of  A's  spouse  or  civil
                      partner;

                  (c)  dependent direct relatives in A's ascending line,  or
                  in that of A's spouse or civil partner.

             (2)  Where A is a  student  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom
             otherwise  than  under  regulation  13   (initial   right   of
             residence), a person  is  not  a  family  member  of  A  under
             paragraph (1)(b) or (c) unless-

                  (a)  in the case of paragraph (1)(b), the  person  is  the
                  dependent child of A or of A's spouse or civil partner; or

                  (b)  A also falls within one of the  other  categories  of
                  qualified person mentioned in regulation 6(1).

             (3)  A person ("B") who is an extended family member  and  has
             been  issued  with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a   registration
             certificate or a residence card must be treated  as  a  family
             member of A, provided-

                  (a)  B continues to satisfy the conditions  in  regulation
                  8(2), (3), (4) or (5); and

                  (b)  the EEA family permit,  registration  certificate  or
                  residence card remains in force.

             (4)  A must be an EEA national  unless  regulation  9  applies
             (family members  [and  extended  family  members]  of  British
             citizens).

         Family members [and extended family members] of British citizens

         9.-  (1) If the conditions in paragraph (2)  are  satisfied,  these
             Regulations apply to a person who is the family  member  ("F")
             of a British citizen ("BC") as  though  the  BC  were  an  EEA
             national.

             [(1A)    These Regulations  apply  to  a  person  who  is  the
             extended family member ("EFM") of a BC as though the  BC  were
             an EEA national if-

                  (a)the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied; and

                  (b)the EFM was lawfully resident in the EEA State referred
                  to in paragraph (2)(a)(i).]

             (2)  The conditions are that-

                  (a)  BC-

                      (i)  is residing in an EEA State as a  worker,  self-
                      employed person, self-sufficient person or a student,
                      or so resided immediately  before  returning  to  the
                      United Kingdom; or

                      (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence in
                      an EEA State;

                  (b)  F [or EFM] and BC resided together in the EEA  State;
                  F16...

                  (c)  F [or EFM] and BC's residence in the  EEA  State  was
                  genuine.

                  [(d) F was a family member of BC [or EFM was  an  extended
                  family member of BC] during all or  part  of  their  joint
                  residence in the EEA State; and

                  (e)  genuine  family  life  was  created  or  strengthened
                  during [F or EFM and BC's]  joint  residence  in  the  EEA
                  State]

             (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
             or was genuine include-

                  (a)  whether the centre of BC's life  transferred  to  the
                  EEA State;

                  (b)  the length of F [or EFM] and BC's joint residence  in
                  the EEA State;

                  (c)  the nature and quality of the F  [or  EFM]  and  BC's
                  accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is  or  was
                  BC's principal residence;

                  (d)  the degree of F [or EFM] and BC's integration in  the
                  EEA State;

                  (e)  whether F's [or EFM's] first lawful residence in  the
                  EU with BC was in the EEA State.

             (4)  This regulation does not apply-

                  (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                  was as a means  for  circumventing  any  immigration  laws
                  applying to non-EEA nationals to which F  [or  EFM]  would
                  otherwise be subject (such as any  applicable  requirement
                  under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom);...

                  (b)  ...

             (5)  Where these Regulations apply to F [or EFM], BC is to  be
             treated as holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for
             the purposes of the application of these Regulations to F  [or
             EFM].

             (6)  In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is  only  to  be  treated  as
             having acquired the right of permanent residence  in  the  EEA
             State if such residence would have led to the  acquisition  of
             that right under regulation 15, had  it  taken  place  in  the
             United Kingdom.

             (7)  For the purposes of determining  whether,  when  treating
             the  BC  as  an  EEA  national  under  these  Regulations   in
             accordance with paragraph (1), BC would be a qualified person-

                  (a)   any  requirement  to  have  comprehensive   sickness
                  insurance cover in the United Kingdom still applies,  save
                  that it does not require the cover to extend to BC;

                  (b)  in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as
                  a worker under  regulation  6(2)(b)  or  (c),  BC  is  not
                  required to satisfy condition A;

                  (c)  in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker
                  as defined in regulation  6(1),  BC  is  not  required  to
                  satisfy conditions A and,  where  it  would  otherwise  be
                  relevant, condition C.

Factual Background

14. The essential facts are not in dispute. The appellant is the mother-in-
    law of the sponsor, a  British  citizen  who  genuinely  exercised  his
    Treaty rights in the EU Member States of Norway and Greece, accompanied
    by his Russian citizen wife, daughter of the  appellant.  Both  husband
    and wife then returned to live in the UK. The  daughter  holds  an  EEA
    Residence Card as a family member (spouse) of the sponsor.  It  is  not
    disputed that the appellant is a direct relative in the ascending  line
    of the spouse, living with  and  presently  dependent  on  the  British
    citizen sponsor and his wife in the UK.

15. It is important to note that the appellant never lived with the sponsor
    and his wife whilst  he  was  exercising  his  Treaty  rights  of  free
    movement in any other EU Member State, although is is asserted that she
    was nevertheless dependent on them.

16. The application was refused and the subsequent appeal dismissed on  the
    basis that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of Regulation  9,
    which applies the Regulations to a family member of a  British  citizen
    but only on certain conditions.

17. It is common ground that the first  of  those  conditions,  that  under
    regulation 9(2)(a)(i), is met in that the sponsor resided in a host  EU
    Member State as a  worker  immediately  before  returning  to  the  UK.
    However, to meet the condition under regulation 9(2)(b), the  appellant
    must have genuinely resided together with the sponsor in the  other  EU
    Member State before he returned to the UK. Before us, Mr Pipe  conceded
    that the appellant cannot bring herself  within  regulation  9  as  she
    cannot meet the 'resided together' requirement.

18. In summary, the argument as advanced by Mr Pipe is that  the  appellant
    does not need to bring herself within regulation 9 at all but qualifies
    directly as a family member under regulation 7(1)(c) as  the  dependent
    direct relative in the ascending line of her  daughter,  the  sponsor's
    spouse, in the specific circumstances where that daughter  has  herself
    been recognised as a family  member  pursuant  to  the  Surinder  Singh
    principle of equivalence enshrined in regulation 9. In the alternative,
    it is submitted that if regulation 9 does apply  to  the  appellant  it
    must be interpreted in the light of EU law, including the Directive and
    the Surinder Singh principle, and  that  to  adopt  the  interpretation
    contended  for  by  the  respondent  to  exclude  the  appellant   from
    entitlement to a Residence Card as the family  member  of  the  British
    citizen sponsor is inconsistent with EU law.

Family Member under Regulation 7

19. Regulation 7 defines 'family member' as someone in relation to a person
    'A'. Regulation 7(4) provides that 'A must be an  EEA  national  unless
    regulation 9 applies (family members and  extended  family  members  of
    British citizens).'

20. The appellant's primary argument is that as  the  daughter  was  issued
    with  a  Residence  Card  pursuant  to  regulation  9,  this  satisfies
    regulation 7(4). As noted above and in Ms Everett's skeleton  argument,
    the respondent concedes the relationship referred to is met with regard
    to both the  family  relationship  and  dependence  elements.  Mr  Pipe
    accepted that regulation 7(4) must be met before the appellant  can  be
    regarded as a family member for the purpose of  the  Regulations.  Even
    though regulation 7(4) specifically refers to family members  (or  EFM)
    of a British citizen, Mr Pipe submitted that it  is  possible  to  read
    regulation 7(4) consistently with his argument that  once  the  British
    citizen sponsor's wife  was  recognised  as  his  family  member  under
    regulation 9, then regulation 9 'applies'.

21. After due consideration of the arguments of both Mr Pipe and Ms Everett
    we  find  we  cannot  accept  the  interpretation  of  regulation  7(4)
    contended for by Mr Pipe.

22. We first note that Article 3(1) of the Directive provides that it shall
    apply 'to all Union citizens who move to or reside in  a  Member  State
    other than that of which they are  a  national,  and  to  their  family
    members as defined in point 2 of Article 2 who accompany or join them,'
    (emphasis added). The Directive limits its application to those  family
    members who accompany or join a EU Member State national exercising his
    Treaty rights to work in a host Member State. It is those persons  who,
    pursuant to subsequent  case-law,  including  R  v  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal et Surinder Singh, ex parte  SSHD  (freedom  of  movement  for
    persons) [1992] EUECJ C-370/90, are to have the right to join the Union
    citizen who returns to live in the  Member  State  of  which  he  is  a
    national.

23. In Surinder Singh, the ECJ held that the Treaty  and  Directive  73/148
    must be construed "as requiring a Member State to grant leave to  enter
    and reside in its territory to the spouse, of whatever nationality,  of
    a national of that State who has gone, with  that  spouse,  to  another
    Member State in order  to  work  there....  and  returns  to  establish
    himself or herself....in the territory of the State of which he or  she
    is a national. The spouse must enjoy at least the same rights as  would
    be granted to him or her under Community  law  if  his  or  her  spouse
    entered or resided in the territory of another Member State." Again, it
    is clear that the extension of rights is limited to those who accompany
    or have joined the national of a EU  Member  State  in  a  host  Member
    State.

24. The appellant also relies on SSHD v Banger (Citizenship of the European
    Union - Right of Union citizens to move and reside  freely  within  the
    territory of the European  Union  -  Judgment)  [2018]  EUECJ  C-89/17.
    However, unlike the appellant in this case, that case concerned the non-
    EEA national partner of a British citizen who had lived with him in the
    Netherlands before returning to the UK. As she was an  EFM  and  not  a
    family member, Regulation 9 in the form  in  which  it  then  appeared,
    could not apply to her. In consequence, the Secretary of State  refused
    to issue her with an EEA Residence Card. The  Upper  Tribunal  referred
    the issue to the ECJ for  a  preliminary  ruling  on  the  question  of
    whether the Surinder Singh principle operates so as to require a Member
    State to issue or facilitate the provision of  residence  authorisation
    to the non-Union  unmarried  partner  of  an  EU  citizen  who,  having
    exercised his Treaty right of freedom of movement to work in  a  second
    Member State accompanied by his partner, returns with such  partner  to
    the Member State of his nationality.

25. In Banger, the ECJ noted that the purpose of Directive 2004/38  was  to
    facilitate the exercise of the primary and individual right to move and
    reside freely within the territory  of  the  Member  States,  which  is
    conferred on citizens of the Union by Article 21(1).  Article  3(1)  of
    the Directive provides that the Directive is  to  apply  to  all  Union
    citizens who move to or reside in a Member State  other  than  that  of
    which they are a national, and, according the  ECJ,  "to  their  family
    members as defined in Article 2(2) of that directive who  accompany  or
    join them."

26. At [23] the ECJ pointed out  that  it  had  previously  held  that  the
    Directive "governs only the  conditions  determining  whether  a  Union
    citizen can enter and reside in Member States other than that of  which
    he is a national and does not confer a derived right  of  residence  on
    third-country nationals, who are family members of a Union citizen,  in
    the Member State of which that citizen is a national." However, it  was
    acknowledged at [27] that in "certain cases" a  third-country  national
    family member who could not qualify under the Directive for  a  derived
    right of residence could, nevertheless, be accorded such a right on the
    basis of Article 21(1). At [28] it was stated that this  was  based  on
    "settled case-law," according to which, in essence, if no such  derived
    right of residence were granted to such a person, a Union citizen would
    be discouraged from leaving his Member State to exercise Treaty  rights
    in another Member State "because he is uncertain  whether  he  will  be
    able to continue in his Member State of origin a family life which  has
    been created or strengthened, with that third-country national, in  the
    host Member State, during a  genuine  residence,"(emphasis  added).  In
    such circumstances, the conditions under which  the  derived  right  of
    residence is provided should not, in principle, be stricter than  those
    provided for under the Directive and should be applied by  analogy.  At
    [32]-[34] the ECJ agreed that this should also apply to a partner in  a
    durable relationship with a Union citizen and rejected the Secretary of
    State's argument that such a derivative right should be confined solely
    to third-country nationals who are a 'family member'.

27. However, whilst Banger extended the Surinder  Singh  principle  from  a
    spouse to a partner, none of the reasoning  of  the  ECJ  supports  the
    argument advanced by Mr Pipe. In both Banger and Surinder Singh, the EU
    Member State  national  was  returning  to  the  Member  State  of  his
    nationality after exercising his Treaty rights in a host Member  State,
    accompanied or joined by his family member. That is  not  analogous  to
    the facts of the present case where the British citizen sponsor did not
    have any family life  with  his  third-country  national  mother-in-law
    appellant in a host Member State before returning to the UK.

28. Turning to the Regulations, it is to be noted that  regulation  7  does
    not itself grant any rights but defines the term  'family  member'  for
    the purpose of the Regulations. It does so with reference to  a  person
    'A' and defines whether another person is a family member  of  'A',  in
    distinction to a relative who is an extended family  member  (EFM)  and
    other relatives who are neither. As stated above, it  is  not  disputed
    that the appellant is the dependent direct relative  in  the  ascending
    line of her daughter, the  sponsor's  wife.  However,  regulation  7(4)
    specifically limits the ambit of its application by the condition  that
    'A'  must  be  an  EEA  national,  unless  regulation  9  applies.  The
    parentheses immediately following that  condition  refers  directly  to
    family members or EFMs of British citizens and  requires  consideration
    of the conditions of regulation 9.

29. In his submissions, Mr Pipe conceded that the appellant does  not  meet
    the requirements to be a EFM and confirmed that we need not address the
    definition of an EFM within regulation 8, or consider the ambit of EFMs
    as referred to within in the provisions of regulations 7 and 9.

30. The wording of 7(4) includes the phrase, 'unless regulation  9  applies
    (family members and extended  family  members  of  British  citizens),'
    (emphasis added). Regulation 9 (1) provides that if the  conditions  in
    regulation 9(2) are satisfied, "these Regulations apply to a person who
    is a family member ('F') of a British citizen ('BC') as though  the  BC
    were an EEA national,' (emphasis added). It is  clear  that  the  words
    'applies' and 'apply' specifically relate to the family member, not  to
    the British citizen. For the reasons stated above, the appellant cannot
    meet regulation 9(1). Given the concession by Mr Pipe, neither can  the
    appellant meet regulation 9(1A) in relation  to  being  the  EFM  of  a
    British citizen. It follows that in  relation  to  the  claimed  family
    member, the appellant, regulation 9 does not and cannot  apply  in  the
    sense intended by regulation 7(4).

31. Whilst the appellant's daughter qualified  in  her  own  right  as  the
    family member of her British citizen spouse under  regulation  9,  that
    does not assist the appellant's argument. Neither the  Regulations  nor
    the ECJ case-law relied on by Mr  Pipe  are  authority  to  extend  the
    Surinder Singh principle to what,  effectively,  would  be  the  family
    member of a family member of a British citizen. On the  facts  of  this
    case, where the appellant never lived with the British citizen  sponsor
    in either of the host Member States in which he lived  and  worked,  we
    consider the relationship too remote from the Surinder Singh principle.
    The appellant coming to live with the British citizen and his  wife  in
    the UK has nothing to do with the exercise of his Treaty rights in host
    Member States.

32. We acknowledge, as did Ms Everett in  her  submissions,  that  had  the
    appellant gone to live with her British citizen  son-in-law  whilst  he
    was working in either Greece or Norway, she would have qualified  as  a
    family member under regulation 7 on the basis of being dependent on him
    in the UK and under regulation 9 on the basis of meeting  the  'resided
    together' condition.  Similarly, to apply the analogy  deployed  by  Mr
    Pipe in his submissions, had the sponsor living  in  the  UK  been  not
    British but, say, Greek, there would be no difficulty for the appellant
    in being recognised as the family member of his spouse for the  purpose
    of the Regulations. However, both such situations would  arguably  meet
    the Surinder Singh principle because in each case the sponsor would  be
    exercising his Treaty rights. Further, not to permit the entry  of  his
    family members or those of his wife, provided all other conditions such
    as dependency are met, could potentially deter him from exercising  his
    Treaty rights in a host EU Member State.

33. Neither does it assist the appellant to consider whether she  can  rely
    on her daughter's recognition of being a family member,  which  derived
    from her British citizen husband's work in a host Member  State.  As  a
    Russian citizen, the daughter is neither  a  British  citizen  nor  the
    citizen of any other EEA state, so regulation 7(4) cannot be  met  even
    if the daughter is regarded as person 'A'.

34. Having considered the arguments carefully, we find  no  support  in  EU
    law, including the case-law relied on by Mr Pipe, for  the  proposition
    that once regulation 9 has been applied to a family member of a British
    citizen who returns to the UK after working in a host EU Member  State,
    he becomes for all purposes thereafter in effect a different  class  of
    EU national whose relatives, or those  of  his  spouse,  who  meet  the
    relationship and dependency elements of regulation 7 are also  entitled
    to be recognised as family members for the purposes of the Regulations.
    We conclude that it  would  be  stretching  the  meaning,  purpose  and
    interpretation of regulation 7(4) beyond all  sense  to  conclude  that
    because regulation 9 was applied to the daughter to  bring  her  within
    the definition of family member within regulation 7, then regulation  9
    'applies' to the appellant.  As stated above, for the appellant to be a
    'family member' she must meet regulation 7(4), which in  turn  requires
    her to meet the 'resided together' condition of regulation 9. We  must,
    therefore, reject Mr Pipe's argument that the appellant can succeed  on
    the  basis  of  regulation  7  alone,  or  on  any   variant   of   the
    interpretation of regulation 7(4) advanced by Mr Pipe.

35. For the reasons set out above, neither do we  find  that  the  decision
    refusing the appellant a Residence Card on the basis  that  she  cannot
    meet the conditions of regulation 9 infringes the equivalence principle
    of Surinder Singh. As stated above, it is clear that the  ECJ  case-law
    relied on by Mr Pipe is restricted on the facts to family  members  who
    have accompanied or joined the EU  Member  State  national  in  a  host
    Member State before he returns to the Member State of his  nationality.
    On the facts  of  this  case,  the  extension  of  the  Surinder  Singh
    principle to  the  appellant,  or  someone  in  her  position,  is  not
    justified by any consideration of whether a national of a Member  State
    might be deterred from exercising his Treaty rights  by  working  in  a
    host Member State.

36. In the circumstances, we are driven to the clear conclusion that  there
    was no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

         The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve an error of law.

         The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands  and  the  appeal
         remains dismissed.



     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    1 December 2019



Anonymity

We have considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. In the circumstances, we make no anonymity order.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    1 December 2019

                           -----------------------
                                    Draft




