
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: EA/07181/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st July 2019                            |On 4th July 2019              |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                              MR MUMRAIZ ASGHAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Atcha, Ebrahim & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
    1. This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  by
       First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Aziz on 19th March 2019, in  which
       he dismissed an appeal, against a decision of the  respondent  dated
       2nd June 2016, to refuse an application  for  a  residence  card  as
       confirmation of a right to reside in the UK.

 Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He arrived in the UK as  a
       visitor on 9th May 2006 and remained in the UK unlawfully  when  his
       visitor visa  expired  on  9th  November  2006.  The  appellant  was
       encountered by Immigration officials in 2010 and on 11th July  2011,
       he was married to Ms Gyulezar Brahimbrasheva, a Bulgarian  national.




    3.  The  appellant  made  an  application  for  a  residence  card   as
       confirmation of the right to reside in the UK, but that  application
       was refused by the respondent in October 2011. The appellant, as  he
       was  entitled  to,  appealed  that  decision,  and  his  appeal  was
       dismissed for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated  by  FtT
       Judge Steer in  December  2011.  FtT  Judge  Steer  found  that  the
       marriage is not genuine. The appellant made  a  further  application
       for a residence card, but that application was also refused  by  the
       respondent, for the reasons set out in a decision of 17th  September
       2013.  The appellant again appealed, and his  appeal  was  dismissed
       for the reasons set out in a  decision  by  FtT  Judge  Petherbridge
       promulgated on 13th November 2014.   FtT  Judge  Petherbridge  heard
       evidence from the appellant, Gyulezar Brahimbrasheva,  Khadam  Shah,
       Faiza Malik and Zafar Sultan Kiani. Having considered  the  findings
       previously made by FtT Judge Street, and all of the evidence  before
       him, FtT Judge Petherbridge found, at [56], that the  appellant  was
       not credible, and that the marriage of the appellant and the sponsor
       was not genuine or subsisting.


    4.  Most recently on 20 October 2015 the appellant again applied for an
       EEA residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the UK as
       the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the United
       Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations   2006.    That
       application was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out in
       a decision dated 2nd June 2016 and it was that decision that was the
       subject of the appeal before FtT Judge Aziz. We pause to  note  that
       prior to the hearing of the appeal before FtT Judge Aziz, the appeal
       had been heard by FtT Judge Andrews, but her decision was  found  to
       be infected by a material error of law and was set  aside  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Grubb in September 2018.


    5. In readiness for the hearing of the appeal before  FtT  Judge  Aziz,
       the appellant's representatives had prepared a bundle  of  documents
       relied upon by the appellant comprising  of  some  310  pages.   The
       respondent had  also  provided  the  Tribunal  with  a  bundle  that
       included the previous decisions of FtT Judge  Steer  and  FtT  Judge
       Petherbridge.


 The decision of FtT Judge Aziz


    6. At paragraph [9] of  the  decision  the  FtT  Judge  refers  to  the
       documents  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  in   support   of   his
       application.  At paragraphs [11] and [12] of the decision, the Judge
       confirms that he had sight of the appellant's bundle served on  12th
       February 2019. The evidence given by the appellant, is  set  out  at
       paragraphs [15] to [27] of the  decision.   The  evidence  given  by
       Gyulezar Brahimbasheva is set out at paragraphs [28] to [35] of  the
       decision. The FtT Judge also heard evidence from  Mr  Sajjad  Akhtar
       Shad, the appellant's brother-in-law, and that evidence is  set  out
       at paragraphs [36] to 40] of the decision.


    7. The Judge's  findings  of  fact  and  conclusions  are  set  out  at
       paragraphs [50] to [74] of the decision.  The Judge  considered  the
       previous decisions of FtT Judge Steer and  FtT  Judge  Petherbridge.
       He noted, at [67] and [68], that:


             "67. Ms Atcha acknowledged that Devaseelan  applied  and  that
             the previous two Tribunal's had concluded that the appellant's
             marriage was one of convenience. She  also  acknowledged  that
             there  were  some  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  of  the
             appellant and Ms Gyulezar Shefkeveteva Brahimbasheva  at  this
             hearing.


             68.  Her key argument was that this Tribunal now had before it
             several years evidence of the couple cohabiting and that  this
             evidence was not before the previous Tribunal's. Approximately
             five years had passed since that second appeal hearing in 2011
             (sic)."


    8. At paragraph [70] of the decision,  the  FtT  Judge  refers  to  the
       wealth of evidence relied upon by the appellant.  He states:


             "I have gone through the evidence of cohabitation contained at
             pages 77-310 of the appellant's bundle. They  include  tenancy
             agreements, utility bills,  bank  statements,  employment  and
             other correspondence in relation to the various  addresses  in
             Luton that the couple claim to have resided at. There are also
             photographs submitted. In the  appellant's  favour,  I  accept
             these documents cover a substantial period."


    9. In reaching his  decision  the  FtT  Judge  took  into  account  the
       decisions of  the  previous  two  Tribunal's  and  referred  to  the
       decision in Devaseelan.  The FtT Judge concluded at paragraphs  [72]
       and [73] as follows:


             "72. I have taken  into  account  the  additional  documentary
             evidence which has  been  submitted.  This  Tribunal  is  also
             constrained by the  findings  of  not  one  but  two  previous
             judges. Both in 2011 and 2014 the first-tier tribunal came  to
             a conclusion that the appellant had entered into a marriage of
             convenience. The decision of these two Tribunal's was  arrived
             at following discrepancies  within  the  appellant's  and  EEA
             sponsor's marriage interviews from 2011 and  discrepancies  in
             the evidence of the witnesses at the appeal hearings.


             73.  Whilst there was some consistency in the evidence of  the
             three witnesses at this hearing, there was also  inconsistency
             on a  number  of  matters.  In  particular,  the  EEA  sponsor
             asserting that the  appellant  is  not  in  contact  with  his
             children in Pakistan. The appellant  stated  that  he  was  in
             contact with them and it is reasonable to conclude that if the
             merge was genuine that she would be aware of this. I found  Mr
             Sajjad Akhtar Sha to be of limited  assistance.  During  cross
             examination, he was vague and  unclear  in  a  number  of  his
             answers."


The appeal before us


   10. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Simpson on 23rd May
       2019.  The matter comes before us to consider whether the decision of
       the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
       remake the decision.


   11. The written grounds of appeal are incoherent, but Ms Atcha confirmed
       that there are two grounds of appeal. First the FtT Judge failed  to
       have any proper regard to the substantial volume  of  evidence  that
       was provided to the Tribunal to support the appellant's  claim  that
       his marriage to Ms Gyulezar Brahimbasheva is a genuine one. Ms Atcha
       submits that the FtT Judge should have attached more weight  to  the
       documents and photographs that demonstrate that  the  appellant  and
       his wife remain in a happy marriage. She submits that the  appellant
       and Ms Brahimbasheva have persisted in their endeavour  to  persuade
       the Tribunal of the genuineness of their relationship  and  marriage
       because it is a genuine marriage, and it would make no sense for  Ms
       Brahimbasheva to continue to support the appellant  in  this  appeal
       if, as the respondent claims, and the FtT Judge found, the  marriage
       is not a genuine one.


   12. Second, the FtT Judge should have attached  greater  weight  to  the
       evidence of the appellant, Ms  Brahimbasheva,  and  the  appellant's
       brother-in-law, who all gave evidence that the marriage is a genuine
       one. Ms Atcha submits that there  are  minor  discrepancies  in  the
       evidence given by  the  appellant  and  Ms  Brahimbasheva,  but  she
       submits, that is to be expected, and does not undermine their  claim
       to be in a genuine marriage.


 Discussion


   13. We reject the claim that FtT Judge Aziz failed to have proper regard
       to the evidence set out in the appellant's  bundle  comprising  some
       310 pages.  Ms Atcha confirmed that all of the evidence relied  upon
       by the appellant was contained within that bundle. It  is  right  to
       say that there is a wealth of evidence that  demonstrates  that  the
       appellant and Ms Brahimbasheva reside at the same address, but  that
       is, as the FtT Judge noted at [70], evidence of  cohabitation.   The
       Judge  accepted  that  the  evidence  of   cohabitation   covers   a
       substantial period.  We invited Ms Atcha to draw  our  attention  to
       the  evidence  that  was  before  the  FtT  Judge  and  capable   of
       demonstrating  a  relationship  between   the   appellant   and   Ms
       Brahimbasheva, rather than evidence  of  cohabitation  at  the  same
       address.  Ms Atcha referred us to a document at page  [279]  of  the
       appellant's bundle.  That is a document from the Luton and Dunstable
       Hospital NHS Trust Emergency Department, dated 21st  November  2013,
       naming Ms Brahimbasheva as the appellant's 'next  of  kin'.   Beside
       the photographs relied upon as evidence of their relationship,  that
       was the only document that Ms Atcha was able to draw  our  attention
       to.


   14. We have carefully considered for ourselves  the  evidence  that  was
       relied upon by the appellant and set out at pages [56] to  [310]  of
       the appellant's bundle. In our judgement, it is clear from paragraph
       [70] of his  decision,  that  the  FtT  Judge  had  regard  to  that
       evidence. The Judge was prepared to accept that there  was  evidence
       of cohabitation covering a substantial period. It  does  not  follow
       that the Judge was bound to accept that the evidence is evidence  of
       a genuine marriage.  Despite the passage of time, the  appellant  is
       only able to point to one document that is dated November  2013,  in
       which Ms Brahimbasheva is named as  the  appellant's  next  of  kin.
       That must be weighed against  all  the  other  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal, including the oral evidence of the witnesses.


   15. In reaching his decision, the FtT Judge had regard to  a  number  of
       factors.  The FtT Judge noted that in 2011,  the  appellant  and  Ms
       Brahimbasheva were invited to an interview and  the  respondent  had
       highlighted a number of discrepancies in the answers given by  them.
       He noted that  FtT  Judge  Steer  had  previously  considered  those
       inconsistencies and  had  also  noted  further  inconsistencies  and
       anomalies in the evidence received by the Tribunal, that in the end,
       lead FtT Judge Steer to find that the  appellant's  marriage  to  Ms
       Brahimbasheva is not  genuine.   FtT  Judge  Aziz  noted  FtT  Judge
       Petherbridge had reached a similar conclusion in  the  2014  appeal,
       having found that there were yet further inconsistencies between the
       evidence of the appellant and a witness, Faiza Malik, that had given
       evidence before FtT Judge Petherton.


   16. For his part, FtT Judge Aziz had also identified material  anomalies
       and inconsistencies in the evidence given by the  appellant  and  Ms
       Brahimbasheva.  For reasons that  remain  unexplained,  neither  the
       appellant nor Ms Brahimbasheva are registered with the same GP,  but
       importantly, neither was able to name the GP practice at  which  the
       other is registered.  The appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  does
       speak to his children and that he had last spoken  to  his  children
       about a month ago, when he called his elder brother.   The  evidence
       of Ms Brahimbasheva was that neither she nor the appellant speak  to
       his children.


   17.  We have carefully considered the criticisms made of the FtT Judge's
       assessment of the evidence. Here, it cannot be said that the Judge's
       analysis of the evidence is irrational or perverse.  The  Judge  did
       not consider irrelevant factors, and the weight that he attached  to
       the evidence either individually or cumulatively, was a  matter  for
       him.  It was in our judgment open to the FtT Judge to conclude that,
       although there was some consistency in the  evidence  of  the  three
       witnesses  at  the  hearing  of  the   appeal,   there   were   also
       inconsistencies on a number of matters, and that  in  the  end,  the
       evidence before the FtT Judge was not such  that  he  should  depart
       from the decision of two previous Tribunals who have both  concluded
       that  the  appellant's  marriage  to  Ms  Brahimbasheva  is  one  of
       convenience.


   18. It follows that we dismiss the appeal.


Notice of Decision


   19. The decision of the FtT Judge does not contain any error of law and
       the appeal is dismissed.

   20. No anonymity direction is made.





 Notice of Decision


   21. The appeal is dismissed.


   22. No anonymity direction has been applied for.  The FtT made  no  such
       direction and we make no anonymity direction.


Signed   [pic]                               Date     1st July 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed            [pic]                      Date  1st July 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

