
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07842/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                        mrs Durgadevi Babubhai Dubal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal and Mr A Metzer QC, Counsel instructed by
                    A Y & J Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of India.  Her date of  birth  is  5  August
    1958.  On 27 February 2017 she made an application for a residence card
    as the direct family  member  of  her  son  Yash  Babulal  Dubal  ("the
    Sponsor"), a British citizen.

2.   The application  was  refused  on  6  September  2017.   The  Appellant
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State. Her appeal was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  (FTT)  Judge  Rowlands,  following  a
    hearing on 11 July 2018 in a decision that was promulgated on 28 August
    2018.  The Appellant was granted permission by FTT Judge Grimmett on  8
    October 2018 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge erred  in
    consideration of the law  by  assessing  the  Appellant's  position  by
    reference  to  a  withdrawn  Immigration  Rule  rather  than   to   the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  2016
    Regulations").

3.   On 22 February 2016 the Appellant was granted a ten-year visit visa  to
    the UK.  She came to the UK as a visitor and stayed with her  daughter.
    I understand that this was in September. On 9 September 2016  she  made
    an application for visit visa to visit the Sponsor in the  Republic  of
    Ireland.  She  withdrew  this  application  on  27  October  2016.  She
    travelled to the Republic of Ireland on  24  December  2016  using  her
    visit visa that was granted to her by the Respondent.   On  12  January
    2017 she made an application for entry clearance. She came to the UK on
    20 February 2017. She made an application for a residence  card  on  27
    February 2017.

4.   The  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  states  that  the  application  was
    considered under Regulation 9 of the  2016  Regulations  but  that  the
    Appellant has not provided evidence in support of  her  application  as
    the family member of a British citizen who was exercising treaty rights
    in another EEA state.  It was not accepted by the Respondent  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor's residence  in  the  EEA  host  country  was
    genuine and it was concluded that the purpose of the residence  in  the
    EEA host country was  a  means  for  circumventing  the  UK's  domestic
    Immigration Rules or other immigration law.  The Respondent  considered
    that nineteen days after her arrival in the  Republic  of  Ireland  she
    made an application for entry clearance to return to the UK.    It  was
    concluded that it was never  the  Appellant's  intention  to  move  the
    centre of her life to Ireland.  The decision maker went on to  consider
    the English language requirement under  E-ECP.4.1  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and E-ECP.4.2 and concluded that the Sponsor's residence was  not
    genuine.

5.   The judge  found  that  the  Sponsor  was  genuinely  resident  in  the
    Republic of Ireland; however, he did  not  accept  that  Appellant  had
    established genuine  residency.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor  and  he  had  before  him  his  and  the  Appellant's  witness
    statements.  The Sponsor's evidence was that he and his family moved to
    Ireland in December 2015. He set up a company. He was also employed  as
    a business consultant and earned  an  income  from  this.   The  family
    returned after a year because the Sponsor's  wife  was  depressed,  and
    they were not  doing  well  financially.  They  had  not  expected  the
    Appellant to join them in Ireland.

6.   The Sponsor was cross-examined. He said that the Appellant visited  his
    sister in the UK in September 2016 and then she came to Ireland to live
    with him permanently.  When he was asked why after a few days she  made
    an application to return to the UK, he stated that she applied in order
    to return with him and his family.  She was not aware when  she  joined
    them in Ireland that the family had been thinking of moving back to the
    UK.  He was asked why he did not tell her to remain with his sister  in
    the UK and he said that there  were  issues  with  her  staying  there.
    There was evidence from the Sponsor that his mother had been  dependent
    on him before coming to Ireland and he was  sending  money  to  her  in
    India.

7.   The judge said at paragraph 16 that it was for the  Appellant  to  show
    that she meets the condition and for the Respondent to  show  that  the
    purpose of  the  residence  in  the  EEA  state  was  as  a  means  for
    circumventing the Immigration Rules.  The judge recorded that the total
    joint residence had been 58 days.  The judge said he considered all the
    evidence (see paragraph 21) and he stated as follows:

         "22. In order to put the matter in context I have  considered  what
             the Rules are in relation to her joining  him  in  the  United
             Kingdom directly as opposed  to  through  the  European  Union
             route.


         23.  The requirements for leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the
             parent of a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
             are contained in  Paragraph  317  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
             Because of her age the Appellant would have to show  that  she
             was living alone  outside  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  most
             exceptional compassionate circumstances, is financially wholly
             or mainly dependent on the person she is joining i.e. her  son
             and has no other close relatives in her own  country  to  whom
             she could turn to for support.  I  am  satisfied  that  I  was
             initially mislead by the Appellant and her son as to the  fact
             that there clearly are family members in India to whom she can
             turn for support and also clearly satisfied that  she  is  not
             financially dependent on her son.  The  simple  fact  that  he
             feels a commitment because he is the eldest is  no  basis  for
             saying that she should  be  allowed  to  join  him  under  the
             Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom and for that reason  I
             am satisfied that she would not be able to do so were  it  not
             for the EEA Rules that she wishes to rely on.


         24.  I do not accept that the  2014  judgment  in  O  and  B  makes
             Regulation 9 obsolete.  The  facts  in  those  cases  are  not
             similar to this case and, in any event, it does nor more  than
             say that when a citizen has created or strengthened  a  family
             life with a third country national during genuine residence in
             the Member State other than that of which he is a national  of
             the Rules shall apply.


         25.  As a fact, I am satisfied  that  the  British  (her  son)  was
             residing in the EEA state (Ireland) as a self-employed person.
              The evidence shows  that  including  the  business  accounts,
             tenancy agreement, witness statements,  school  enrolment  and
             letting of his own property in the United Kingdom.   The  case
             of O and B does suggest that three months residence  would  be
             enough but clearly they stayed  longer.   I  do  not  see  any
             evidence that makes me conclude that  his  residence  was  not
             genuine.


         26.  I am satisfied that the two of them have resided  together  in
             Ireland.  I am satisfied that his residence was genuine but am
             not satisfied that hers was, which is also  a  requirement  of
             the Rules.


         27.  The Regulations make it clear that it is not just the  British
             citizen who has to be genuine  but  also  the  family  member,
             Regulation 9(2)(c) says so.  I have concluded the factors and,
             in doing so, have considered the fact that, contrary to  their
             evidence, the Appellant knew when she  went  to  Ireland  that
             they were also intending to return.  I do not accept that they
             would not have told her so.


         28.  Her joint residence was very short, it  only  lasted  19  days
             before she applied to enter the United Kingdom and, having had
             that refused, she returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  39  days
             later.  She had not integrated at all in Ireland.  I am  given
             to understand that she doesn't speak English and she  actually
             wasn't there long enough to integrate  at  all.   Finally,  it
             clearly was her first lawful residence in an EU  country  with
             her son.  I understand perfectly well that the sponsor  treats
             it as his duty to look after his mother  but  the  reality  is
             that she was perfectly able to  look  after  herself  back  in
             India and this is an opportunistic application rather than any
             attempt to  circumvent  the  Rules  from  the  outset.   I  am
             satisfied that her residence in the EEA state was not  genuine
             and that she tried to take advantage of the circumstances."

8.   At the hearing before me I made sure that I had all relevant  evidence.
     I was given a copy of the Appellant's  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  which  included  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor's  witness
    statements.  I had before me an Authority's bundle and  a  letter  from
    the Appellant's solicitors of 19 November 2018 enclosing  the  skeleton
    argument of 19 November 2018. I had the Appellant's bundle prepared for
    the hearing before me.  There was an Appellant's  supplementary  bundle
    containing evidence which the Appellant sought to  adduce  pursuant  to
    Rule 15 of the 2008 Procedure Rules.  I indicated that it would only be
    necessary for me to consider that application if the decision was to be
    remade. There was no reason advanced by Mr Metzer why the  evidence  in
    the supplementary bundle should be taken into account when  determining
    whether the judge erred in law and indeed he did not seek  to  persuade
    me otherwise.  Mr Metzer made  lengthy  submissions  responding  to  my
    questions from time to time.  He also gave me a copy of a  document  he
    had prepared concerning post error of law considerations.

The grounds of appeal

9.   The grounds of appeal are threefold and expanded upon in  the  skeleton
    argument.  The first ground is that the judge failed to properly  apply
    the relevant law.  The judge did not  apply  anxious  scrutiny  and  in
    support of this the grounds rely on paragraph 23 of  the  decision  and
    the judge's consideration of paragraph 317 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Again, at paragraph 22, the judge made reference to the Rules  when  he
    stated, "In order to put the matter in context I have  considered  what
    the Rules are in relation to her joining  him  in  the  United  Kingdom
    directly as opposed to through the European Union route".

10.  On 9 July 2012 paragraph 317 was  replaced  by  E-ECDR  (Appendix  FM).
    Paragraph 317 was obsolete. In any event, it is unclear why  the  judge
    wished to place the Appellant's application within the context  of  the
    Immigration Rules because it was an application  under  European  Union
    law.  The judge's  findings  at  paragraph  23  relating  to  financial
    dependency supports the argument that he failed to make any finding  of
    fact about dependency, despite  the  Sponsor's  evidence  (recorded  at
    paragraph 7) that he had been  sending  the  Appellant  money  and  the
    evidence that was submitted to support dependency.  In  any  event,  it
    was not a matter that was raised by the Respondent in the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  No proper consideration was given to the matter by the
    judge.  There was a lack of proper scrutiny to  the  Appellant's  case.
    The Respondent erroneously made reference to the Immigration Rules  and
    Appendix FM in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

11.  The second ground asserts that the judge failed  to  properly  consider
    the decision of O and B v The Netherlands  C-456/12  which  essentially
    rewrote  the  principals  set  out  in  Surinder  Singh  C-370/90.   My
    attention was drawn to the conclusion reached by the court as follows:

         "Article 21(1) TFEU must be interpreted as  meaning  that  where  a
         Union citizen has created or strengthened  a  family  life  with  a
         third-country national during genuine residence, pursuant to and in
         conformity with the conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2)  and
         Article 16(1) and (2)  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  of  the  European
         Parliament and of the Council of 29 April  2004  on  the  right  of
         citizens of the Union and their family members to move  and  reside
         freely  within  the  territory  of  the  Members  States   amending
         Regulation (EEC) No 01612/68 and repealing  Directives  64/221/EEC,
         68/360   EEC,   72/194/EEC,   73/148/EEC,   75/34/EEC,   75/35/EEC,
         90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC, in a Member State other  than
         that of which he is a national, the provisions  of  that  Directive
         apply by analogy where that Union citizen returns, with the  family
         member in question, to his Member State of origin.  Therefore,  the
         conditions for granting a derived right of residence  to  a  third-
         country national who is a family member of that Union  citizen,  in
         the latter's Member State of origin, should not,  in  principle  be
         more strict than those provided for by that directive for the grant
         of a derived right of residence to a third-country national who  is
         a family member of a Union citizen who has exercised his  right  of
         freedom of movement by becoming established in a Member State other
         than the Member State of which he is a national."

12.  It is submitted that the factors contained in Regulation 9(3) were  not
    mentioned in O and B or Surinder Singh and therefore Regulation  9  was
    not lawful.  The submission before the First-tier  Judge  made  by  the
    Appellant's Counsel was not that regulation was obsolete in contrast to
    what is said at paragraph 24 by the judge.  The  grounds  rely  on  the
    case of Coman (C-673/16) where the CJEU further  endorsed  that  during
    the genuine residence of a union citizen, where family life is  created
    or strengthened in that Member State, then it required the  continuance
    of this position by virtue of the grant of residence derived  from  the
    union citizen (see paragraph 23 -  25).    The  grounds  refer  to  the
    decision of the CJEU in Banger (C- 89/17) which reaffirmed that:

         "21. It is the court's established case law  that  the  purpose  of
             Directive 2004/38 is to facilitate the exercise of the primary
             and individual right to move  and  reside  freely  within  the
             territory of the Member States, which is conferred directly on
             citizens of the Union by Article 21(1)(TFEU), and that one  of
             the objectives of that Directive is to strengthen  that  right
             (judgments  of  12March  2014,  O.  and  B.,   C-456/12,   EU:
             C:2014:135, paragraph 35,  and  of  5  June  2018,  Coman  and
             others, C-673/16, EU: C:2018:385, paragraph 18)."

13.  It is asserted that the court held that more stringent conditions  must
    not be attached by Member States for entry of a third country  national
    with a British  citizen  to  the  UK  than  are  provided  for  by  the
    Directive.

14.  The skeleton argument refers to paragraph 24 of the case of Rahman  and
    others C-83/11 where the CJEU stated:-

         "24. In the light both of the absence of  more  specific  rules  in
             Directive 2004/38 and of the use of the words  'in  accordance
             with  its  national  legislation'  in  Article  3(2)  of   the
             directive, each Member State has a wide discretion as  regards
             the selection of the factors to be taken  into  account.  None
             the  less,  the  host  Member  State  must  ensure  that   its
             legislation contains criteria which are  consistent  with  the
             normal meaning of the  term  'facilitate'  and  of  the  words
             relating to dependence used in Article 3(2), and which do  not
             deprive that provision of its effectiveness."

15.  It is asserted that the judge's approach specifically at paragraphs  24
    and 28 was unduly restrictive  and  failed  to  consider  the  relevant
    applicable law.  The grounds refer to the Home Office Guidance from the
    European Operational Policy Team dated 1 January 2014 which  highlights
    at paragraph 14 the following:

         "14. It should be noted that the factors set out in Regulation 9(3)
             are not determinative.  The question as to whether the British
             citizen would be deterred from exercising their free  movement
             rights  were  their  spouse/civil  partner  refused,  must  be
             determined having regard to all relevant factors."

16.  It is asserted in ground 3 that the 2016  Regulations  do  not  require
    any consideration of the application of the Immigration  Rules  and  if
    the judge's reference to them was to demonstrate that  the  Appellant's
    residence with her son was not genuine  then  such  an  approach  would
    demonstrate a material error of law.   In  relation  to  the  issue  of
    genuine residence, the judge, at paragraph 27, did not accept that  the
    Appellant did not know that her son and family intended  to  return  to
    the UK when she travelled to be with them in Ireland.  It  is  asserted
    that the judge did not have regard to the Appellant's fragile state  of
    mind evidenced by the psychiatric report  and  other  medical  evidence
    within the Appellant's bundle before making a finding  of  fact  as  to
    whether she had been informed of the family decision to relocate.

17.  The medical evidence highlights that the Appellant was  suffering  from
    a major depressive disorder.  There was a report from Dr Adrian  Window
    a consultant psychiatrist of 20 March 2017 who had diagnosed her with a
    moderate  depressive  episode  under  the  ICD.10  classification.   He
    considered two previous medical reports from India which confirmed  the
    Appellant's fragile state of mind.  The family's decision  to  relocate
    to the UK and the Appellant's knowledge of  that  decision  was  wholly
    irrelevant.  The judge was satisfied that the Sponsor had  demonstrated
    that he had transferred the centre of his life to Ireland and  that  he
    and his mother had resided together in Ireland for nineteen days before
    the application was made to return to the  UK  and  58  days  in  total
    before they returned to the UK on 20 February 2018.  Despite the  short
    period of residence the judge did not properly consider the guidance in
    O and B.  The Appellant's move to Ireland was to strengthen  or  create
    family life with her son.  It is not a requirement of  the  Regulations
    for the Appellant to be able to look after herself in  India  and  this
    was not a material consideration (see paragraph 28  of  the  decision).
    This highlighted the judge's lack  of  understanding  of  the  relevant
    considerations.   The  judge  in  finding  it  to  be  an   opportunist
    application failed to consider the  factual  matters  set  out  in  the
    application.  In the Appellant and her son's statement and  the  series
    of events that led to the deterioration  of  her  mental  health  after
    retirement and the decision that the Appellant should join  the  family
    in Ireland.  In any event, were it an opportunist application the  case
    of Akrich C-109/01 is relied on and  the  conclusions  of  the  ECJ  in
    relation to parties to a  genuine  marriage  installing  themselves  in
    another Member State to obtain a benefit conferred by EC law which  was
    held not to be relevant to an assessment of their legal situation: -

         "3.  Where the marriage between a national of a Member State and  a
             national of a non-Member State is genuine, the fact  that  the
             spouses installed themselves in another Member State in order,
             on their return to the Member State of which the former  is  a
             national,  to  obtain  the  benefit  of  rights  conferred  by
             community law is not relevant to an assessment of their  legal
             situation by the competent authorities of the latter State."

18.  In respect of ground 3 again the case of Banger is  relied  upon  which
    makes clear that there  should  be  an  extensive  examination  of  the
    Appellant's personal circumstances and reference is made to  paragraphs
    38 to 40 of that decision.

19.  Mr Walker made submissions.  He relied on paragraph 21 of the  decision
    to support his contention that the judge considered all  the  evidence.
    He referred to a Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's  minute  from  the
    hearing but conceded that this had not  been  shown  to  the  Appellant
    prior to the hearing.  There was no Rule 24 response or counter  claim.



20.   The  judge  set  out  the  Sponsor's  and  Appellant's  evidence.   My
    attention was drawn to various parts of that  evidence  by  Mr  Metzer.
    The Appellant's evidence in her witness statement reads as follows:

         "5.  I confirm that my initial letter of application  sets  out  in
             details my level of financial and physical  dependency  on  my
             sponsor, I will not repeat the information here.  I confirm my
             dependency has increased and is ongoing.  The  stress  of  the
             uncertainty of my immigration  status  had  contributed  to  a
             decline in my mental health.


         ...


         9.   The next paragraph (last on page 1) states that because of the
             time I moved to Ireland to join my son  suggests  that  I  had
             never planned to move the 'centre of my life' to  Ireland.   I
             will say in response that I moved to Ireland to join  my  son,
             so I could be cared for and supported by him.  My  belief  was
             at the time I moved was that we would be residing in  Ireland.
             The decision to relocate back to the UK was taken  by  my  son
             following how unhappy and depressed his wife became.  I do not
             believe he could cope with caring for  me  and  his  wife  and
             still operate his business.  The centre of my life is with  my
             son."

21.   I  was  referred  to  parts  of  the  Sponsor's   witness   statement,
    specifically the following:

         "10. At the time we moved to Ireland, my  mother  was  residing  in
             India, and I would send  her  money  each  month  towards  her
             living expenses, without the additional assistance  she  would
             have struggled.  She did not join me until  24  December  2016
             quite some time after I moved.  If  it  was  my  intention  to
             'circumvent' the rules I would have arranged for her  to  join
             me sooner and would not have resided in Ireland for as long as
             I did, or at very least have remained in Ireland for a  longer
             period after she joined me.


         11.  I have previously explained why the decision to  relocate  was
             made; I could not leave my mother in the condition she was in.
              Her mental health had deteriorated, and she almost burnt down
             her house while she was still in it.  I  had  calls  from  her
             neighbours raising concerns.   I  believe  that  her  loss  of
             family caused her to have a breakdown.  As the eldest son,  it
             is my responsibility to care for my mother, and I could not do
             so from overseas.  So, I made the decision to  have  her  live
             with me and my family, I  thought  that  being  surrounded  by
             others who could keep an eye on her might  actually  help  her
             mental  health  improve.   Although  that  has  not   actually
             happened, I at least know she is being cared for  on  a  daily
             basis in my home.


         12.  The UKVI has taken the view that my move to  Ireland  was  not
             'genuine based on the fact that when I relocated to Ireland  I
             did not sell my house in the UK.  Property in  the  UK  is  an
             investment, many people own property in the UK but it  is  not
             their main residence.  I earned money  from  renting  it  out.
             UKVI have also taken the view that by renting it  out  through
             an Estate Agent, with a standard  12-month  Tenancy  Agreement
             was indicative of my intention to return.  I disagree,  a  12-
             month tenancy Agreement  is  standard,  also  the  tenant  who
             rented the property did not want to commit to  more  than  one
             year.'


         ...


         18.  I woke up one morning and realised that  I  had  a  choice  to
             make.  It was clear that my wife did not  want  to  remain  in
             Ireland, and I could not lose her and my son.  I had to  think
             about what was best for the whole family, as the  eldest  male
             that is my job.  I knew that if I did not make  this  decision
             the outcome could have been devastating for my family unit  as
             a whole.  I love my wife and son, and I  have  a  duty  to  my
             mother.  I made the decision to move back to the UK and try to
             make a go of the business I had left behind.  When  Arjun  had
             been researching the setting up of  legal  advice  service  in
             Ireland he discovered that we could set up an ABS law firm  in
             the UK, we could not do it in Ireland but if it worked well in
             the UK and we got to a position where  we  could  expand  into
             Ireland.  Although with Brexit looming nothing is certain.


         19.  We started the paperwork for the ABS and incorporated  A  &  Y
             Law Limited in June 2017 which  is  now  trading  as  AY  &  J
             Solicitors.  Building this business is the focus of my brother
             and me now."

22.  There was evidence of the Appellant's medical state before  the  judge.
    I was referred to the medical evidence. There was a psychiatric  report
    by consultant psychiatrist Adrian Winbow of 20 March 2007.  He examined
    the Appellant on 16 March 2017.  He states that the Appellant initially
    moved to England in September 2016 for a short period  from  India  and
    then she moved to Ireland to be with her relatives  in  December  2016.
    He describes the suicide of the Appellant's  husband  in  1997  and  he
    considered the medical  evidence  that  he  had  from  the  Appellant's
    doctors in India and that she has been diagnosed as having  a  moderate
    depressive episode which under the ICD.10 classification is  classified
    as F32.1 and that she was  now  on  antidepressants.   She  retired  in
    August 2016.  She was worried that no-one would look after her in India
    on her retirement.  There was a statement from Dr Rathod of  30  August
    2016 which stated that she lived alone and that she has had in  in  the
    past intermittent hypertension.  She  saw  a  general  practitioner  in
    Dublin on 18 January  2017  and  was  prescribed  antidepressants.   Dr
    Winbow  concludes  that  at  present  she  was  lethargic  and   eating
    excessively due to  the  antidepressants.   She  is  disinterested  and
    apathetic.  In his opinion she has a moderate depressive episode  which
    started originally after her husband's death and which was  made  worse
    by her retirement in August 2016.  She is on antidepressants and  needs
    regular support from her relatives.  She is a danger to herself  should
    she live alone.

Conclusions

23.  The grounds overlap I shall initially engage with the O  and  B  point.
    The Secretary of State considered that the Appellant failed to  satisfy
    the requirements of Regulation 9 of the 2016 Regulations. They read  as
    follows:-

         "9. -(1) If the conditions in paragraph (2)  are  satisfied,  these
                  Regulations apply to a person who  is  the  family  member
                  ("F") of a British citizen ("BC") as though the BC were an
                  EEA national.


             (2)  The conditions are that-


                  (a)  BC-


                        i) is residing in an EEA State as  a  worker,  self-
                           employed  person,  self-sufficient  person  or  a
                           student,  or  so   resided   immediately   before
                           returning to the United Kingdom; or


                       ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence  in
                           an EEA State;


                  (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and


                  (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.


             (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
                  or was genuine include-


                   a) whether the centre of BC's life  transferred  to  the
                      EEA State;


                   b) the length of F and BC's joint residence in  the  EEA
                      State;


                   c)  the  nature  and  quality  of   the   F   and   BC's
                      accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is  or
                      was BC's principal residence;


                   d) the degree of F  and  BC's  integration  in  the  EEA
                      State;


                   e) whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with  BC
                      was in the EEA State.


             (4)  This regulation does not apply-


                   a) where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                      was as a means for circumventing any immigration laws
                      applying  to  non-EEA  nationals  to  which  F  would
                      otherwise  be  subject  (such   as   any   applicable
                      requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter
                      or remain in the United Kingdom); or


                   b) to a person who is only eligible to be treated  as  a
                      family  member  as  a  result  of   regulation   7(3)
                      (extended family members treated as family members).


             (5)  Where these Regulations apply to F, BC is to  be  treated
                  as holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the
                  purposes of the application of these Regulations to F.


             (6)  In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is  only  to  be  treated  as
                  having acquired the right of permanent  residence  in  the
                  EEA  State  if  such  residence  would  have  led  to  the
                  acquisition of that right  under  regulation  15,  had  it
                  taken place in the United Kingdom.


             (7)  For the purposes of determining  whether,  when  treating
                  the BC as an  EEA  national  under  these  Regulations  in
                  accordance with paragraph (1), BC  would  be  a  qualified
                  person-


                   a)  any  requirement  to  have  comprehensive   sickness
                      insurance cover in the United Kingdom still  applies,
                      save that it does not require the cover to extend  to
                      BC;


                   b) in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as
                      a worker under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC  is  not
                      required to satisfy condition A;


                   c) in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker
                      as defined in regulation 6(1), BC is not required  to
                      satisfy conditions A and, where it would otherwise be
                      relevant, condition C."

24.  The Grand Chamber's decision in O and B, unlike Regulation 9, makes  no
    reference to any "centre of life"  test,  the  nature  and  quality  of
    accommodation, the question of principal residence and integration.  It
    may be  arguable  that  Regulation  9  is  more  restrictive  than  the
    Directive to which it is intended to  give  force  and  certainly  more
    restrictive than the judgment of the court in O and B.   However,  both
    Regulation 9 and O and B are concerned  with  the  genuineness  of  the
    residence in the host Member State.  In O and B, the  court  stated  at
    paragraph 54:

         "54. Where, during the genuine residence of the  Union  citizen  in
             the host Member State, pursuant to and in conformity with  the
             conditions set out in Article 7(1) and (2) of the  Directive
             2004/38, family life is created or strengthened in that Member
             State, the effectiveness of the rights conferred on the  Union
             citizen by Article 21(1) TFEU  requires  that  the  citizen's
             family life in the host Member State may continue on returning
             to the Member  State of which he is a  national,  through  the
             grant of a derived right of residence to the family member who
             is a third-country national.  If  no  such  derived  right  of
             residence  were  granted,  that   Union   citizen   could   be
             discouraged from leaving the Member State of  which  he  is  a
             national in order to exercise his  right  of  residence  under
             Article 21(1) TFEU in another  Member  State  because  he  is
             uncertain whether he will be able to continue  in  his  Member
             State of origin  a  family  life  with  his  immediate  family
             members which has been created or  strengthened  in  the  host
             Member State."

25.  The judge considered whether the residence was genuine, and this  is  a
    requirement as made clear in O and  B;  notwithstanding,  the  specific
    factors in regulation  9.  Any  challenge  to  the  lawfulness  of  the
    regulations, an issue not pursued by Mr Metzer at  the  hearing  before
    me, is not a matter on which this Tribunal has jurisdiction and is not,
    in any event, material. In addition, any interpretation  issue  is  not
    material. The judge was entitled to require residence  to  be  genuine.
    The approach is consistent with O and B. The decision did not  turn  on
    the centre of life test.
26.      The Respondent's decision to refuse the application is  lacking  in
    detail. It is stated  that  the  Appellant  did  not  provide  adequate
    evidence to support her application to be a family member of a  British
    citizen exercising treaty rights in another EEA  state.   I  reasonably
    assume that the reason why the Appellant submitted a significant amount
    of  evidence  relating  to  dependency  was  to  address  this.  It  is
    unarguable that the findings relating to dependency were irrelevant; on
    the contrary, it was incumbent on the judge to make findings  to  order
    to determine whether she was in fact a family member. It is  unarguable
    that there was any unfairness in the judge applying his  mind  to  this
    issue. The judge determined dependency and concluded that the Appellant
    was not financially dependent on the Sponsor.  I am  not  satisfied  he
    applied  the  applicable  test   in   Case   C-1/05   Yunying   Jia   v
    Migrationsverket. However, this was not  an  issue  raised  at  by  the
    Appellant. In any event,  it  is  not  material  because  even  if  the
    Appellant is a family member, the appeal could not succeed without  the
    Appellant establishing that she was genuinely residence.
27.  The Sponsor's oral evidence as recorded  by  the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant was not aware of the intention of the family to return to the
    UK. The Appellant's evidence was that she did not  know  they  were  to
    return and that her belief was, at the time she moved to  the  Republic
    of Ireland, that she would be residing there. However,  the  judge  did
    not believe this. Mr Metzer argued at the hearing before  me  that  the
    Appellant's knowledge was not specifically canvassed at the hearing and
    he suggested that there had been unfairness caused by the judge  making
    findings about it.  This is a submission  entirely  without  substance.
    It was a matter that was raised at the  hearing.   If  the  Appellant's
    legal team failed to properly engage with the issue, it  would  show  a
    lack of judgement because it is very clear from  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent  that  genuine  residency   was   an   issue.   Whilst   not
    determinative, the knowledge and intentions  of  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant were factors that the judge was entitled to take into account
    when determining whether she was genuinely resident.  Fairness  in  any
    event, is not an issue raised in the grounds.

28.  Mr Metzer argued that the evidence that the Appellant was not aware  of
    the intention of the Sponsor was not challenged by the Respondent;  the
    implication being that the  judge  was  not  entitled  to  reject  this
    evidence. I disagree. The core of the Respondent's  case  is  that  the
    Appellant was not genuinely resident  and  credibility  was  an  issue.
    Because of the unusual circumstances of the case, it is  reasonable  to
    expect the Appellant to explain how it came to  be  that  she  was  not
    aware of the Sponsor's intentions bearing in mind that a matter of days
    after her arrival she returned to the UK.  There  was  no  evidence  to
    explain this.

29.  In the absence of evidence explaining why the Sponsor had not told  the
    Appellant, the judge was entitled to find this was  not  what  happened
    and therefore that the Appellant was aware of the  Sponsor's  intention
    to return to the UK. Mr Metzer argued before me  that  the  Appellant's
    state of mind was such that either the Sponsor decided not to tell  her
    because of her mental health or that he  told  her,  but  she  was  not
    capable of understanding. It is not clear on which basis  the  case  is
    now advanced. However, it was not advanced on either basis  before  the
    FTT. The case was advanced on the basis that the Sponsor did  not  tell
    the Appellant. No reason was given to account  for  this.   Whilst  the
    medical evidence could potentially support the Sponsor  having  decided
    not to tell the Appellant (because of her state of mind), this was  not
    how the case was advanced.  Moreover, the medical evidence does not  go
    anywhere near to establishing that the Appellant  was  not  capable  of
    understanding what she had been told by her son. The  grounds  rely  on
    Banger to  argue  that  the  judge  did  not  carry  out  an  extensive
    examination of the Appellant's circumstances which  required  according
    to  Mr  Metzer  consideration  of  capacity  in  the  context  of   the
    Appellant's mental health.  I wholly reject that following  Banger  the
    FTT, faced with a diagnosis of depression  relating  to  a  represented
    Appellant, must engage in the  type  of  speculation  suggested  by  Mr
    Metzer.  Furthermore the evidence does not nearly establish incapacity.
     In any event, I am not persuaded that either scenario as  advanced  by
    Mr Metzer, if accepted by the FTT  support  genuine  residence  in  the
    circumstances in this case.  If the Appellant intended to reside in the
    Republic of Ireland and or did know that her son was to  return,  there
    was still an  absence  of  evidence  capable  of  establishing  genuine
    residence.

30.  The judge considered matters under the Immigration Rules. This was  not
    a material consideration.  He may have  been  misled  by  the  decision
    letter.  He also considered matters such as  the  Appellant's  language
    skills when considering genuine residence.  I  am  not  persuaded  that
    this was a  wholly  immaterial  consideration  when  assessing  genuine
    residence. However, I am satisfied that he took into account immaterial
    matters and made findings about  matters  that  were  not  relevant.  I
    accept  that  he  may  have  conflated  the  issues  of  dependency  (a
    requirement to be met  in  order  to  be  family  member)  and  genuine
    residence. The Appellant has to establish dependency in order to  be  a
    family  member.   Overall,  I  am  satisfied  that  any  error  in  the
    assessment by the judge did  not  infect  the  ultimate  conclusion  in
    respect of whether the Appellant was a genuine resident. Whilst  motive
    is not material to genuine  residence  as  properly  concluded  by  the
    judge, he was entitled to take into account intentions and knowledge in
    assessing whether residency was genuine.  Credibility was a  factor  to
    consider. The judge was entitled to find that  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor were not credible.

31.  Notwithstanding that the Sponsor was found to  be  genuinely  resident;
    the Appellant's stay in the Republic of Ireland  was  extremely  brief.
    Whilst this is not determinative of the issue,  it  is  undoubtedly  of
    significance in this case. Regardless of her intentions or knowledge of
    what was going to happen shortly after she arrived, there  is  in  this
    case a dearth of evidence that  residence  was  genuine,  effective  or
    real.  It is unarguable that she satisfied the centre of life  test  or
    that her residence was genuine in the O and B sense. Her claim that  it
    was genuine was wholly unsupported. My attention was not drawn  to  any
    material evidence that the judge did not take  into  account  which  is
    capable of undermining  his  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    genuinely resident. The judge was entitled to conclude that she  was  a
    visitor.  Moreover, the  conclusion  was  inevitable  on  the  evidence
    before the judge. From the brief duration of her stay in  the  Republic
    of Ireland, notwithstanding that the Appellant has medical problems, it
    cannot sensibly be argued that family life between  the  Appellant  and
    the Sponsor was created  or  materially  strengthened  whilst  she  was
    there. She stayed with the Sponsor for just over 8 weeks.

32.  It was not the intention of the court in O and B to  extend  union  law
    to cover abuses. However, the judge did not find that there had been an
    abuse.  The decision is not incompatible with Akrich  C-109/01  because
    ultimately the judge concluded that the Appellant's residence  was  not
    genuine. Her motivation was not an issue material to that decision.

33.      There is no error of  law  capable  of  having  an  impact  on  the
    outcome in this case. There is no need for me  to  interfere  with  the
    decision of the FTT to dismiss the Appellant's appeal  under  the  2016
    Regulations.

34.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date 20 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
