
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/07311/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th October 2018                          |On 6th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                         MR AHMED SALAMA SHAABAN ALY
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Katambala, Finsbury Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt.  His date of birth is 1st February
    1971.
 2. On 1 February 2017 the Appellant made an application  for  a  Residence
    Card under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016
    (the "2016 Regulations") on the basis that he has a retained  right  of
    residence following his divorce  from  an  EEA  national  of  Slovakian
    nationality, Ms Gaborova (the "Sponsor")  which  was  finalised  on  30
    December 2015.  The application was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    on                   27                   July                    2017.


 3. The Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary of  State.
    His appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Cockrill  in
    a decision that was promulgated on 10th July 2018, following a  hearing
    at Taylor House  on  2nd  July  2018.   Judge  Cockrill  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal.  The Appellant was  granted  permission  by  First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 15th August 2018.  Thus, the matter  came
    before me to determine whether Judge Cockrill made an error of law.

 4. The Appellant was granted a residence card on 31 October 2010,  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national. The Respondent refused the  application  for
    permanent residence because it was his view that the Appellant  married
    the Sponsor in a marriage of convenience.

 5. According to the Respondent the Appellant  failed  to  submit  evidence
    that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights. Experian credit  reports
    showed that there was no trace of the Sponsor having  a  connection  to
    any of the addresses  where  the  Appellant  lived.   In  addition,  in
    February 2013 a Lloyds Bank Account was opened in  the  Sponsor's  name
    connecting her with an address in Gravesend which had no connection  to
    the Appellant.   Checks were  conducted  on  her  international  travel
    history to and from the UK over the period between 20 July 2012 and  20
    July 2017 and there was only one trace of her coming to the  UK  during
    that period for a visit between 30 June 2015 and 10 July 2015, when she
    returned to Slovakia.

 6. The Appellant in his application gave  his  home  address  as  [  ~  ],
    Cricklewood.  A visit was made on the 21 July 2017  by  an  Immigration
    Officer and enquiries were made with the occupants of the property (see
    B1-2 Respondent's  bundle).    One  of  the  occupants  recognised  the
    Appellant from a photograph and stated that he was  a  friend  who  had
    stayed with him in his room for a month one year ago.  He said that  he
    did not know where he was now  residing.    It  was  concluded  by  the
    Immigration Officer that the Appellant had been using the address as  a
    postal drop and that he had lived there for no more than a month.   The
    conclusion  was  that  the  Appellant  had  never  been  in  a  genuine
    relationship with the sponsor and that she was clearly not resident  in
    the UK throughout the period of the marriage.   It was  concluded  that
    she had never exercised treaty rights in the UK throughout  the  period
    of the marriage or that she was in the UK at the time of the divorce on
    30 December 2015.

 7. Judge  Cockrill  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant.  The  Appellant
    corrected his witness  statement  which  indicated  that  he  had  lost
    contact with the Sponsor. His oral evidence was he had been in  contact
    with her before making the application. She assisted him  by  providing
    him with some payslips and P60s.   These documents all show an  address
    in London where the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  lived.  They  couple
    separated in April 2015.  In response to the Experian report he  stated
    that the Sponsor was living in Kent initially and she continued to  use
    the address as her postal address because the address in London was not
    safe.  His evidence was that divorce proceedings commenced in March  or
    April 2015. He could not be clear about this.

 8. The judge heard evidence from Mr Jeredat, a friend of the Appellant. He
    gave evidence that the Appellant and the Sponsor lived together as  man
    and wife.  He had visited them twice, once in 2011 and once in 2013.

 9. The judge made findings at paragraphs  27  -  36  of  the  decision  as
    follows:-

         "28. I have had the obvious advantage of seeing the  appellant  and
         have listened to him give oral evidence and be  subject  to  cross-
         examination.  I have also had evidence from one witness  called  on
         his behalf.  That witness could say fairly general  terms  that  he
         had known the appellant and Miss Gaborova to the extent that he had
         been a friend of the appellants for about 7 years.  They had worked
         together at a restaurant and the witness could confirm  that  there
         had been a time when Miss Gaborova would come to the restaurant  at
         the end of the day to meet the appellant.   There had been 2 visits
         made by  the  witness  to  the  appellant's  home.   There  were  2
         different addresses and his evidence was helpful to me,  but  quite
         limited in its extent.   He does not really deal in any substantial
         way with the issue that is now raised  as  to  whether  this  is  a
         marriage of convenience.


         29.  It is important to recognise that there is not a burden on the
         appellant to show that his marriage is a  genuine  one.   I  remind
         myself of the decision in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ14.   That  Court  of
         Appeal decision makes reference  to  the  principles  laid  out  in
         Papajorgji (EEA Spouse - Marriage  of  Convenience)  Greece  [2012]
         UKUT 00038.  The burden is on the respondent to raise, by reference
         to the evidence, reasonable grounds for suspecting that this is not
         a genuine marriage and then it is on the appellant to answer that.


         30.  In this particular case, I am not persuaded,  looking  at  the
         totality of the  material,  that  the  respondent  discharged  that
         burden that lies upon her.  Although the reference is to  different
         addresses for the appellant and sponsor,  that  in  itself  is  not
         sufficient in my judgment to raise reasonable suspicion.


         31.  I have commented already that the visit which  took  place  at
         the address in Cricklewood in July 2017 does  not  assist  me  very
         much, because of course on the appellant's case, by that stage,  he
         had separated from his wife and so of  course  there  had  been  no
         reference to her there.


         32.  As far as I can see, the crux of this matter is  not  so  much
         whether this is  a  marriage  of  convenience,  because  I  am  not
         persuaded, looking at the totality of the material, that  it  is  a
         marriage of convenience, but the issue that to my mind is very real
         one is whether the applicant can show that his  now  former  spouse
         was exercising Treaty Rights when the divorce commenced.


         33.  It has to be pointed out that it was  he  that  commenced  the
         divorce  proceedings,  but  he  has  been  vague  about  when  that
         happened.  He puts it as March or April 2015.  I have been provided
         with some pay slips for the sponsor, but they do  not  cover  March
         2015.  There is a significant question mark therefore  raised  over
         whether or not the sponsor was in fact exercising Treaty Rights  at
         that material time of commencement of the divorce proceedings.   On
         that basis alone in my judgment, the appellant is bound to fail  in
         relation to the present appeal.


         34.  The other issue that of course has created some concern on the
         part of the respondent is the fact that an Experian  credit  report
         that was carried out, and which has  been  filed  in  this  appeal,
         appears to show that the sponsor had an address in Kent and had not
         shown up on any system as sharing an  address  with  the  appellant
         when the appellant has moved address periodically.  That also is  a
         matter of concern for me as to whether  the  sponsor  has  in  fact
         really been living down in Kent, or whether what  has  happened  is
         that she has been with the appellant, but for some reason there has
         been no trace of her occupation at these several  addresses,  where
         the appellant has said that they have lived.


         35.  As I have already made  plain  though,  the  appeal  does  not
         succeed because it has  not  been  shown  to  the  requisite  civil
         standard, which is a balance of probabilities, that the sponsor was
         indeed  exercising  Treaty  Rights  when  the  divorce  proceedings
         commenced.   It is unnecessary to come to a definitive answer as to
         where the sponsor was living from time to time.  I  do  acknowledge
         that her employer, Cafe de Vie has shown her address as  being  one
         and the same as the address occupied by the appellant in Maida Vale
         area of London and of course as I have indicated that  is  at  odds
         with the Experian report.


         36.  Looking at the totality of the material, I conclude that  this
         was not a marriage of convenience.  Insufficient evidence has  been
         adduced by the respondent to discharge that burden which lies  upon
         her.  The appellant  has  also  adduced  evidence  in  my  judgment
         sufficient to show that he has maintained a relationship with  Miss
         Gaborova.  Clearly the couple got married and that has not been the
         subject of formal challenge and equally  they  were  divorced  with
         Decree  Absolute  on  30th  December  2015.   There  is  sufficient
         evidence  in  my  judgment  to  show  that  they  had   a   marital
         relationship.   I emphasise that what is missing in this case,  and
         it would appear that the focus of attention was not on this  point,
         is that there is a lack of evidence  to  show  exercise  of  Treaty
         Rights at the commencement of the  divorce  proceedings.   On  that
         basis the application for the residence card on the basis of  being
         a former family member who has retained a  right  of  residence  is
         dismissed."



Error of Law

10. The judge, as conceded by Ms Everett erred because there was sufficient
    evidence, subject to that evidence being found reliable,  to  establish
    that the Sponsor exercised Treaty Rights until divorce proceedings were
    initiated.   The Appellant submitted payslips for March and April  2015
    and a P60 for 2014/2015. Ms Everett accepted that  the  judge  had  not
    properly applied Baigazieva v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1088.


Conclusions


11. Ms Katambala's view was that I should allow the  appeal  on  the  basis
    that the evidence before  the  judge  was  sufficient  to  establish  a
    retained right of residence in the UK under Article 13(2)  (a)  of  the
    Citizens' Directive [2004/38/EC]. However, this was not accepted by  Ms
    Everett who stated that there were credibility issues and the judge was
    troubled by the issues raised by the Experian  credit  checks  and  the
    reliability of the evidence relied on by the Appellant.

12. Whilst the judge was concerned by the issues raised in the  Immigration
    Officer's report which undermined  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he
    relied on in order to establish that the Sponsor was exercising  treaty
    rights (namely, P60s and payslips) he did not believe it necessary  for
    him to make a  clear  finding  relating  to  the  reliability  of  this
    evidence  because  he,  albeit   mistakenly   believed   the   evidence
    insufficient in any event.  It follows that in the light of  the  error
    it is now necessary to make a  clear  unequivocal  finding  about  that
    evidence.   I wholly reject the  proposition  that  because  the  judge
    found  that  the  marriage  was  not  a  marriage  of  convenience,  it
    automatically follows that  the  evidence  submitted  is  reliable.   I
    similarly reject the  proposition  that  in  the  absence  of  evidence
    establishing that the documents are forged they should be  accepted  as
    reliable.

13. Ms Katambala stated that should there be a need to be a finding on  the
    issue, the matter should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal  for  a
    re-hearing.  This in my view is unnecessary. I was  not  given  a  good
    reason why I was not able to make a finding on the  evidence  that  was
    before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal.   Neither  party  submitted  further
    evidence  following  the  standard  directions  issued  by  the   Upper
    Tribunal.


14. The Appellant in my view has failed to properly engage with the  issues
    raised by the Respondent concerning the Sponsor's whereabouts  and  the
    address shown on the documents that he  submitted  in  support  of  his
    application.  There was no challenge to the accuracy  of  the  Experian
    credit check or the record of the visit by Immigration Officers  on  21
    July 2017.  The Appellant changed his evidence from that in his witness
    statement, telling Judge Cockrill that  he  was  in  contact  with  the
    Sponsor. However, he has failed to explain if this is the case  why  he
    was not able to obtain a witness  statement  from  her  explaining  the
    result of the Experian credit check and why there was found  to  be  no
    trace of her ever having been connected to any of the  addresses  where
    the Appellant lived  (or  indeed  the  issue  relating  to  her  travel
    history).   While I take into account the Appellant's  explanation  for
    the use of an address in Kent (see paragraph  18  of  Judge  Cockrill's
    decision), it is in my view unsatisfactory.  He stated that the address
    (in London) was not a safe place, therefore implying that she continued
    to use an old address in Kent. However, if this is the  case,  it  does
    not explain why the Sponsor  used  the  London  address  for  important
    documents such as payslips and  P60s.   The  Appellant's  evidence  was
    unsupported and lacking in credibility.   I  have  taken  into  account
    that Judge Cockrill found  that  although  Mr  Jeredat's  evidence  was
    helpful it was limited.  The evidence does not assist me  with  respect
    to whether the documentation is reliable and the issue relating to  the
    exercise of treaty rights.

15. I find, having considered the documentary evidence, in the  round  that
    it is unreliable. I conclude that the  Appellant  has  not  established
    that the Sponsor was exercising Treaty Rights at the material time  (or
    indeed that she was residing  in  the  UK  until  the  commencement  of
    divorce proceedings). The Appellant has failed to properly engage  with
    the issues arising from the decision of the Respondent.

16. Judge Cockrill made an error  of  law.   However,  the  error  was  not
    material.   Ultimately, he reached the correct  conclusion  and  it  is
    unnecessary for me to interfere with his decision.

17. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed. The decision of the FTT to dismiss
    his appeal under the 2016 Regulations is maintained.




Signed                 Joanna McWilliam      Date 24 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
