
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07653/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th November 2018                         |On 21st December 2018         |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                Zaheer Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Shrestha of Counsel, instructed by Direct
Access
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Pakistani national seeking a  residence  card  as  a
    spouse of a Polish national.  The respondent refused the application on
    30th August 2017 on the  basis  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    marriage was a genuine one in all the circumstances.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal on  20th  June  2018.   The
    appellant did not attend on that occasion and the matter  proceeded  in
    his absence.

3.   The Judge paid particular regard to a previous determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Davies relating to a hearing on 10th  October  2016
    on a similar issue.  Applying the  guidance  in  Devaseelan  the  Judge
    concluded that nothing had been advanced to change the  situation  such
    that the appeal fell to be dismissed.

4.   There are essentially two grounds of challenge  to  that  decision  and
    leave to mount those challenges was  granted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issue.

5.   The first challenge is that it was fundamentally unfair  of  the  Judge
    not to have granted an adjournment.  On 13th June 2018  shortly  before
    the hearing the appellant  submitted  an  application  to  adjourn  the
    matter on the basis he was suffering  from  chronic  backpain  and  was
    unable to move.  He said that both he and his  wife's  attendance  were
    necessary to the hearing.  He attached a doctor's letter  which  simply
    indicated that he was  unfit  for  work  and  that  "backpain -  being
    investigated".

6.   The application was refused on the basis that  there  was  no  evidence
    that the appellant was not fit to attend the hearing and had failed  to
    provide any medical evidence on that issue.

7.   On the date of the hearing a letter dated 19th June 2018 was  faxed  to
    the court by the appellant that he still had  backpain  and  could  not
    travel and also had no funds to hire a lawyer.

8.   The Judge noted that the appellant had been put on  notice  as  to  the
    importance of obtaining medical evidence which he had not done.  It was
    not considered therefore that it was in the  interests  of  justice  to
    further adjourn the matter.

9.   The second challenge relates to the evidence that was submitted by  the
    appellant for that particular hearing which was received on  15th  June
    2018.  It is a voluminous bundle containing a number of statements  and
    also evidence that for a number of years the EEA sponsor  was  working,
    including wage slips.

10.  Perhaps more relevant are copies of  Lloyds  Bank  statements  for  the
    period 2016 to 2018 showing a joint account as  between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor at the same address.  There  are  also  photographs  of
    family gatherings showing the appellant with the  sponsor.   There  are
    also a number of other utility bills.

11.  It is said that the Judge did not pay adequate regard to those  matters
    as being evidence capable of showing that the marriage was  indeed  not
    one of convenience but a genuine marriage.

12.  The respondent in the notice under Rule 24 contends that the fact  that
    the appellant may have acquired more evidence or  continued  cohabiting
    with the EEA national did not take away from the fact that  a  marriage
    of convenience is such as from the outset.  It is submitted that it  is
    the attention of the parties entering the marriage that is crucial.

13.  It seems to me,  however,  that  the  evidence  as  presented  has  the
    potential to show, if accepted, that the appellant and EEA sponsor have
    lived together over a number  of  years  thereby  indicating  that  the
    marriage was in fact a  genuine  one  and  not  one  entered  into  for
    convenience.

14.  There is little mention specifically of the nature  of  this  evidence,
    other than that there were HMRC records and pay slips relating  to  the
    sponsor.  The Judge at paragraph 26 said this "however there is no  new
    evidence before me which addresses the concerns raised by the  previous
    Judge and on balance I cannot  be  satisfied  that  there  is  anything
    before that demonstrates they have  not  entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience".

15.  When one looks at the  findings  of  the  previous  Judge  set  out  in
    paragraph 22 of the  determination  it  is  noted  the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that there was evidence of the sponsor working in the  United
    Kingdom.  That is dealt with to  some  extent  in  the  bundle  of  new
    evidence.

16.  As Ms Isherwood indicated  that  the  difficulty  which  the  appellant
    faces is, indeed, the nature of the interview which was conducted  with
    him and with the sponsor.  It is the nature  of  that  interview  which
    featured largely in the original determination as showing the  lack  of
    knowledge of each other and of the  number  of  contradictions  in  the
    account.  As  Ms  Isherwood  indicated  that  interview  has  not  been
    challenged  and  clearly  provides  cogent  evidence  undermining   the
    genuineness of the relationship.

17.  Although the Judge makes some reference in paragraphs 24 and 25 to  the
    issue of cohabitation, very little reference is made to  the  documents
    as submitted.  As I have indicated potentially they have a relevance to
    the issue of the genuineness of marriage  and  as  such,  in  fairness,
    should have been considered in greater detail and proper findings  made
    upon them.  It is to be recognised of course that the fact  that  there
    may be joint bank accounts at the same  address  does  not  necessarily
    mean that the parties  actually  live  together,  particularly  if  the
    marriage was a sham then there would clearly be motivation to create  a
    false impression as to cohabitation.  However that  is  a  matter  that
    does deserve some consideration and findings made upon it.

18.  Were the matter simply to turn on the issue of an adjournment  I  would
    consider that it was fair for the Judge to have taken the approach that
    was taken.  It seems to me that the lack of full consideration  of  the
    material that was submitted, particularly when the appellant was absent
    from the hearing was such as to undermine the safety or fairness of the
    conclusions.

19.  With some reluctance I consider  that  the  failure  to  consider  that
    additional evidence is an error of law such that the decision should be
    set aside to be remade.

20.    A  further  bundle  of  documentation  was  presented,  received   on
    26th November 2018, namely the morning of the hearing.   Ms  Isherwood
    had  had  no  opportunity  of  seeing  that  bundle.    It   is   quite
    unsatisfactory for papers to be lodged at the last moment in appeals of
    this nature.

21.  In terms of a  rehearing  of  the  matter  it  is  incumbent  upon  the
    appellant to produce  a  comprehensive  bundle  of  documents  properly
    paginated that can serve to assist the Tribunal in its task.

22.  Given the extensive examination of documents and of the  appellant  and
    presumably of the sponsor, it is appropriate  in  accordance  with  the
    senior president's Practice Direction for the matter to be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  No doubt the First-tier
    Tribunal  will  issue  such  directions  as  are  appropriate  in   the
    circumstances.

Notice of Decision

23.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be remade.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date 13 Dec 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

