
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07134/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                               |On 26th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                            MAYLIN ALONZO NITURA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Otieno, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines who was  born  on  1  May
    1971.  On 16 June 2006, she married a British  citizen,  Peter  Stewart
    Turberville.  He was born on 17 August 1946.  On 5  October  2010,  the
    appellant was issued with a residence card as the family member  of  an
    EEA national.  The  basis  for  that  card  was  the  'Surinder  Singh'
    principle as Mr Turberville is a British citizen.  The card was  issued
    under  Regulation  9  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (SI 2006/1003 as amended) ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. On 1 October 2015, the appellant applied for a residence  card  on  the
    basis that she had acquired a permanent right of  residence  under  reg
    15(1)(b) because she  had  resided  in  the  UK  with  her  husband  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations for a  continuous  period  of  five
    years.  That application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  29
    February 2016.  The Secretary of State was not  satisfied  that  either
    the appellant or her husband had continuously resided  in  the  UK  for
    five years as required.

 3. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Her  appeal  was
    determined on the papers and dismissed by Judge  O'Rourke.   Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 17 November 2016.

 4. The appeal initially came before us on  2  May  2017.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 May 2017, we concluded that the judge  had  erred  in
    law in dismissing the appellant's  appeal,  in  particular  by  failing
    properly to  assess  the  evidence  relevant  to  the  claim  that  the
    appellant and sponsor had resided in the UK for a continuous period  of
    five years.  It was accepted before us that the periods of residence by
    the appellant and sponsor in Cyprus were of  insufficient  duration  to
    break the continuity of any residence in the UK.  At that hearing,  the
    (then) Senior Presenting Officer also indicated that the  Secretary  of
    State might, at a further  hearing,  also  put  in  issue  whether  the
    sponsor was a "qualified person" for the five-year period  relied  upon
    by the appellant.

 5. At the resumed hearing, Mr Otieno on behalf of the appellant, put  into
    evidence without objection from Mr Diwnycz  affidavits  from  both  the
    sponsor and a friend of the appellant and sponsor.  In addition,  there
    was a letter showing that the sponsor had been paid a pension in the UK
    by the state from 23 August 2011 - which would  equate  to  him  having
    reached the retirement age of 65 years.  A number  of  bank  statements
    from the sponsor were also put in evidence.

 6. Having considered the evidence, Mr Diwnycz accepted on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the appellant had established that both she and
    the sponsor had been resident in the UK for a continuous period of five
    years between 5 October 2010 and 4 October 2015.  He also accepted that
    the appellant had established that the sponsor was a  qualified  person
    during that period.  On that basis, Mr Diwnycz did not  seek  to  argue
    that the appellant's appeal should not be allowed.

 7. Given the matters accepted by Mr Diwnycz, we  are  satisfied  that  the
    appellant meets the requirements of reg 15(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations
    and is entitled to a permanent residence card.

 8. We do, however, note that  in  the  light  of  the  ECJ's  decision  in
    Minister voor Vreemdelingenzaken en Integratie v Eind (C-291/05) [2008]
    2 CMLR 1, it was not necessary, in a  Surinder  Singh  claim,  for  the
    appellant to establish that the sponsor was, on return to the  UK  from
    Cyprus, a "qualified person".

Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the EEA Regulations involved  the  making  of  a  material
    error of law.  That decision was set  aside  by  our  earlier  decision
    promulgated on 11 May 2017.

10. We remake the decision, allowing the appellant's appeal under  the  EEA
    Regulations on the basis that the appellant has  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence under reg 15(1)(b).

Costs

11. At the conclusion of the hearing, having  announced  our  decision,  Mr
    Otieno made an application for costs against the respondent.

12. The only basis upon which costs could be  awarded  in  this  appeal  is
    under rule 10(3)(d) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) on the basis that:

         "the Upper Tribunal considers that a party  or  its  representative
         has acted unreasonably in bringing,  defending  or  conducting  the
         proceedings; ...".

13. There is simply no basis for awarding costs to the  appellant  in  this
    appeal.  It was  only  at  the  resumed  hearing  before  us  that  the
    appellant  provided  sufficient  evidence  to  establish  the  required
    continuous residence of both the appellant and sponsor  in  the  UK  in
    order to succeed under the EEA  Regulations.   In  the  light  of  that
    evidence, Mr Diwnycz, having seen it on the  morning  of  the  hearing,
    accepted  that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements   of   the   EEA
    Regulations.  Clearly, the First-tier Tribunal proceedings were brought
    by the appellant and she was unsuccessful.  The further appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was also brought by the appellant and the conduct of the
    respondent has, throughout, been entirely reasonable in  defending  the
    appeal until the point  at  which  the  appellant  produced  sufficient
    evidence to meet the requirements of the EEA  Regulations.   For  those
    reasons, we decline to make an  order  for  costs  in  the  appellant's
    favour under rule 10(3)(d).


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  26 July 2017





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appellant also sought a fee award on the basis that  she  had  succeeded
in her appeal.  However, for the reasons  we  have  given  above,  she  only
succeeded in her appeal on the basis of the  evidence  produced  before  the
Upper Tribunal.  In those circumstances, we do not consider  it  appropriate
to make any fee award in respect of a fee paid in order  to  appeal  to  the
First-tier Tribunal where the appellant was  unsuccessful  on  the  evidence
then presented.



                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                          t
                                                 Date:    26   July    2017





