
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07786/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2018                             |On 4 May 2018                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Michael Joseph holmes
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    No appearance.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this is Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    However, for the sake of clarity I shall use the titles  by  which  the
    parties were known before the First-tier Tribunal with the Secretary of
    State referred to as "the Respondent" and Mr Holmes as "the Appellant".

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of the United States  of  America  who  made
    application for a Residence Card. It was refused and  he  appealed  and
    following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 4 September 2017,
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brewer allowed the appeal.

 3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Doyle on 22 February 2018. His  reasons  for
    so granting were:-

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, (in time),  against
             a Decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Brewer) who, in a
             Decision and Reasons promulgated on  04/09/2017,  allowed  the
             appellant's appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regs 2006.

         2.   The grounds assert that the Judge failed to  take  account  of
             the sponsor's previous involvement in  applications  by  other
             men and  failed  to  take  account  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
             Lindsley's decision promulgated on 5 December 2014 which found
             that the sponsor is the spouse of another man. The  respondent
             argues that the Judge reversed the burden of  proof  and  that
             [43] of the determination is nothing more than confusing.

         3.   The Judge's findings of fact are found between [20]  and  [27]
             of the decision. The Judge's analysis of the facts  runs  from
             [28] to [44] the decision.

         4.   The respondent's decision was made  in  the  belief  that  the
             appellant has entered  into  a  marriage  of  convenience  and
             relies on an assertion that the appellant's relationship  with
             the sponsor overlaps the sponsor's relationship with  somebody
             else. Between [35] and [37] the Judge acknowledges a  decision
             of the Upper Tribunal (involving the sponsor) and finds  there
             is a conflict in the evidence  -  but  does  not  resolve  the
             conflict.

         5.   It is arguable that at  [43]  the  Judge  poses  a  rhetorical
             question and then does not answer it.

         6.    The  grounds  of  appeal  identify  arguable  errors  of  law
             permission to appeal is granted".

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. There was no appearance by either the Appellant or a representative.  I
    though, have before me a letter from the Appellant dated 26 March  2018
    wherein he confirmed that he had dismissed his previous representatives
    and was acting in person and that neither he  nor  his  wife  would  be
    attending the hearing today. The letter  invited  me  to  maintain  the
    original decision of Judge Brewer and goes on  to  reiterate  that  the
    Appellant and his wife are in a genuine relationship.

 6. Mr Avery relied upon the grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  The
    Appellant's purported wife, Ms Sczcygielska previously sponsored  a  Mr
    Kaliba in an application under  the  EEA  Regulations.  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Lindsley allowed Mr Kaliba's appeal under Article 8 on the  basis
    that the Appellant and Ms Sczcygielska were married. This is  shown  in
    the Judge's determination under reference number  IA/24043/2014.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Lindsley also found that Ms Sczcygielska was the  spouse
    of Mr Kaliba. Mr Avery emphasised that it was  unclear  on  what  legal
    basis Judge Brewer had gone behind the Upper Tribunal Judge's findings.
    This was particularly so as Ms Sczcygielska did not attend the  hearing
    and provide oral evidence.  The  Respondent  accepted  that  the  legal
    burden rested on her but in this case, given the adduced evidence, that
    burden had shifted to the Appellant and the Judge has materially  erred
    in  concluding  that  the  Appellant  had  discharged  his  burden  and
    particularly  so  in  the  absence  of  any  oral  evidence   from   Ms
    Sczcygielska.

 7. I  share  the  Respondent's  analysis  and  find  that  the  Judge  has
    materially erred for all the reasons put forward in the grounds.

 8. The Respondent's decision was made upon the basis  that  the  Appellant
    had entered into a marriage of convenience and relies on  an  assertion
    that  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  the  sponsor  overlaps  the
    sponsor's relationship with another man. Whilst at paragraphs 35 and 37
    the Judge acknowledges the decision of the Upper Tribunal involving the
    sponsor and finds that there is a conflict in the  evidence  the  Judge
    does in fact not resolve  that  conflict.  The  Judge  has  accordingly
    materially erred.

 9. Mr Avery invited me, were I to find a material  error,  to  remit  this
    appeal for a fresh hearing. That is a course that I intend to take.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Brewer.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 May 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard




