
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07850/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2019                      |On 20 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                Bajram Gjana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Harris, instructed by Solon Jacobs & Gold
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Obhi promulgated 18 April 2019 dismissing his appeal against the
decision of the Secretary of State dated 6 December 2018 to refuse his
application for an EEA residence card as the spouse of an EEA national
exercising treaty rights in the UK, namely Ms Denisa Hubackova, a citizen
of the Czech Republic.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Page granted permission to appeal to the Upper
Tribunal on 15 May 2019.

Error of Law

In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there was an error
of law in the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that
it should be set aside.

In granting permission to appeal Judge Page purported to grant permission
to appeal on ground 2 only on the basis that it is arguable that there has
been procedural unfairness because the judge gave the appellant no
opportunity to answer points found against him on matters that were not
raised or relied on by the respondent.

However, in the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Safi & Ors (permission to
appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC) it was held: "It is essential for
a judge who is granting permission to appeal only on limited grounds to say
so, in terms, in the section of the standard form document that contains
the decision, as opposed to the reasons for the decision."  In other words,
a limitation of permission to appeal in this case should have appeared
above that line and followed the words "permission to appeal is granted."

It follows that there has been no effective limitation of the grounds of
appeal to the Upper Tribunal and I proceed accordingly to consider both
grounds of appeal.

The grounds can be summarised as follows.  First, that the judge made a
material error of fact relying on Ms Hubackova's return to her native Czech
Republic for a month's holiday as a matter telling against the appellant
or, more accurately, the credibility of the marriage not being one of
convenience.  The judge at least implicitly suggested that she made a
surprising decision in December 2017 to separate from her newly married
husband, which alleged fact undermined the credibility of the marriage as
not one of convenience.  It is pointed out that although it was after they
moved in together in October 2017, the holiday took place long before the
marriage, which was not until November 2018.  In fact, they did not become
engaged until February 2018.  It is submitted that this error was material
and that it was key to the assessment as to whether or not the marriage was
one of convenience.

In his submissions to me, Mr Harris also pointed out that the facts of this
case are perhaps not typical of an alleged marriage of convenience and
there were limited other issues of significance relied on, which, it is
submitted, made this error more significant.  The second ground follows on
from the first, that the respondent did not rely on this Czech holiday in
the refusal decision, which is largely based on the contents of the
marriage interview and on an explanation about a sum of money sent to
Albania.  Neither, it is said, was this issue of the visit to the Czech
Republic put to the appellant or the sponsor during the hearing, which
would have allowed them to correct the alleged misapprehension that the
holiday was a long separation from the newly married husband.

It is argued that at paragraph 27 of the decision, when the judge stated
that it was "still noteworthy," the Tribunal clearly drew a significant
adverse inference from the return of the sponsor to the Czech Republic in
December 2017, and of course it is argued that no opportunity was given to
the appellant or the sponsor to address and correct this apparent mistake
at the hearing, or at the very least before that matter was relied on in
making the decision dismissing the appeal.  I accept the submission that
this issue was clearly relevant to the decision and the overall assessment
of the credibility of the relationship and as to whether it was or was not
a marriage of convenience.  However, for the reasons I am about to set out,
I do not accept that it was a mistake of fact or a matter that needed to be
put to the appellant during the hearing.

As Ms Willocks-Briscoe has pointed out, the judge does not quite say what
is suggested in the grounds.  The judge in fact said: "It is still
noteworthy that she went for the month and not a shorter holiday so that
she could spend time with her husband."  By the time of the hearing, of
course, the appellant had become the husband of the sponsor.  Considering
the paragraph as a whole, I am not satisfied that the judge was there
making a mistake of fact by thinking that the sponsor had gone off alone
for a month's holiday, leaving behind her newly-married husband.  I am
fortified in that conclusion by looking at paragraph 36 of the decision,
where the judge added: "Also important is the fact that the sponsor went
home shortly after they moved into the same accommodation.  This suggests
that her family visit was of more importance to her and undermines that
claim that this is a genuine relationship."  It is clear from this that the
judge was well aware and did not lose sight of the fact that the parties
were not married at the time of the holiday but nevertheless the judge
still thought it significant that after they moved into the same house in
furtherance of an alleged relationship she took a lengthy holiday.  It was
open to the judge to conclude that this uncontested fact suggested that the
family visit was of more importance to her that her relationship with the
appellant, and it was open to the judge, and reasonably so, to conclude
that, in addition with the other matters relied on, this fact further
undermined the claim that this was a genuine relationship.

In all the circumstances, I find, for the reasons given above, there was no
material error of law in this decision.  Looking at all the evidence in the
round, the judge was entitled to take a view as to the nature of the
marriage and made an adequately reasoned and correctly based in fact
decision, leading to the dismissal of the appeal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision should be set
aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal remains
dismissed on all grounds.

                    I make no anonymity direction.



                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                       Dated                 12 June 2019



To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award, the appeal having been dismissed.



                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                       Dated                 12 June 2019

