
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07854/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th October 2018                           |On 19th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       mr Jigarkumar Arvindbhai Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Swain (Counsel) instructed by Eagles Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    India born on 31 July 1987.  He appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against the decision of 1 September 2017 refusing his application for a
    permanent residence card on the basis of a retained right of  residence
    following his marriage to an EEA national which had taken place  on  12
    April 2012, the divorce decree absolute being dated 25 November 2016.

 2. In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  5  April  2018  following  a
    hearing on 16 March 2018, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed  the
    appeal under the EEA Regulations.  Permission to appeal was  sought  in
    time by the Secretary of State on 17 April 2018 on the basis  that  the
    decision to allow the appeal was inadequately reasoned in light of  the
    fact that the evidence in relation to the Sponsor's exercise of  treaty
    rights at the time of the divorce in 2016 was a P60 for April 2016.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge I D Boyes of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 28 August 2018, on the basis that the grounds were  clearly
    arguable and permission to appeal was granted. A Rule 24  response  was
    lodged by the Claimant's representatives on 12 September 2018 asserting
    that there was no error by Judge  Robinson,  that  the  P45s  and  P60s
    established that the Sponsor had worked in the UK from 2012  until  the
    breakdown of the relationship on 16 March  2016  and  that  whilst  the
    Claimant had been able to provide a P60 showing that  the  Sponsor  was
    still working at Sainsbury's in April  2016,  as  he  set  out  in  his
    witness statement and  oral  evidence,  he  thereafter  had  difficulty
    obtaining further evidence from the Sponsor due to the breakdown of the
    marriage and the fact he left the matrimonial home.  Reference was also
    made to the Home Office  guidance  processes  and  procedures  for  EEA
    documentation applications which makes clear at pages 6 to 7 that if  a
    document or documents were missing  all  relevant  evidence  should  be
    considered in the round.

 4. At the outset of the hearing I  raised  with  the  parties  the  recent
    decision by the Court of Appeal in Baigazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088.  In
    particular the judgment of Lord Justice Singh where he held:

         "It was sufficient to show  that  a  former  EEA  spouse  exercised
         treaty rights until divorce proceedings commenced."

    This was a reflection of the terms  of  a  consent  order  based  on  a
    concession by the Respondent to that effect.

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Tufan accepted that if  it
    could be shown that the initiation of the  divorce  was  on  or  around
    April 2016, then the requirements of the  Regulations  were  satisfied.
    The Claimant, helpfully through his Counsel Mr Swain, produced  a  copy
    of his divorce petition which was dated 13 May 2016 and was  lodged  on
    27 May 2016 in the Bury St Edmunds Divorce Unit.   Mr  Swain  submitted
    that the final pay slips the Claimant had been able to obtain from  his
    former spouse were dated April 2016.  Mr Tufan  declined  to  make  any
    further submissons.



     Decision

 6. I dismissed the appeal of the Secretary of State with the  effect  that
    the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robinson  is  upheld.  I
    announced my decision at the hearing.  I now give my reasons.

 7. It is now tolerably clear in light of the recent decision in Baigazieva
    (op. cit.) that the relevant decision is not the date that the  divorce
    took place, but the date that the divorce  proceedings  commenced.   At
    [3] of the judgment, Lord Justice Singh held as follows:

         "The Secretary of State now accepts that a third country  national,
         in order to retain a right to reside  in  the  UK  in  reliance  on
         Regulation 10(5), does not need  to  show  that  their  former  EEA
         spouse exercised treaty rights as  a  qualified  person  until  the
         divorce itself.  Rather, it is sufficient to show that  the  former
         EEA spouse exercised treaty rights until divorce  proceedings  were
         commenced."

 8. The Claimant has produced evidence in the form of a P60 that his former
    wife  was  exercising  treaty  rights  up  and  including  April  2016.
    Thereafter, he was unable to obtain further documentation  due  to  the
    breakdown of the marriage and  the  fact  that  he  moved  out  of  the
    matrimonial  home.  The  Claimant  commenced  divorce  proceedings  the
    following month. I find that, whilst there is a very  short  period  of
    time of less than a month between the last piece of  evidence  and  the
    commencement of divorce proceedings, that the Judge did not  materially
    err in law in allowing the appeal given that the Claimant was  able  to
    evidence that his former wife had worked consistently since 2012 and up
    to within a month preceding the divorce proceedings.

 9. There was no issue on the facts of this particular case in relation  to
    any other of  the  conditions  set  out  in  Regulation  10(5)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

10. I find no error of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robinson with the effect that it is upheld.


Signed Rebecca Chapman                       Date 15 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

