
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/07430/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th October 2018            |                                |
|                                |On 5th November 2018            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

                              Ihor Ploskodnyak

                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman instructed by Sterling & Law Associates

For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Trevaskis, promulgated on 24th January 2018,  dismissing
    an appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  dated  18th
    August 2017.  The respondent's decision to  remove  the  appellant  was
    made under regulations 26(3) and 32(2)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016  ('the  EEA  Regulations  2016'),  with
    reference to regulation 23(6)(c) of the EEA Regulations  2016,  on  the
    basis that the appellant's removal was  justified  on  the  grounds  of
    misuse of a right to reside.

 2. The judge recorded that:

    (i)    the  appellant  appealed  a  decision  dated  16th  August  2017
    revoking the right of permanent residence in the United Kingdom as  the
    unmarried partner of a qualified EEA  national  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

Application for Permission to Appeal


 3. The  application  for  permission  contended  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision

    (i)    dealt with an issue which was not under  appeal.   This  was  an
    appeal relating to the misuse of rights not revocation.  The judge  was
    not entitled to consider whether the respondent was entitled to  revoke
    the residence card.

    (ii)   failed to  make  an  accurate  record  of  the  proceedings  and
    determine the relevant issues

    (iii)  failed to give proper reasons

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McGeachy  on  20th  September
    2018 in the following terms (inter alia)

    'Although I consider the original grounds were unpersuasive I  consider
    that the further grounds are, just, arguable'.

The Hearing


 5. At the hearing before us, Ms  Norman  confirmed  that  there  had  been
    another decision by the Secretary of  State  dated  5th  January  2018,
    which had revoked the appellant's permanent residence card,  and  which
    was under appeal, and listed as  EA/00905/2018  within  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but it was not this one. The present decision under challenge
    was a different  decision.   She  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered the correct decision or issues and that this  matter  should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration and linked  to
    the other appeal listed, with regard to the revocation decision.

 6. Mr Tufan agreed that the decision under appeal was that of removal  and
    the judge had focussed on the wrong decision.

Conclusions

 7. As agreed by the representatives, the judge concentrated on a  decision
    to revoke the right of permanent residence (which was not before him or
    in the file), and not the decision which  was  actually  under  appeal,
    that is, to remove  the  appellant  for  misuse  of  EEA  rights.   The
    decision in this appeal was taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  under
    regulations   26(3),    32(2)    with    reference    to    regulations
    23(6)(a)/23(6)(c). The provisions for revocation are  under  regulation
    24.

 8. Regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations 2016 sets out as follows:

    26.    Misuse of a right to reside


         (1)      The misuse of a right to reside occurs where a person-


             (a)  observes  the  requirements  of  these   Regulations   in
             circumstances which  do  not  achieve  the  purpose  of  these
             Regulations (as determined by reference to  Council  Directive
             2004/38/EC(16) and the EU Treaties); and


             (b) intends to obtain an advantage from these  Regulations  by
             engaging in conduct which artificially creates the  conditions
             required to satisfy the criteria set out in these Regulations.




         (2)      Such  misuse  includes  attempting  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom  within  12  months  of  being  removed  under   regulation
         23(6)(a), where the person attempting to do so is unable to provide
         evidence that, upon re-entry to the United Kingdom, the  conditions
         for a right to reside, other than the initial  right  of  residence
         under regulation 13, will be met.


         (3)      The Secretary of State may take an  EEA  decision  on  the
         grounds of misuse of rights where there are reasonable  grounds  to
         suspect the misuse of a right to reside and it is proportionate  to
         do so.


 9. The judge referred at [1], [4] and at  [57]  to  the  appeal  being  in
    relation to revocation of permanent  residence.  He  finally  concluded
    that the appellant was no longer entitled to  a  residence  permit  and
    that

    'the decision by the respondent to revoke permanent residence which had
    been wrongfully granted was correct'.

10. Some of the issues considered by the judge may be relevant but  overall
    his determination  is  fundamentally  legally  flawed.  The  focus  was
    misplaced on a decision to revoke permanent residence,  not  misuse  of
    rights. The assessment in the decision was thus incorrectly framed. The
    judge misdirected himself on the law between paragraphs  [5]  and  [11]
    because he targeted the wrong question, ignoring as he did  the  misuse
    of a right to reside under Regulation 26(3) and he failed  to  consider
    the second limb of regulation 26(3), namely proportionality.

11. As grounds (i) and (ii) were made out and axiomatic, we consider  there
    is no requirement to address ground (iii).

12. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. We set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007). Bearing in mind the nature and  extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

    Direction

    On remittal to the First-tier Tribunal this  appeal  should  be  linked
    with EA/00905/2018 for hearing/determination at the same time.




Signed                                 Helen                       Rimington
    Date    19th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





