


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/07559/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice|        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 07 January 2019                  |        On 15 February 2019           |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between

                           OLALEKAN KAMORU SOKOYA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           In person
For the respondent:          Mr T. Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    Mr Sokoya ("the appellant") appealed the Secretary  of  State's  ("the
      respondent") decision dated 08 August 2017 to refuse a residence  card
      as the family member of an EEA national with reference to regulation 7
      of The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA
      Regulations 2016").

2.    The appellant, a Nigerian  national,  produced  several  documents  to
      support his claim to have contracted  a  valid  proxy  marriage  to  a
      Portuguese national, Lurdes Rodrigues Da Costa, under Guinean law. The
      documents included  a  religious  marriage  certificate  and  register
      (11/02/16), a letter from John N. Usman of  the  Nigerian  Embassy  in
      Conakry (30/10/14), an  affidavit  of  support  from  the  appellant's
      parents and a divorce certificate relating to the appellant's  divorce
      from Ariana Daniela Sokoya (30/07/13). The  appellant  says  that  the
      marriage was contracted by proxy because he could not  travel  outside
      the UK because of his immigration status as an overstayer. His  father
      lives and works in Guinea. The appellant does not explain why  he  and
      the EEA sponsor decided not to marry in the UK  if  they  were  living
      together here as claimed.

3.    The respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  documents  produced  in
      support of the application showed that a  valid  proxy  marriage  took
      place under  Guinean  law.  Background  information  provided  by  the
      Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (09 October 2012) showed  only
      civil marriage is recognised under the law and both spouses must  give
      consent for the marriage to be legal. The  respondent  concluded  that
      the religious marriage certificate was insufficient  to  show  that  a
      valid marriage took place under Guinean law. The letter  from  the  Mr
      Usman at the Nigerian embassy in Conakry  stated  that  the  appellant
      married Marta Cedres Bethancourt in Conakry on 30 October 2014.  If  a
      marriage did take place, there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant was divorced when the marriage to the current  EEA  sponsor,
      Ms Da Costa, took place on 11 February 2016.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge McGrade ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
      in a decision promulgated on 10 July 2018. He heard evidence from  the
      appellant and the EEA sponsor. He did not find  them  to  be  credible
      witnesses and  expressed  doubts  about  the  genuine  nature  of  the
      relationship. He summarised the reasons given by  the  respondent  for
      refusing the application. He concluded:

           "15.  The Respondent noted a letter dated 30 October  2014  from
                 John N Usman, of the Nigerian Embassy in Guniea  (sic)  was
                 submitted along with the application. This letter indicates
                 Olowate Sokoya married Juana Marta Cedres Bethencourt on 30
                 October 2014. In his statement, the Appellant  states  that
                 this letter should have referred to his first wife,  Ariana
                 Daniela Sokoya, from whom he is now divorced. However,  the
                 letter would appeal not only to have given the  wrong  name
                 for the  Appellant's  spouse,  but  also  to  indicate  the
                 marriage took place on 30 October 2014 being  the  date  of
                 the marriage. Given the date of the letter, I do not accept
                 that this letter was issued in error. I can  only  conclude
                 that the Appellant was married on this  date  or  that  the
                 letter is forged.


           16.   I consider the discrepancies in the accounts given by  the
                 Appellant and Lurdes Da Costa are very significant and must
                 call into question  the  assertion  that  they  are  living
                 together in a genuine relationship, either  as  spouses  or
                 otherwise. The Home Office Presenting Officer indicated  he
                 was not arguing that the marriage was a  sham,  but  simply
                 that the parties are not in a genuine relationship.


           17.   The Appellant's counsel submitted that the validity of the
                 marriage certificate had not been challenged  by  the  Home
                 Office Presenting Officer and there was a prima facie valid
                 marriage certificate. He also indicated  that  the  parties
                 may have been nervous and that English was  not  Lurdes  Da
                 Costa's first language.


           18.   It is the position of the Respondent that the  Appellant's
                 marriage is not valid according to the  law  of  Guinea  as
                 only civil marriages are valid in Guinea. The documentation
                 produced  indicates  the  parties  underwent  a   religious
                 marriage. There is a separate certificate  headed  Republic
                 of Guinea, which suggests the marriage has been  registered
                 under the law of Guinea. I accept the certificate  was  not
                 specifically  challenge  by  the  Home  Office   Presenting
                 Officer. However, in light  of  my  finding  regarding  the
                 letter from John Usman dated 30 October 2014 and  the  very
                 unsatisfactory evidence from both parties  regarding  their
                 relationship, I am unwilling to attach any weight  to  this
                 document. I am therefore not prepared to  accept  that  the
                 parties are validly married according to the law of Guinea.
                 I am also unable to hold that the parties are in a  genuine
                 relationship, which would entitled them to  succeed  either
                 as spouses or on the basis of a  durable  relationship.  In
                 these circumstances, the Appellant's appeal is  refused  on
                 EEA grounds."

5.    The appellant appealed the First-tier Tribunal decision.  Although  he
      appeared in person at the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing,  he  was  legally
      represented when the application for permission to  appeal  was  made.
      The grounds of appeal argued that the judge failed to give  weight  to
      the significant amount of evidence that was produced in support of the
      appeal, which showed that they were in  a  durable  relationship.  The
      respondent failed to produce any evidence to show  that  the  marriage
      certificate was not valid under Guinean law because it was a religious
      marriage.

6.    Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley  granted  permission  in  the  following
      terms:

           "It is arguable that the decision errs in law as it is  arguably
           not understood that this is a matter to be decided under the EEA
           Regulations  which  are  distinct  rather  than  part   of   the
           Immigration Rules and it is arguable that there is a failure  to
           set out the relevant Regulations and  assess  the  appeal  under
           these Regulations giving  distinct  reasons  for  assessing  the
           appeal under Regulations 7 (spouse) and Regulation 8(5) (durable
           relationship) of the  2016  EEA  Regulations,  see  particularly
           paragraph 3 of the decision and generally and thus to give clear
           reasons for the decision; the First-Tier Tribunal also  arguably
           errs  in  considering  whether  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
           subsisting  rather  than  whether  it  was  a  sham  or  one  of
           convenience, arguably the only relevant test in relation  to  an
           EEA marriage aside from the issue of whether  the  marriage  was
           legally binding, and in this context arguably did not understand
           that the burden of proof  of  showing  that  there  was  such  a
           relationship of convenience lies initially with the  respondent,
           see paragraphs 2, 16 and 18; it is further arguable  that  there
           was a failure to consider  the  evidence  of  cohabitation  when
           considering whether there was  a  durable  relationship  and  in
           general to give clear reasons for the  decision  on  this  basis
           referencing all evidence before the First-tier Tribunal."

Decision and reasons

7.    I agree  with  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal decision lacks the structure that would  make  clear  to  the
      parties what findings of fact were made in respect of each element  of
      the relevant legal framework.

8.    At [3] the judge incorrectly referred  to  "the  relevant  immigration
      rules" being set out in the  EEA  Regulations  2016.  The  immigration
      rules are a distinct legal  framework  setting  out  the  respondent's
      policy relating to leave to enter and remain under UK law.  The  legal
      framework for residence under European law is not included in  the  UK
      immigration rules. Rights of residence under European law are governed
      by the direct effect of the Treaty on the Functioning of the  European
      Union and the Citizen's Directive (2004/38/EC).  The  EEA  Regulations
      2016 are  intended  to  transpose  the  provisions  of  the  Citizen's
      Directive into UK law. An appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  2016  is
      brought on the ground that  "the  decision  breaches  the  appellant's
      rights under the EU Treaties in respect of entry to  or  residence  in
      the United Kingdom".

9.    The judge also failed to identify the specific  regulation  applicable
      in this case. The appellant applied for a residence card as the family
      member of an EEA national. The relevant provisions are Article 3(1) of
      the Citizen's Directive and regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations  2016.
      Despite this lack of  rigour,  the  decision  broadly  identified  the
      correct legal issue, which was whether the evidence  showed  that  the
      appellant contracted a valid marriage under Guinean law  in  order  to
      show that he is a  'family  member'  for  the  purpose  of  rights  of
      residence under European law.

10.   The burden of proof was on the appellant to show  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that a valid marriage was contracted under Guinean  law:
      see Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178. The respondent cast doubt on the
      validity of the religious  marriage  with  reference  to  identifiable
      background information. The appellant produced no evidence in response
      to show the marriage certificate and register, both of which purported
      to be issued in English, were sufficient  to  show  that  a  religious
      marriage contracted by proxy was a valid marriage under Guinean  civil
      law.

11.   It was open to the judge to make findings on the  reliability  of  the
      evidence in light of his credibility findings and other aspects of the
      evidence that raised concerns. Most notably, it was open to the  judge
      to find that the evidence purporting to be from the  Nigerian  embassy
      cast further doubt on the  credibility  of  the  application  and  the
      reliability of the marriage certificate and other  documents  relating
      to the marriage. The letter made no sense;  nor  did  the  appellant's
      explanation. The letter pre-dated the claimed  marriage  in  2016  and
      referred to a different woman. The appellant's explanation,  that  the
      letter mistakenly gave the name  of  Juana  Marta  Cedres  Bethencourt
      rather than his first wife's details, went no way  to  explaining  the
      difficulties with this piece of evidence.  The  letter  was  dated  30
      October 2014, but the appellant claimed that  he  divorced  his  first
      wife the year before. A divorce certificate purporting to be issued by
      the Guinean authorities in August 2013 formed part  of  the  evidence.
      The logical consequence of the explanation offered by the appellant in
      his witness statement was that he remarried his  first  wife,  if  so,
      then there was no evidence, as the respondent  pointed  out,  to  show
      that he was divorced before marrying the EEA  sponsor.  There  was  no
      evidence to suggest that  polygamous  marriages  are  permitted  under
      Guinean law.

12.   Given the difficulties with the evidence it was open to the  judge  to
      conclude that the letter from the Nigerian embassy indicated that  the
      appellant was either married to another person on 30 October  2014  or
      that the document was forged [15]. Having come to that conclusion, and
      taking into account his adverse assessment of the credibility  of  the
      witnesses, it was open to the judge to conclude that the appellant had
      failed to establish  the  reliability  of  the  evidence  produced  in
      support of his claim such that he could be satisfied to  the  required
      standard of proof that a valid marriage had taken place under  Guinean
      law [18].

13.   Mr Sokoya argued, in effect,  that  the  hearing  was  unfair  because
      there was no interpreter and his wife had difficulty in  understanding
      some of the questions. The appellant was  legally  represented  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.  Section  1(k)  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      appeal form asked whether anyone giving evidence at the hearing  would
      require  the  assistance  of  an  interpreter.  No   interpreter   was
      requested. The appellant was represented at the hearing. There  is  no
      indication that the legal representative raised any concerns about the
      EEA sponsor's ability  to  speak  or  to  understand  English  at  the
      hearing. There is no evidence to  suggest  that  any  request  for  an
      adjournment was made to allow for an interpreter to be present if  one
      was needed. The judge took into account the fact that English was  not
      the EEA sponsor's first language [17]. I  conclude  that  insufficient
      evidence has been produced to indicate that the  lack  of  interpreter
      caused any significant difficulties  for  the  sponsor  such  that  it
      rendered the hearing procedurally unfair.

14.   Mr Sokoya raised the issue in  an  attempt  to  explain  some  of  the
      concerns raised by the judge about the discrepancies in  the  evidence
      given by him and the EEA sponsor at  the  hearing.   The  judge  heard
      evidence from the witnesses and was entitled to make an assessment  of
      their overall credibility. It is  understandable  that  the  appellant
      disagrees with the decision, but the judge's findings relating to  the
      credibility of  the  witnesses  were  within  a  range  of  reasonable
      responses to the evidence as summarised in the decision.

15.   I accept that the judge's credibility findings casting  doubt  on  the
      genuine nature of the relationship muddied the  waters.  Although  the
      judge did not follow a clearly structured approach, it seems from what
      he said at [16] that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  made  clear
      that the respondent did not assert that the marriage, even  if  valid,
      was one of convenience contracted  solely  to  circumvent  immigration
      control. If no  assertion  was  made  that  this  was  a  marriage  of
      convenience it is difficult to see how the judge's failure to  take  a
      structured approach to this issue could amount to an error of law.

16.   The judge appeared to make findings as to whether the appellant was  a
      durable relationship for the  purpose  of  regulation  8  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2016 although, again, the findings were made without clear
      reference to the relevant legal framework. Mr Melvin argued that  this
      was a "new matter" for the purpose of section 85 of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  NIAA  2002"),  which  was  not
      considered by the Secretary of State. It was not open to the judge  to
      determine whether the appellant was in a durable relationship for  the
      purpose of regulation 8.

17.   It is unclear why the decision letter did not, as is usual, go  on  to
      consider regulation 8 once a finding had been made that  the  evidence
      was not sufficient to show a valid marriage had taken  place  for  the
      purpose of regulation 7. Although both issues come within  the  rubric
      of the main EEA ground of appeal, the factual matrix of  the  validity
      issue is arguably different to an assessment of the genuine nature  of
      the relationship: see Mahmud (S. 85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters')  [2017]
      UKUT 00488. I bear  in  mind  that  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal is Mr Sokoya and not the Secretary of State. Even  if  it  is
      the Secretary of State's view that the judge erred  in  considering  a
      new matter, it is not his appeal and it makes no  material  difference
      to the Secretary of State given that the appeal was dismissed  on  all
      grounds.

18.   The  general  interpretation  section  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2016
      purports to exclude an appeal against a decision to refuse to issue  a
      residence card as an extended family member from the definition of  an
      "EEA decision" giving rise to a right of appeal. However, the decision
      made by the respondent was an EEA decision that gave rise to  a  right
      of appeal. The ground of appeal is broad, and once  engaged,  provides
      for a fairly wide assessment of an  appellant's  EEA  rights.  Once  a
      right of appeal has been established, I see no reason why it could not
      also include an assessment of EEA rights as an extended family member.



19.   Even if it was open to the judge to go  on  to  consider  whether  the
      decision to refuse a residence  card  amounted  to  a  breach  of  the
      appellant's rights under the EU Treaties in respect  of  entry  to  or
      residence in the United Kingdom with reference to  regulation  8,  his
      failure to consider the evidence contained in the  appellant's  bundle
      would have made no material difference to the outcome of  the  appeal.
      The judge took into account the fact that the appellant  and  the  EEA
      sponsor were  consistent  in  some  aspects  of  their  evidence,  but
      identified a number of  "serious  discrepancies"  which  he  concluded
      undermined their claim to live together in a genuine relationship. The
      bundle of evidence contained over  200  pages.  However,  the  witness
      statements were brief and did not provide any detail about the history
      or nature of their relationship. The  evidence  consisted  largely  of
      bank statements and utility bills. At its highest, it  indicated  that
      the  appellant  and  the  EEA  sponsor  use  the  same   address   for
      correspondence and paid bills there. Cohabitation is not a requirement
      under European law, but there was no tenancy  agreement,  no  evidence
      from family or friends and no photographs  or  other  evidence  of  an
      ongoing relationship.

Conclusion

20.   Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  should  have  been  more
      rigorous, and would have benefited from a clearer  structure,  I  find
      that it dealt with the core issue of  the  validity  of  the  marriage
      adequately. Any inadequacies are not elevated to an error of law  that
      would justify setting aside the decision. It was open to the judge  to
      reject the reliability of the marriage certificate and other  evidence
      of the proxy marriage with reference to  his  own  assessment  of  the
      appellant's credibility and the obvious weakness in the evidence of Mr
      Usman, which cast doubt on the credibility of  the  application  as  a
      whole. It was open to the judge to conclude that the appellant  failed
      to produce sufficient reliable  evidence  to  show  that  a  religious
      marriage contracted by proxy was a valid marriage under Guinean law.

21.   The respondent raised the question  of  whether  the  judge  erred  in
      determining regulation 8 issues when they were arguably a "new matter"
      for the first time at the Upper Tribunal hearing. There is no evidence
      to suggest that the respondent raised the question before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal. Indeed, it would appear from what is said at [16]  that
      the suggestion that the appellant and the sponsor  may  not  be  in  a
      genuine relationship came from the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.
      Although I accept that the findings relating to whether the  appellant
      was in a 'durable relationship' for the purpose of  regulation  8  are
      scant, it was open to the judge to make credibility findings  as  part
      of his assessment of whether the marriage was valid  under  regulation
      7. The judge clearly took into account the appellant's assertion  that
      he was living together with the EEA sponsor [16]. At its  highest  the
      evidence in the appellant's bundle only showed that the appellant  and
      the EEA sponsor may use the same  address,  but  did  not  go  to  the
      strength and nature of the relationship. The significant discrepancies
      identified by the judge  went  to  the  witnesses'  knowledge  of  one
      another,  which  in  several  important  respects  was  lacking.   The
      appellant claimed to fast on Sundays but the EEA sponsor said that  he
      ate normally every day [9]. The appellant claimed that  his  wife  had
      plans to study journalism and music but the EEA sponsor said that  she
      wanted to study health and social care  [10].  The  appellant  claimed
      that his wife was about to start work for Primark the next  week,  but
      she confirmed that this was not the case [11]. They  both  stated  the
      date of the marriage incorrectly [13].  Despite the voluminous  number
      of pages, the evidence contained in the appellant's bundle went  to  a
      narrow issue, which was unlikely to make any  material  difference  to
      the judge's core finding about the genuine nature of the  relationship
      even if the appellant and the EEA sponsor use the same address.

22.   For the reasons given above I  conclude  that  the  decision  did  not
      involve the making of an  error  of  law  that  would  have  made  any
      material difference to the outcome of the appeal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error of law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date   12 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
