
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/07000/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 May 2017                             |On 6 June 2017                   |
|Determination given orally at the hearing  |                                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                             Mrs Rhodora de Vera
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Krushner, of Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines  who  came  to  Britain
    initially as a student.   On  23  September  2011  she  married  Tomasz
    Yaroslaw Jodlowiec, a Polish citizen.   She  applied  for  a  residence
    permit as the wife of an EEA national and that was granted valid  until
    February 2017.  However, she lost that permit and when she applied  for
    a replacement the respondent sent an officer to the address  which  she
    had given. A resident at that address was asked  if  she  recognised  a
    photograph of the appellant and she replied  that  she  did  not.   The
    appellant and her husband were not called to interview to be questioned
    about their marriage but the appellant was immediately refused.

2.   The refusal was appealed and came before Judge  Malins.   Judge  Malins
    heard evidence from the appellant and her husband, did  not  find  them
    credible and dismissed the appeal.  She commented that there were  very
    few photographs of the  wedding  and  that  there  were  only  the  two
    witnesses at the wedding and so on. She  expressed  surprise  that  the
    appellant was working away from the  home  where  she  lived  with  her
    husband.

3.   The appellant then put in a further application.  That was refused  and
    was appealed but it was decided that the appeal should be dealt with on
    the papers.  It came before Judge Taylor, who dismissed the appeal.  He
    relied on the decision of Judge Malins.  That  determination  was  then
    appealed further to the Upper Tribunal and the matter came before me on
    4 April 2017.

4.   I set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge and  gave  my  reasons
    in a decision dated 19 April which is annexed hereto.  In that decision
    I commented on the determination of Judge Malins.   In  short,  I  felt
    that she had speculated about matters such as where the  appellant  was
    working and reached a conclusion which surprised me.  However, she  did
    give reasons for her conclusion and of course Judge Malins' decision as
    indeed  that  of  Judge  Taylor  are  the  starting   points   in   any
    determination which I now make.

5.   The appellant has given evidence before me as  has  her  husband.   The
    appellant's evidence in brief is that  they  married  for  love.   They
    lived together until there was an  incident  which  led  to  the  first
    separation.  She eventually returned and since December  of  last  year
    has brought into place a second  separation  although  they  are  still
    living together and indeed  it  is  the  case  that  as  of  today  the
    appellant's mother, who is visiting from  the  Philippines,  is  living
    with them.

6.   The appellant had produced a number of photographs which show  her  and
    her husband on their wedding day and visiting a number of places around
    the country on different occasions.  These  include  Bath,  Stonehenge,
    Dover and also places in London such as Twickenham and Kingston as well
    as photographs of them in the flats where they were living.

7.   The central issue, as I have  said,  is  whether  or  not  this  was  a
    genuine marriage.  I have heard evidence not only  from  the  appellant
    but also from her husband and I have considered his witness  statement.
    I can only come to the conclusion, and I think it is a conclusion which
    is reached applying the very high standard of proof, that  this  was  a
    genuine marriage.  The appellant and her husband loved each  other  and
    they married and, as the appellant said, they plan to live together for
    the rest of their lives.

8.   It is the case that there have been troubles in the marriage and  these
    have been caused, I consider, not only by financial difficulties  which
    have led to the appellant working  away  from  home  but  rather  sadly
    because of the way in which her application  was  dealt  with  and  the
    treatment in the first appeal but  I  am  convinced  that  this  was  a
    genuine marriage and that this couple loved each other  and  wished  to
    live together and there is  absolutely  nothing  to  indicate  anything
    other than that the marriage was genuine.

9.   That is the central fact in this case.  The appellant  entered  into  a
    genuine marriage with an EEA national and they are still married.   For
    that reason I allow this appeal.

10.  I will make two further comments.  I understand that the appellant  had
    a residence permit until February of this year.  That is a factor  that
    will have to be  taken  into  consideration  when  making  the  further
    submissions that will follow on this decision.  I have seen photographs
    of the appellant and her husband and  they  have  both  given  evidence
    before me.  I am aware that there have been strains and stresses in the
    marriage caused by external factors.  It is not for me to  advise  them
    as to what they should do now but I would hope that there  might  be  a
    measure of reconsideration of the situation now  that  the  immigration
    status is resolved but that is obviously a  personal  comment,  so  the
    appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.
No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 5 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

















Annex
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA070002016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2017                               |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                             Mrs rhodora de vera
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of the Philippines appeals,  with  permission,
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I F  Taylor  who
    in  a  determination  promulgated  on  23  August  2016  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse her a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  as
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   The appellant and Tomasz  Yaroslaw  Jodlowiec,  a  citizen  of  Poland,
    married on 23 September 2011.  The appellant then applied for leave  to
    remain as the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.   She
    was granted a registration permit as the spouse of an EEA national. She
    lost that document and applied for a new document but  her  application
    was refused. She appealed and her appeal was heard before Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Malins on 1 June 2015 and dismissed.  Judge  Malins
    heard evidence from both the appellant and her husband.  She took  into
    account that the West London Arrest Team  had  visited  an  address  in
    Cromwell Road, Hounslow.  An occupant of the house had stated that they
    had just moved into the house and did  not  recognise  the  appellant's
    name or photograph.  Another person living in the house had  said  that
    the appellant's husband had lived there on his  own  but  that  he  had
    moved out two weeks before.  The Secretary of State, on  that  evidence
    concluded that the appellant and her husband were not  living  together
    and that therefore this was a marriage of convenience.

3.   Judge Malins found that neither  the  appellant  or  her  husband  were
    credible stating that there were certain discrepancies about gifts that
    had been given by the appellant to her husband for  his  last  birthday
    and that he had given to her and what they had done the day before  the
    hearing.  She also placed weight on the fact  that  the  appellant  had
    said that she lived "on and off with her husband."

4.   Judge Malins placed weight on the fact that the appellant  was  working
    in Essex, some distance from the home which she claimed to  share  with
    her husband and stated that:

         "This arrangement is wholly inconsistent with the appellant and her
         husband being a young couple who wish to spend their lives together
         in a genuine marriage.   It  is  implausible  -  in  the  following
         circumstances which I find:


         (i)  Can the Edgware Agency not find the appellant work  nearer  to
             Hounslow, so that she does not need to toil over to  the  east
             coast  each  week?   It  would  be  appear  to  be   a   large
             organisation which in any event  is  based  in  north  London.
             Hounslow is a borough in west London;


         (ii) Is it a viable arrangement for the appellant to go  Westcliff-
             on-Sea for only three days' employment given the high cost  of
             fares and the deduction  she  suffers  for  the  cost  of  her
             accommodation, she really does live in Hounslow?  If  this  is
             actually the case then the appellant's earnings would be  thin
             indeed  and  the  exercise,  barely  worthwhile,   given   the
             alternatives presented by other agencies or work patterns.  It
             is the case, that nursing agencies are always short of staff;




         (iii)    Why could the husband not obtain employment in  his  fluid
             area of work, in Essex, if it is the case that this  is  where
             the appellant has to work where in any event, it is likely  to
             be the working conditions would be more congenial;


         (iv) There is actually no evidence other than the husband's and the
             appellant's evidence that she does return to Hounslow for four
             days a week."

5.   Judge Malins went on to state that the appellant's  and  her  husband's
    domestic living arrangements were not as they were claimed to be in the
    light of the employment documents which they produced and  then  stated
    that because there were only two legally required witnesses present  at
    the wedding and no other family or friends  that  this  indicated  that
    this was a marriage of convenience.  She placed weight on the fact that
    there were no photographs of the wedding.

6.   Although the determination of Judge Malins was appealed in  the  First-
    tier permission was not granted.  Instead the appellant went on to make
    a further application and when that was  turned  down  asked  that  the
    appeal be dealt with on the papers.  It was in those circumstances that
    it came before Judge Taylor.

7.   Judge Taylor  placed  weight,  as  he  was  required  to  do,   on  the
    determination of Judge Malins.  He then wrote, in paragraph 11:-

         "11. It would appear that the appellant is now relying upon all  of
             the documentation she relied upon when her  appeal  was  heard
             before IJ Malins.  The only new evidence is an email from  the
             appellant's landlord at 167  Cromwell  Road,  the  handwritten
             statement by a resident of that  property,  a  bank  statement
             relating to that resident, some train tickets and a bundle  of
             photographs.  However, these documents  do  not  amount  to  a
             material change in the factual  situation  which  remains  the
             same namely it has been determined by Immigration Judge Malins
             that the appellant entered into a marriage of  convenience  on
             23 September 2011 and whilst that decision was subjected to  a
             challenge that challenge has been unsuccessful and  is  appeal
             exhausted and therefore I regard the issues as settled by  the
             first Adjudicator and make my findings of fact  in  line  with
             the earlier determination".

8.   He went on to say that as the evidence was  the  same  as  that  before
    Judge Malins and that the appellant was merely  trying  to  re-litigate
    her appeal.

9.   The appellant wrote  her  application  for  leave  to  appeal  herself.
    Permission was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Scott-Baker
    who stated inter alia:-

         "    ... the appellant had produced further new evidence which  had
             not been before the original judge but at [11] of the decision
             the FTT Judge remarked that the documents did not amount to  a
             material change in the factual situation but gave no  findings
             for  reaching  that  decision  and  failed  to  analyse   such
             evidence.


         5.   It is therefore considered that the absence  of  reasoning  in
             decision amounts to an arguable error of law."


10.  At the hearing before me the appellant represented  herself.  She  gave
    an explanation, at some length, about why she had had to work in Essex,
    because of the difficulty of finding work, and the difficulties she and
    her husband had had with accommodation but stated that her husband  now
    had a rented flat in which they could both  live.   She  has  two  jobs
    which are required to pay for living expenses and her husband  is  also
    working.

11.  This is, of course, not an appeal against the decision of Judge  Malins
    but I would comment that I consider that much of  what  she  wrote  was
    speculative and not based on findings of fact.  It was mere speculation
    of her to suggest that the appellant should have been able to get a job
    nearer to where she was living in London and indeed she  speculated  on
    the nature of the marriage and seemed to place no weight  on  the  fact
    that the appellant and her husband both gave evidence that theirs was a
    genuine marriage.

12.  Be that as it may I have considered the  determination  of  Judge  I  F
    Taylor and in particular paragraph 11  thereof.   I  agree  with  Judge
    Scott-Baker that insufficient reasoning, if any,  was  given  by  Judge
    Taylor for rejecting the new evidence. I adopt the reasoning  given  by
    Judge Scott-Baker when granting permission. While I  have  considerable
    sympathy with the forceful arguments of Mr Kotas I  consider  that  the
    lack of reasoning in Judge Taylor's decision does amount to an error of
    law.

13.   Moreover, I am fortified in  my  decision  when  I  consider  the  new
    evidence that was submitted.  In  particular,  I  have  considered  the
    photographs which were in an envelope on the file before Judge  Taylor.
    They not only show the couple on their wedding day - the  appellant  in
    what is clearly a  wedding dress - and the couple  showing  very  clear
    affection towards each other on that day.  Moreover, there  are   large
    number of  other  photographs   of  the  couple   in  different  places
    (including Stonehenge and Bath)  at different times  of  the  year,  in
    different clothes  and alone and also  with friends.  These photographs
    are clearly very persuasive evidence and not to comment on them or give
    reasons for rejecting them  as  evidence  of  a  genuine  marriage  was
    clearly an error of law.

14.  I therefore set aside  that  decision.   I  consider  that  the  appeal
    should proceed to a hearing afresh before me in the Upper Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the judge in the First-tier is set aside.

Directions

1.   The appeal will proceed to a hearing afresh  before  me  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 26 May 2017.

2.   The appellant should  produce a bundle of all documents she  wishes  to
    rely on at the hearing including documents  relating  to  her  and  her
    husband's employments, further photographs, if any, household bills and
    other documents addressed to both the appellant and her  husband.   The
    appellant and her  husband  should  also  produce  a  detailed  witness
    statement setting out the chronology of their  marriage  including  the
    date on which they met and the places where they lived. Those documents
    and photographs should be served on the respondent   and  the  tribunal
    at least 10 days before the hearing.


No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]
Signed                                  Date 18 April 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

