
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/07357/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 29 November 2018                 |On 09 January 2019                    |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               mr fethi ouahib
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins instructed by EMAP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed to a Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision of 26 May 2016 refusing to issue  him
    with a residence card as the spouse of an EEA citizen exercising treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

2.   The judge found in favour of the  appellant  and  allowed  the  appeal.
    Subsequently at a hearing before Judge McWilliam on 27 April  2018  she
    set aside the judge's decision as being vitiated by an  error  of  law.
    The matter was adjourned to be reheard in the Upper Tribunal.   We  sat
    as a panel on 1 August 2018 and the matter had to be adjourned  because
    of a point that had arisen in connection with the relationship  between
    the deportation order of which the appellant is the subject and the EEA
    Regulations.  We subsequently received helpful written submissions from
    Mr Collins and Mr Melvin prior to the hearing today.

3.   The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  in  February
    2010.  On 9 April 2010 he was sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment
    when  convicted  of  making  false   representations/possessing   false
    identity documents.  He was recommended  for  deportation.   In  August
    2010 deportation was enforced  and  he  was  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  He re-entered the United Kingdom in October 2010 in breach of
    the deportation order and has remained here since.

4.   The appellant met Ms Lagssaibi, a French national,  in  2013  and  they
    subsequently entered into a relationship and began living  together  in
    May 2014.  On 4 October 2014 the appellant came to the attention of the
    immigration authorities when he was attempting to marry his partner and
    he was detained in immigration detention.  He made an application for a
    residence card on 8 October 2014, that application being refused  on  8
    December 2014.  On 23 December 2014, whilst in  immigration  detention,
    he was allowed to marry his wife.

5.   He made an application for  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  of  his
    marriage to an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 13 January 2015.  He was  released  on  bail  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  on  14  April  2015  and,  having  been  released  from
    immigration detention, was given  permission  to  work  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has worked thereafter.  On 21 September  2015  he  and  his
    wife attended a marriage interview in Liverpool as a  result  of  which
    they were found to be in a genuine relationship.

6.   The judge in 2017 accepted without reasons that the appellant  was  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights, and found  that  he
    did not currently pose a serious threat to the United Kingdom.  It  was
    concluded that the terms of  Regulation  21(5)(c)  of  the  Immigration
    (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006    (hereafter    "the
    Regulations"), were not met.

7.   As noted above, this decision was set aside by Judge  McWilliam  noting
    that the First-tier Judge had not considered the issue in  the  context
    of there being an extant deportation order against the  appellant,  and
    also identifying a lack of reasoning as to the finding that the sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights, which constituted an error of law.

8.   The written submissions  before  us  and  the  oral  submissions  today
    concentrated on the issue we raised  at  the  hearing  in  August  2018
    concerning the interplay between and implications of the  existence  of
    the deportation order and the exercise of EEA rights by the appellant.

9.   Mr Collins noted that  it  was  no  longer  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the existence of an extant deportation order acted as  a
    "override" in this case.  It appeared  from  his  submissions  that  an
    application was made to revoke the deportation order in  October  2014,
    though in his written submissions Mr Melvin disavowed on behalf of  the
    Home Office any awareness of such an application ever having been made.
     Mr Collins argued the evidence  indicated  the  appellant  was  not  a
    genuine and present risk of any sort.  There was no attempt  to  deport
    the appellant despite the Home Office being aware of his  existence  in
    the United Kingdom in defiance of the deportation  order,  since  2014.
    The appellant led a blameless life subsequent  to  his  return  to  the
    United Kingdom and there were job references on  file  which  had  been
    referred to at the earlier hearing.  The issue of proportionality would
    only become relevant, as held by the Upper Tribunal in MC  [2015]  UKUT
    00520 (IAC) if the personal conduct of the person concerned  was  found
    to  represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of the fundamental interests of society under  Regulation
    21(5)(c).  That was  not  the  case  here  and  accordingly  issues  of
    proportionality did not arise.  On the facts of the case  it  would  be
    wholly disproportionate to refuse a residence card.

10.  In his submissions Mr Melvin maintained  that  the  appellant  posed  a
    genuine and sufficiently serious threat given  his  complete  disregard
    for United Kingdom law and his illegal entrance to the United  Kingdom.
    He had previously been removed at public expense and  had  ignored  the
    deportation order and returned.  No doubt this had  been  done  on  the
    basis of false documents.  He had made no  attempt  to  regularise  his
    status which had only come to light on his attempt to  marry  in  2014.
    The respondent did not further use public money in removing  him  given
    the likelihood that he would  return  illegally  in  the  future.   His
    representatives  had  always  known  the  EEA  Regulations  included  a
    revocation point and this required  the  person  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and so any effort to seek revocation while he was still in  the
    country could not have been successful.  The Immigration Rules  were  a
    fundamental  element  of  UK  society.   It  was  unclear  whether  the
    reference to the decision in Decker which had been made at the previous
    hearing could assist him as there the appellant  was  applying  on  the
    basis of being an extended family member under Regulation 8 unlike  the
    circumstances in this  case.   The  Tribunal  was  invited  to  make  a
    proportionality  assessment  considering  all  the  facts  and  drawing
    conclusions from them.

11.  By way of reply Mr Collins argued that Mr Melvin had made no  reference
    to any present  threat.   He  had  come  back  to  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully and no sensible reason had been given why the  Secretary  of
    State had not sought to deport him albeit aware  of  his  residence  in
    breach of the order since 2014.  The original deportation order was not
    an EEA deportation order.  The point from Decker fell away as there was
    no longer any reliance on the override point on behalf of the Secretary
    of State as this had now been conceded.  It was relevant to  note  also
    that the Secretary of State had conceded that the appellant's wife  was
    exercising treaty rights and that he had a blameless history subsequent
    to  his  return  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Although  there   was   no
    documentation,  this  Tribunal   was   assured   by   the   appellant's
    representative who would provide  a  statement  if  required  that  the
    revocation application had been made when claimed in October 2014.   An
    application was likely to be made for wasted costs of  today's  hearing
    but that was a matter that could be dealt with subsequently.

12.  We reserved our determination.

13.  We have set out above the appellant's immigration history.  This  is  a
    case that is governed by the 2006 version of the EEA  Regulations.   It
    is clear from Regulation 20(1) that:

         "The Secretary of State may refuse to issue, revoke  or  refuse  to
         renew ... a residence card ... if  the  refusal  or  revocation  is
         justified on grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health or  on  grounds  of  abuse  of  rights  in  accordance  with
         Regulation 21B(2)."

14.  It is also relevant to note Regulation 21 which states at 21(1)

         "In this Regulation a "relevant decision"  means  an  EEA  decision
         taken on the grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public
         health.


         ...


         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  Regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles -


             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality


         ...".

15.  Also relevant  is  Regulation  25  which,  where  material,  states  as
    follows:

         "...


         (4)  A person  who  enters  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  a
             deportation or exclusion order ... shall be  removable  as  an
             illegal entrant under Schedule  2  to  the  1971  Act  or  the
             provisions of that Schedule shall apply accordingly.


         (5)  Where such a deportation order is made against a person but he
             is not removed under the order  during  the  two  year  period
             beginning on  the  date  on  which  the  order  is  made,  the
             Secretary of State shall only take action to remove the person
             under the order after the  date  of  that  period  if,  having
             assessed  whether  there  has  been  any  material  change  in
             circumstances  since  the  deportation  order  was  made,   he
             considers that  removal  continues  to  be  justified  on  the
             grounds of public policy, public security or public health."

16.  The decision in this case was based on  Regulation  20(1),  noting  the
    conviction of the appellant in April 2010 to  which  we  have  referred
    above and noting also that his conviction resulted in  his  deportation
    from the United Kingdom, and also on the basis that his  wife  was  not
    exercising community rights.  That latter point has fallen away.

17.  On the former point the first issue we have to consider is whether  the
    refusal is justified on grounds of public policy bearing in  mind  that
    the decision must comply with the principle of proportionality.  It  is
    also important to bear in mind Regulation 21(5)(c)  that  the  personal
    conduct of the person concerned must represent a genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society.  Under (d) matters isolated from  the  particulars  of  the
    case or which relate to consideration  of  general  prevention  do  not
    justify the decision;  and  under  (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal
    convictions do not in themselves justify the decision.

18.  The central issue in this regard is the weight to be  attached  to  the
    deportation order against the appellant and the fact that he re-entered
    the United Kingdom in breach of that order and remained in  the  United
    Kingdom thereafter.  In the particular circumstances of  this  case  it
    seems to us that a decision to  refuse  on  grounds  of  public  policy
    bearing in mind the ongoing purpose of the deportation order is capable
    of amounting to a decision taken on  grounds  of  public  policy.   The
    ability of a State to deport foreign nationals who have acted in breach
    of its laws is a fundamental interest of society which  clearly  merits
    protection and deserves considerable respect.  The appellant  chose  to
    return to the United Kingdom in defiance of the deportation  order  and
    though it seems efforts were made to revoke the order  in  2014,  those
    were not with a response from the respondent and were not  followed  up
    subsequently by the appellant.

19.  As was said in MC, it is only if the personal  conduct  of  the  person
    concerned is found to represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  to  society
    that the issue of proportionality becomes relevant.  In  our  view  the
    speedy return to the United Kingdom by the appellant in defiance of the
    deportation order and the resumption of his life in the United  Kingdom
    without making any effort, subject to the abortive effort  in  2014  to
    have it set aside, does amount to a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting a fundamental interest of society, that  being
    an  ongoing  threat  to  a  fundamental  interest  in  society  in  the
    importance  of  and  significance  of   deportation   decisions   being
    respected.

20.  However there is the  remaining  issue  of  proportionality.   In  this
    context we must consider as clearly material the failure on the part of
    the respondent, having been aware since 2014 of the appellant's illegal
    status in the United Kingdom, and allowing him to  marry,  to  work  in
    particular to do anything to remove him from the  United  Kingdom.   No
    effort for example appears to have been taken to put  into  effect  the
    provisions of Regulation 24(5).   Nor  does  it  appear  there  is  any
    ongoing action on  the  part  of  the  respondent  in  respect  of  the
    deportation  order.   That  in  our  view   weighs   heavily   in   the
    proportionality  evaluation  in   this   case.    In   the   particular
    circumstances as here where  though  a  person  represents  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  a   fundamental
    interest of society, nevertheless we conclude that the decision in  the
    case is not proportionate bearing in mind the weakening of  the  public
    interest side of this equation by the respondent's inertia in the teeth
    of clear awareness of the appellant's unlawful presence in  the  United
    Kingdom for several years, to take any action.   As  a  consequence  we
    conclude  that  the  decision  to  refuse   the   residence   card   is
    disproportionate, and the appellant's appeal is allowed.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 04 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen





