
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/08843/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 December 2018                           |On 10 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                 Fatima [S]
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Heidar, of Counsel, instructed by AA
Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me after I set aside the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Nicholls who, on 25  May  2018,  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal to grant her  a
         residence card as a family member under the  EEA  Regulations.  For
         the reasons set out in my decision of 29 September  2018,  I  found
         that  the  judge's  findings  under  reg.  9(4)  were  inadequately
         reasoned.

      2. The appellant is an Afghan national born on 25 September 1991.  Her
         spouse and sponsor (also her first cousin), born on 3  March  1994,
         whom she married in Afghanistan in August 2013,  is  a  naturalised
         British citizen (since 2011). He arrived in  the  UK  in  2007  and
         moved to Ireland in 2015, allegedly to exercise his treaty  rights.
         On 2 May 2015, the appellant joined him there. The evidence  as  to
         what she travelled on is contradictory. It is claimed both that she
         travelled on a Schengen visa and on an EU permit. A son was born to
         them on 20 February 2016. They then returned to  the  UK  in  March
         2016 and the appellant's subsequent  application  for  a  residence
         card, made on 15 February 2017, was refused on 26 July 2017 (served
         on 11 October 2017).

    The Hearing

      3. The appellant and the sponsor attended  the  hearing  and  I  heard
         evidence from both. The sponsor gave evidence first.  He  spoke  in
         English.  He  confirmed  his  address  and  adopted   his   witness
         statement. He stated that he first went to Ireland on 24 March 2015
         because there were many Afghans there and he decided that he  would
         form an immigration consultancy and work to help them  to  complete
         forms. He confirmed he  was  self  employed  and  had  started  his
         business on 24 May 2016 (I assume he meant 2015). He stated that he
         had a business partner who also helped to complete forms that  were
         downloaded from the internet and pertained  to  Irish  immigration,
         National Insurance and registration with a doctor. When  asked  how
         he obtained his clients, he stated that he gave his cards out to an
         Asian community organisation. He did not need any qualifications to
         work in the business. It was registered with the local PCC  office.
         He had to show them his office rental agreement and  invoices.  His
         wife joined him on 2 May 2015.

      4. The sponsor stated that they left Ireland for the UK  on  24  March
         2016. This was because business was not profitable. It  was  taking
         too long for people to get their confirmation of leave through  and
         he did not get paid enough. His wife had had a child and  so  there
         were more expenses to cover. They needed the help  and  support  of
         his parents.  For the first 6-7 months, the business had been good.
         It had taken about three weeks for the visas to  come  through  but
         then from June or July 2016 there were delays of 6-7 months. It was
         pointed out to the sponsor that this was well  after  he  had  left
         Ireland. He then repeated what he had said, before stating  he  was
         not sure of the dates. He then said the business had done well  for
         the first 4-5 months.

      5. The sponsor stated that his wife had not applied to join him  prior
         to her application to come to Ireland. They married  on  12  August
         2013. He had been studying at the time and had no work so could not
         call for her. His first job was in Ireland where he started working
         on 24 March 2015. He had completed his studies in 2014. When  asked
         what he did after his studies, he said he had worked part time with
         his father in his garage. He had  been  looking  for  a  job  as  a
         mechanic but had not found one.

      6. The sponsor was then tendered for cross examination.  He  confirmed
         to Mr Melvin that he had studied car mechanics and had  looked  for
         work in car garages. He then decided to move to Ireland and open an
         immigration consultancy because he did not need any  qualifications
         and there were a lot of Afghans entering Ireland and so  a  lot  of
         scope for work. His partner in Limerick was Essan Hashemi. He was a
         friend of his father. He was an immigration consultant too but  the
         appellant had no evidence of that. His appellant applied for a visa
         as soon as he got to Ireland. She did not wait for the business  to
         establish itself because their culture did not  allow  them  to  be
         apart for long periods.

      7. The sponsor said that he had no previous experience in  immigration
         work but he did not need any as it was just a matter of filling out
         forms. He agreed there were other rival companies in  Limerick  and
         that others had qualifications. He stated that he had not opened  a
         business bank account. He just  had  a  personal  account.  He  had
         provided evidence of three deposit slips to  show  money  was  paid
         into his account. He  had  no  bank  statements.  Although  he  had
         submitted a letter from his accountant, he had no accounts to show.
         He had paid tax of E250 for a 6 month period but had no evidence of
         that.

      8. The sponsor stated that he joined the Irish  Asian  Association  in
         April 2015; he then changed this to August 2015. It was put to  him
         that the  letter  from  the  organisation  stated  that  membership
         commenced on 30 June 2016. He said that was a mistake. He  did  not
         get it corrected because he was here.

      9. The sponsor said his son was born in Ireland in February 2016. They
         then returned to England in March 2016, shortly after the appellant
         obtained status in Ireland. He said they had decided to  leave  for
         financial reasons. He stated that if his business  had  been  doing
         well, he would not have left. When asked why his parents could  not
         have helped him out financially whilst he was in Ireland, he stated
         that they had their own business and he had more  opportunities  to
         work in that business here. When it was put to him  that  he  could
         have done that in the first place, he replied his business  partner
         in Ireland had let him down.

     10. The sponsor was asked what activities he had participated  in  with
         the Irish Asian Association. He said anyone could join. They played
         football and talked to the community. He  confirmed  this  was  the
         organisation to whom he had handed out his card. He stated  he  had
         joined within a month or his arrival. He then said it was in fact 2-
         3 months later. He then said it was in August. He was asked how  he
         had obtained  his  customers  prior  to  August.  He  replied  that
         business had been good then. The questions was repeated. He said he
         had handed out his card to friends and family  and  they  contacted
         those they knew in Ireland. When asked how he could have given  his
         Irish contact details to people before he left, he  stated  he  had
         given them his 'WhatsApp' number. When asked why they  should  want
         to do business with someone who had no experience,  he  replied  it
         was because he had one successful client and so attracted others.

     11. The sponsor said that he had utility bills to show that he had been
         in Ireland between March 2015 and February 2016. He  did  not  know
         his business telephone number but said it must be on the  invoices.
         His office was on the third floor  of  [~]  Catherine  Street.  His
         first home address was [~] Alandale Orchard and five  months  later
         they moved to [~] Frederick House.

     12. The sponsor was asked why he had  continued  to  pay  rent  on  the
         business premises after leaving in March 2016. He replied that this
         was because the agreement had been for  a  two-year  period.  Other
         than the business receipts showing rent for E350  a  month  between
         August and December 2016, he had no evidence as he had always  paid
         cash. He was asked how did so after leaving Ireland and he  replied
         he asked his friend to pay it but he had no evidence  that  he  had
         reimbursed his  friend.  The  sponsor  was  asked  whether  he  had
         intended to trick the British authorities by moving to Ireland.  He
         replied he had not and that he had intended to stay there  forever.
         That completed cross examination.

     13. In re-examination, the sponsor was  asked  what  documents  he  had
         submitted when his wife applied for a  residence  permit  following
         her arrival in Ireland. He stated that he  had  sent  his  business
         registration form, gas and electricity bills, evidence of his  work
         and a doctor's form. He confirmed that he left Ireland by  car  and
         that he  had  not  passed  through  any  immigration  control  when
         leaving. That completed the examination.

     14. I then put questions to the sponsor for clarification. The  sponsor
         confirmed that the letter from Unique Accountants  related  to  his
         business. I pointed out to him that  they  had  the  same  business
         address as he did and he replied that they were based in  the  same
         building which  also  contained  a  mobile  phone  shop.  The  rent
         receipts were issued by the landlord. He did not know his name  but
         they were on the receipts. He owned the mobile shop and  the  whole
         building. I brought his attention to the phrase 'Thank you for your
         business!', noting that was an unusual format and that it  appeared
         both on the rental receipts and on his own  invoices  for  work.  I
         indicated  that  this  suggested  they  were  issued  by  the  same
         individual or company but he denied this. He confirmed that he  had
         arrived in Ireland on 24 March 2015. He said that the family friend
         he went to work with had been a taxi driver previously. The sponsor
         stated that he lived  with  his  sister,  Sharifa,  and  a  cousin,
         Taimoor. They remained in Ireland.

     15. The sponsor stated that his wife had continued  to  live  with  her
         parents in Kabul after the marriage and until she  joined  him.  He
         stated that his father and brother had  come  once  to  visit  them
         before the birth of their child. His father still  had  the  garage
         business and had one employee. The sponsor stated that his  monthly
         income in Ireland  varied  between  E300  and  E700  a  month.  His
         expenses were just under E500 a month. When there was  a  shortfall
         in his earnings, he made up the difference with E2000 in savings he
         had accumulated when he worked with his father  and  had  taken  to
         Ireland in cash. The sponsor stated that he now had a garage of his
         own where he did diagnostic work. His father had given it to him as
         a gift. Following his marriage, he did not make any enquiries about
         his wife joining him in the UK because he had been a student at the
         time. He said he came to the UK in November 2007 and had known  his
         wife since they were young. Those were my questions.

     16. Mr Melvin then put questions to the sponsor arising from  mine.  He
         was asked why he had no evidence from  his  cousin  or  his  sister
         about his business. He had no answer. He was asked whether all  his
         business was conducted in cash and he  replied  that  he  had  some
         savings.

     17. In response to Ms Heidar's questions, the sponsor  stated  he  paid
         some bills by bank transfer and others by cash. He then  said  that
         the majority of bills were paid by cash and the gas bill  was  paid
         by bank transfer.

     18. The sponsor was asked to explain how the tenancy agreement for  his
         accommodation in the UK came to be signed and dated by him prior to
         his return. He answered that there must have been a mistake in  the
         date. It should have been dated two weeks earlier.  That  completed
         the sponsor's oral evidence.

     19. I then heard evidence from the appellant  through  an  interpreter.
         Although the appellant stated she spoke  Pushtu  and  a  Farsi/Dari
         interpreter had been booked, she also spoke Dari  and  no  concerns
         were raised with comprehension during or at the conclusion  of  her
         evidence.

     20. The  appellant  confirmed  her  address  and  adopted  her  witness
         statement. She stated that she arrived in Ireland on 2 May 2015  to
         join her husband. He was working in an immigration office. She  was
         a housewife and as she could not speak English and was in a strange
         country, she was afraid to go out  on  her  own.  She  married  her
         husband on 12 August 2013 and although he wanted her to join him in
         the UK, no application had been made because he had been studying.

     21. In cross-examination she confirmed that she left Ireland on 8 March
         2016. This was because her husband's work was not doing well,  they
         had a child and they needed help from his  parents.  She  confirmed
         that she had lived with her parents in Afghanistan prior to joining
         her husband. She travelled to Abu Dhabi to apply for  the  visa  in
         the March before her arrival here.

     22. The appellant was asked whether her husband had arranged for her to
         join him in Ireland in order to avoid UK immigration  control.  She
         replied that he had just told her she could join him there and  had
         not said anything else. She confirmed that she had tried  to  study
         English at home after her marriage. She was asked  whom  she  lived
         with in Ireland and she replied they  lived  with  members  of  the
         family. She specified this was a  cousin  called  Sharifa  and  her
         husband. Both of them were her cousins. She then clarified that she
         and the sponsor were first cousins as their fathers  were  brothers
         and so Sharifa and her husband were related to both of  them.  They
         worked in the same office as the sponsor. She was not sure  of  the
         name of the company but thought it was A H or A S Immigration.  She
         stated that they split the rent of E700 per month  for  their  home
         and that her husband paid E350 for his office rent. She had been to
         the office once and she thought it was on the third floor. She  did
         not notice whether there were any other  offices  in  the  building
         because she was in a hurry.

     23. The appellant could not recall when they had joined the Irish Asian
         organisation. She thought it was a few months  after  her  arrival.
         She confirmed that they had attended some functions arranged by the
         organisation for New Year and for Eid. She said she  sometimes  did
         the weekly shopping alone and sometimes with her husband. She could
         not remember what they spent on their food every week. She did  not
         know whether her husband earned any other  income  apart  from  the
         earnings through his immigration work but he did not have any other
         job. She did not ask him about money matters. She did not  know  if
         he had savings. She stated that  eventually  they  met  some  other
         Afghans in the park and made friends. At  first  they  remained  in
         touch but gradually they lost contact with each other.  She  stated
         that her husband decided they would return to the  UK  after  their
         child was born and when his  business  began  to  deteriorate.  She
         could not remember when the business problems began.

     24. In response to my questions, the appellant stated that she prepared
         her witness statement with the help of her solicitors.  They  asked
         questions and she answered. She confirmed that she  understood  all
         of it. As the statement  made  reference  to  the  'Surinder  Singh
         principles', I asked  what  she  understood  by  that.  After  that
         paragraph of her statement was read to her, she said that  she  had
         been given a card by the Irish authorities. I asked her to  explain
         how she was fully integrated into the community as claimed  in  the
         statement. She replied that she had lived there for 11 months.  She
         stated that she visited the park, saw friends and attended  English
         classes. Her husband helped people to fill out forms. She confirmed
         that she had travelled back to England with her husband on 8  March
         2016. I told her that her husband's  evidence  was  that  they  had
         returned on 24 March 2016 but she insisted it had been on 8  March.
         They went to live with their in-laws for over a month before moving
         to their current accommodation. There  were  no  questions  arising
         from mine and that completed the oral evidence.

     25. I then heard submissions from the parties. Mr Melvin relied on  the
         decision letters and the written submissions. He stated  there  was
         no evidence to show that  the  business  existed  or  that  it  was
         anything other than a move to circumvent the  laws.  There  was  no
         evidence of funds going through an Irish bank and nothing  to  show
         that rent or bills had been paid through a bank account. There  was
         no evidence that tax had been paid. Nor was there evidence to  show
         any routine transactions had been made. The sponsor had just set up
         a shell of a company designed to dupe  the  Irish  authorities  and
         circumvent the rules. There were several issues  arising  from  the
         dates over the tenancy agreement, the return date to the UK and the
         membership of the Irish  Asian  Association  which  should  all  be
         viewed against the backdrop of the absence of any application being
         made on return to the UK for 12  months.  Whilst  the  sponsor  had
         claimed to have closed the business in March 2016, the  appellant's
         evidence had been that his sister and her husband continued to work
         in it. They appeared to be some sort of  partnership  between  them
         and the  sponsor  but  this  had  not  featured  in  the  sponsor's
         evidence. The sponsor was a car mechanic who  suddenly  decided  to
         take up immigration work and move to  Ireland  and  his  wife  then
         immediately applied for a visa to join him. The bank receipts  were
         not stamped and there was no evidence to show that  they  had  been
         paid into an account. The sponsor and appellant had not shown  that
         they  were  fully  integrated  into  Irish  society  or  that   the
         regulation 9 test had been met. It was accepted that  the  marriage
         was genuine and although the previous judge's finding that they had
         lived in Ireland had been preserved, the Tribunal was urged to find
         that it was all a ruse.

     26. Ms Heidar relied upon her skeleton argument. She submitted that the
         first application had been made in August 2016 and there  had  been
         no delay. It  would  have  been  of  help  if  the  respondent  had
         submitted the application form. The sponsor had been confused  with
         dates but was not trying to deceive the  Tribunal.  The  chronology
         set out the dates which tallied with the evidence of the appellant.
         The sponsor had been exercising treaty rights in Ireland. He set up
         a company there and the authorities issued a residence card to  the
         appellant. There was no evidence that the respondent had  contacted
         the  Irish  authorities  about  their  concerns  over  the  alleged
         deception used to obtain the residence  card.  In  support  of  the
         claim, the Tribunal had a letter  from  the  sponsor's  accountant,
         rent receipts, the residence card issued in  February  2016  and  a
         letter from HMRC regarding the sponsor's work in the UK.  The  fact
         that he had taken up a different line of work did not mean that  he
         was not working. His profession was confirmed on the child's  birth
         certificate. With regard to the bank deposit slips,  every  country
         had its own system and the absence of stamps did not mean the money
         had not been deposited. There was case law which gave  guidance  on
         matters to be considered. The appellant and sponsor enjoyed  family
         life in Ireland and the  tenancy  agreement  demonstrated  that  he
         never intended to go for a short period. His  motivation  in  going
         there was irrelevant. The appellant did not have a bad  immigration
         history. The couple now had a child and there  were  provisions  on
         which the appellant could rely as the mother of  a  British  child.
         The appeal should be allowed.

    Assessment and conclusions

     27. I have taken account of all the evidence before me in  reaching  my
         decision.  The appellant applied for a residence card under reg.  9
         of the EEA Regulations 2016 on the basis of her residence with  her
         British spouse.  The  provisions  of  that  regulation  (which  are
         identical to those contained in the 2006 Regulations) provide:

         Family members of British citizens


         9.-      (1)  If the conditions in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,
                  these Regulations apply to a  person  who  is  the  family
                  member ("F") of a British citizen ("BC") as though the  BC
                  were an EEA national.

             (2) The conditions are that-

                  (a)  BC-

                      (i)   is residing in an EEA State as a worker,  self-
                           employed  person,  self-sufficient  person  or  a
                           student,  or  so   resided   immediately   before
                           returning to the United Kingdom; or

                      (ii)  has acquired the right of  permanent  residence
                           in an EEA State;

                  (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

                  (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine.

             (3) Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State  is
                  or was genuine include-

                  (a)  whether the centre of BC's life  transferred  to  the
                      EEA State;

                  (b)  the length of F and BC's joint residence in  the  EEA
                      State;

                  (c)   the  nature  and  quality  of   the   F   and   BC's
                      accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is  or
                      was BC's principal residence;

                  (d)  the degree of F  and  BC's  integration  in  the  EEA
                      State;

                  (e)  whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with  BC
                      was in the EEA State.

             (4) This regulation does not apply-

                  (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                      was as a means for circumventing any immigration laws
                      applying  to  non-EEA  nationals  to  which  F  would
                      otherwise  be  subject  (such   as   any   applicable
                      requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter
                      or remain in the United Kingdom); or

                  (b)  to a person who is only eligible to be treated  as  a
                      family  member  as  a  result  of   regulation 7(3)
                      (extended family members treated as family members).

             ...

     28. Articles 7 and 16 of the Citizen's Directive 2004/38/EC of 29 April
         2004 provide:

         Article 7: Right of residence for more than three months

         1. All Union citizens shall have the  right  of  residence  on  the
         territory of another Member State for a period of longer than three
         months if they:

             (a) are workers or self-employed persons in  the  host  Member
             State; or

             (b) have sufficient resources for themselves and their  family
             members not to become a burden on the social assistance system
             of the host Member State during their period of residence  and
             have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host Member
             State; or ...

             (d) are family members accompanying or joining a Union citizen
             who satisfies the conditions referred to in points (a), (b) or
             (c).

         2. The right of residence provided for in paragraph 1 shall  extend
         to family  members  who  are  not  nationals  of  a  Member  State,
         accompanying or joining the Union citizen in the host Member State,
         provided that such Union citizen satisfies the conditions  referred
         to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c).

         3. For the purposes of paragraph 1(a), a Union citizen  who  is  no
         longer a worker or self-employed person shall retain the status  of
         worker or self-employed person in the following circumstances:

             (a) he/she is temporarily unable to work as the result  of  an
             illness or accident;

             (b) he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment  after
             having been employed for more than one year and has registered
             as a job-seeker with the relevant employment office;

             (c) he/she is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment  after
             completing a fixed-term employment contract  of  less  than  a
             year or after having become  involuntarily  unemployed  during
             the first twelve months and has  registered  as  a  job-seeker
             with the relevant employment office. In this case, the  status
             of worker shall be retained for no less than six months;

             (d) he/she embarks on vocational training.  Unless  he/she  is
             involuntarily unemployed,  the  retention  of  the  status  of
             worker shall  require  the  training  to  be  related  to  the
             previous employment.

         Article 16: General  rule  for  Union  citizens  and  their  family
         members

         1. Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous  period
         of five years in the host Member State  shall  have  the  right  of
         permanent residence      there. This right shall not be subject  to
         the conditions provided for in III.

         2. Paragraph 1 shall apply also  to  family  members  who  are  not
         nationals of a Member State and have legally resided with the Union
         citizen in the host Member State for a continuous  period  of  five
         years.

     29. I have also taken into account  the  authorities  to  which  I  was
         referred: Akrich C-109/01, O and B v The Netherlands (C-456/12,  12
         March 2014) and Osoro (Surinder Singh) [2015] UKUT 00593 (IAC).

     30. As argued for the appellant in her grounds for permission and in Ms
         Heidar's skeleton argument, following the guidance in Akrich, it is
         for the respondent, who alleges abuse of the Regulations, to  prove
         both that the rules for a right are not really met and  that  there
         was a deliberate intention artificially to make it appear as if the
         rules were satisfied.  The court held that  "...the  motives  which
         may have prompted a worker of a Member state to seek employment  in
         another member State are of no account  as  regards  his  right  to
         enter and reside in the territory of the latter State provided that
         he there pursues or wishes  to  pursue  an  effective  and  genuine
         activity".

     31. In O and B (also cited in  the  appellant's  grounds  and  skeleton
         argument), the court held that abuse was  impermissible:  "...  the
         scope of Union law cannot be extended to cover abuses ... Proof  of
         such  an  abuse  requires,  first,  a  combination   of   objective
         circumstances in which, despite formal observance of the conditions
         laid down by the European Union rules, the purpose of  those  rules
         has  not  been  achieved,  and,  secondly,  a  subjective   element
         consisting in  the  intention  to  obtain  an  advantage  from  the
         European Union rules by artificially creating the  conditions  laid
         down for obtaining it".  The  court  also  clarified  that  the  UK
         national must be able to demonstrate a "genuine" exercise of treaty
         rights.

     32. I have regard to Ms Heidar's submission that the 'centre  of  life'
         test introduced by the UK has no place in a lawful assessment of  a
         Surinder Singh case. She clarifies that although it  originated  in
         the Advocate General's Opinion that preceded the final judgment  of
         O and B, it was not adopted therein. She also  maintains  that  the
         judgment sets out that the length of residence  as  a  worker/self-
         employed person must be at least three months and that  the  nature
         and quality of accommodation must be considered, with the  guidance
         suggesting that a mortgaged home or long term rented  accommodation
         is more likely to indicate  genuine  residence  than  living  in  a
         hotel, bed and breakfast or short stays with friends. She maintains
         that the judgment said nothing at all, however, about the degree of
         integration into the host  State.   It  is  also  argued  that  the
         "circumvention test", in genuine marriages, is directly contrary to
         the case of Akrich.

     33. According to the skeleton argument the key issue to  be  determined
         then, is "whether the appellant has demonstrated there has  been  a
         genuine exercise of treaty rights by the EEA national" (at 3.9  and
         3.10). This is in direct conflict with the grounds  for  permission
         to appeal which criticised the judge so  heavily  for  placing  the
         burden upon the appellant. It also  does  not  sit  well  with  the
         Akrich guidance cited above and at 3.4 of  the  skeleton  argument.
         As it is the respondent who asserts  that  there  has  not  been  a
         genuine exercise of treaty rights, I proceed to consider whether he
         has established that assertion. In  so  doing,  I  must  of  course
         carefully consider the evidence put forward  by  the  appellant  to
         show that treaty rights were genuinely exercised.

     34. The following findings were preserved from the determination of the
         First-tier Tribunal: (1) that the  appellant  and  sponsor  entered
         into a genuine marriage (at 13); (2) that the appellant  could  not
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules (at  19);  (3)  that
         the appellant and sponsor lived in Ireland for under a year from 1-
         2 May 2015 (at 20); (4) that they had family life (at 20)  and  (5)
         that family life was strengthened by the  birth  of  their  son  in
         February 2016 (at 20). Neither party has raised  any  objection  to
         these although Mr Melvin urged me to find  that  the  residence  in
         Ireland was not genuine.

     35. In assessing all the evidence (even if not specifically mentioned),
         and bearing in mind the guidance  from  the  authorities  cited,  I
         conclude that the respondent has satisfied me that the residence in
         Ireland was not genuine and that  the  sponsor  was  not  genuinely
         exercising treaty rights there. I reach  this  conclusion  for  the
         reasons I set out above  which  are  not  given  in  any  order  of
         priority.

     36. The witness statements of both the appellant and  the  sponsor  are
         identical in many parts. They  were  clearly  not  responsible  for
         their  preparation.  The  language,  similarities  throughout   and
         reference to legal principles demonstrate that they  were  prepared
         by solicitors.  Despite his claimed engagement in immigration work,
         the sponsor admitted he had no qualifications  in  that  field  and
         that  he  only  assisted  with  completing  basic  information   in
         application forms. It is not, therefore, accepted,  that  he  could
         have been  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  the  statements.
         Whilst, of course, it is expected that legal  representatives  will
         assist their clients in the preparation of witness  statements,  it
         is unhelpful when that preparation takes over  to  such  an  extent
         that the statements cease to be a meaningful expression of what the
         authors themselves wish to, or are able to, say.

     37. The difficulties in the evidence begin with establishing the period
         of residence in Ireland, as the evidence as  to  when  the  sponsor
         moved there is conflicting. In oral evidence to me,  he  maintained
         he moved on 24 March 2015, but he told the First-tier Tribunal that
         he moved there on 1 May 2015 (at paragraph 5). Indeed, this was one
         of the findings that I preserved, and which the appellant  and  her
         representatives took no objection to. In his witness statement, the
         sponsor further confirms that  he  moved  there  in  May  2015  (at
         paragraph 2). He adopted his statement as  true  and  correct.  The
         chronology prepared by the appellant's representatives also gives 1
         May 2015 as the date he moved  to  Ireland.  Whilst  I  could  have
         accepted that the sponsor was mistaken about his March arrival date
         and had indeed arrived in 1 May,  there  is  other  evidence  which
         throws this date into question. For example, the tenancy  agreement
         for the first property occupied by the appellant and sponsor -  [~]
         Alandale Orchard - although commencing on 1 May 2015 (for a  period
         of three months and three weeks, until 24 August 2015)  was  signed
         on 28 April 2015. It was co-signed by Habib Saleh, as guarantor, of
         an address in Wembley, on the same date. He would appear to be  the
         sponsor's father.  This would have  been  prior  to  the  sponsor's
         arrival in Ireland, if the May date is correct.   The  sponsor  did
         not claim that the rental agreement was signed in England.

     38. According to the First-tier Tribunal's Record of Proceedings (and I
         note Ms Heidar was also the  appellant's  representatives  at  that
         hearing and so would be aware of this), the sponsor  gave  evidence
         that the appellant's visa to join him took two months. This accords
         with her own evidence to the Upper Tribunal in  cross  examination,
         that she had gone to Abu Dhabi in March 2015. Plainly, the decision
         for her to travel to Ireland was made well before the sponsor moved
         there and set up his business. Whilst this in  itself,  is  not  an
         adverse factor, it does  raise  issues  with  the  explanation  the
         sponsor and appellant gave for the absence of any  application  for
         entry to the UK. It was the sponsor's evidence that his culture did
         not permit separation after marriage yet the appellant did not join
         him until almost two years later. He claimed this  was  because  he
         was a student when he married. No reason is offered as  to  why  he
         then went ahead with the marriage when he was still  a  student  in
         his teens, knowing full well that a separation would be inevitable.
          It was also the sponsor's evidence that he completed  his  studies
         in 2014 and worked part time for his father. It  is  not  explained
         why he did not work full time, in view  of  his  qualifications  in
         that line of work, and why he did not seek to bring his wife to the
         UK at that time. If it is, as he claimed, because  he  was  not  in
         reliable employment and financially secure,  then  her  arrival  in
         Ireland, the very next day after his, and before he had even set up
         his business does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  a  smart  decision.
         Certainly, his position was even worse than it was in the UK  where
         he at least had an income and had the support of his family.

     39. The key issue in this case is, however, whether the sponsor has had
         genuine residence in Ireland in the sense  that  he  was  genuinely
         exercising treaty rights there. I, therefore, turn to the  evidence
         before me of the business.

     40. Firstly, the evidence  relating  to  how  and  when  the  sponsor's
         business started is contradictory. In his evidence  to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, the sponsor stated  that  he  started  his  business
         after he moved to Ireland (at 6), that it commenced in August  2015
         (at 8) and that it was in Ireland that he  undertook  research  and
         came to discover that there was a business opportunity with  people
         struggling to complete  application  forms  (at  9).  In  his  oral
         evidence to me, he stated that  he  had  decided  on  the  business
         venture before he left the UK and, indeed, had  given  his  contact
         details out to friends and family with a view to obtaining  clients
         when he got to Ireland. He said that he had identified the issue of
         many Afghans entering Ireland and having difficulties in completing
         application  forms  and,  therefore,  took  the  unusual  step   of
         abandoning his own area of experience to travel to another  country
         and set up a business in which he had no previous experience and no
         qualifications. His witness statement contradicts that.  There,  he
         maintained that  there  were  very  few  people  who  required  his
         services (at 7). The appellant said the same in her statement (also
         at paragraph 7).

     41. In oral evidence, the sponsor said that he started his business  on
         24 May 2015 and then changed this to 24 March 2015. Both contradict
         what he told the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  the  March  figure
         does not accord with his stated date of entry of 1 May 2015. if  he
         did start the business on or soon after arrival, then it is unclear
         why he waited until 1 August 2015 to employ accountants to act  for
         him. If he started  in  August  2015  as  he  told  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, then there is no explanation for what he lived  on  until
         then (for either 5 or 3 months depending  on  which  of  his  entry
         dates is correct). His savings would have been eaten up during  his
         time and he would have had nothing  left  to  supplement  his  lean
         months and cover his move back to  the  UK.  No  accounts  for  the
         business have been adduced; again this would have  been  simple  to
         produce and there is no explanation for why the letter from  Unique
         Accountants is dated 21 June 2016, long  after  the  appellant  had
         returned to the UK. The letter also confirms they  are  acting  for
         the sponsor (in present  tense)  and  that  the  company  is  still
         trading.

     42. I have not been provided with  the  registration  document  of  the
         business and so I have no  independent  evidence  as  to  when  the
         business started. The documents submitted to show that the  sponsor
         was self employed are  limited  and  raise  various  concerns.  The
         sponsor stated in evidence that he had a business partner but  this
         individual has not featured in any of the documentary evidence  and
         there is no evidence to show that  he  shared  the  office  running
         costs. Nor is he referred to in any of  the  rental  receipts.  The
         appellant's evidence was that Taimoor and Sharifa also worked  with
         the sponsor but this has not  been  mentioned  before.  I  have  no
         information as to their status in Ireland.

     43. The only evidence of rent having been paid for the office  premises
         is between 1 August 2016 and 1 December 2016 but  this  post  dates
         the return of the sponsor and appellant to the  UK.   There  is  no
         explanation for why there should be no receipts for the period when
         the appellant and sponsor were in  Ireland.  These  post  departure
         receipts indicate that payment was always made in cash so there  is
         no evidence of any bank transfers or a direct  debit.  The  sponsor
         stated he asked his friend to pay the rent for him but there is  no
         evidence that he was reimbursed. Nor is it  clear  to  me  why  the
         appellant should continue to pay the full rent when he is no longer
         there and when  the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  Taimoor  and
         Sharifa continued to  run  the  business.   Indeed,  that  evidence
         directly contradicts the sponsor's  evidence  that  he  closed  the
         business down in January 2016, even before his child was  born.  It
         also raises difficulties with the claim that the business  did  not
         generate an income as both Taimoor and  Sharifa  continue  to  work
         there and, presumably, earn a  living  from  it.  I  have  seen  no
         evidence of the terms of the rental lease and there is  nothing  to
         confirm the sponsor's claim that the  rental  period  was  for  two
         years. That would have been a document easily obtainable.

     44. The rent receipts are dated from 1 August 2016 - 1 December 2016 as
         INV001 through to INV005. It is not clear why, if  as  the  sponsor
         claims, he was paying rent from May 2015, that the  invoices  would
         be numbered in this way.

     45. All bear the same expression with an exclamation mark at the bottom
         as the sponsor's  own  business  invoices  -  Thank  you  for  your
         business! This is an unusual format.

     46. The appellant was very clear in her evidence as to  the  amount  of
         rent  paid  for  the  business  premises  and  for  their   private
         accommodation yet when asked about their shopping  expenses  (which
         she  would  have  been  responsible  for,  at  least   on   several
         occasions), she was unable to give any estimate. She  also  claimed
         not to know about financial matters, saying that she  did  not  ask
         her husband  about  such  things.  That  rather  goes  against  her
         knowledge of the rent, particularly of  the  office,  and  suggests
         that was part of rehearsed evidence.

     47. The sponsor did not open a business bank account. He maintained  he
         used his personal bank account but apart from confirmation that the
         account was opened, no bank statements have been adduced.

     48. The bank account was opened on 4 September 2015 but it was done  so
         using the Alandale Orchard address. I was not told why  this  would
         be so when the sponsor moved to his Frederick House address  on  28
         August 2015 (as confirmed by the tenancy agreement and  the  letter
         from the  Private  Residential  Tenancies  Board).  Similarly,  the
         registration with the Office of the Revenues Commissioner is  dated
         2 September 2015 but addressed to the sponsor at his old address.

     49. The sponsor's evidence as to when the business began to deteriorate
         is also conflicting. Initially he stated in  evidence  to  me  that
         things had been good for the first 6-7 months, then he said it  was
         until July 2016 and when it was pointed out to him that he said  he
         had left in March 2016, he stated it had been fine for the first 4-
         5 months after his arrival. He also claimed to have closed down the
         business in January 2016. He said that his earnings varied  monthly
         between E300 at the lowest to E700 at  the  highest  and  that  his
         expenses amounted to just under E500 a month. He has only submitted
         invoices for earnings in December 2015. This would  have  been  the
         month before he closed down the business, if his January 2016  date
         is correct. The invoices show earnings  for  E1030  in  that  month
         which is even higher than he claimed his highest monthly income had
         been. It makes no sense, whatsoever, for the sponsor to close  down
         the business and leave after such a successful month.  Furthermore,
         the numbering of the invoices (037 for 2 December 2015 and then 040
         for 14 December 2015; the rest are in numerical sequence)  indicate
         that three invoices for the period between 2 and  14  December  are
         missing. That would mean that the sponsor made even more than E1030
         in December. It is difficult to accept that the sponsor  would  not
         recall these substantial earnings when giving  his  oral  evidence,
         particularly as he  had  provided  invoices  for  them.   The  bank
         deposit clips are not supported by any  bank  statements  but  they
         show that E600 was deposited in November 2015 and E1000 in December
         2015. Both these show the sponsor's  earnings  at  the  higher  and
         beyond the highest level of the scale his oral  evidence  suggested
         and give further cause to question the claim that the business  was
         shut down because his income had dropped.

     50. Ms Heider pointed to the sponsor's profession  being  given  as  an
         immigration consultant on his son's birth  certificate  however  at
         the date of registration of the birth he had  already  closed  down
         the business and so was no longer an immigration consultant.

     51. There is no evidence of rent having been paid  for  either  of  the
         sponsor's residential properties. There is no explanation for this.
         The tenancy agreement for Alandale Orchard, which was signed  prior
         to the sponsor's May 2015 arrival date, gives the rent as E7450 per
         month which contradicts the oral evidence of both the  sponsor  and
         the appellant. It also gives the name of Adid Saleh as one  of  the
         four tenants. This is then crossed out and the  sponsor's  name  is
         inserted. I am not told who Adid is.

     52. The tenancy agreement for Frederick House requires the rent of E650
         (again contradicting the  sum  stated  by  the  appellant  and  the
         sponsor) to be paid by  bank  draft  or  direct  debit.  Again,  no
         evidence of this has been submitted.

     53. The appellant gave birth to a child in Limerick. The child's  birth
         certificate was issued on 14 March 2016; this is after the family's
         departure from  Ireland,  if  the  appellant's  date  of  departure
         (confirmed by the chronology)  is  correct.  I  note  that  on  the
         discharge certificate from the hospital, Sharifa is  named  as  the
         contact and her telephone number is noted. I was not told  why  the
         sponsor was not named as the appellant's contact. That  would  have
         been what I would have expected.

     54. The sponsor's evidence was that he returned to the UK at the end of
         March 2016. this contradicts the appellant's evidence. The  tenancy
         agreement for their accommodation in Edgware was signed on 15 March
         2016. when it was put to the  sponsor  that  this  was  before  his
         stated return, he complained that the document had the wrong  date.
         This does not explain why he signed it and dated it as being the 15
         March.

     55. The sponsor claimed to have been given a garage business as a  gift
         by his father on his return. Quite why this  could  not  have  been
         done before has not been explained.  In  the  decision  letter  the
         respondent raised an issue with the signing of a 12  months  rental
         agreement for the garage premises by the  sponsor  on  18  November
         2015,  prior  to  his  return  to  the  UK.   Notwithstanding   the
         identification of this serious issue,  the  sponsor  and  appellant
         have not sought to resolve this. The rental agreement  demonstrates
         that the sponsor had already decided to return  to  the  UK  before
         November 2015 and that all the excuses he gave for leaving  Ireland
         were untruthful. Further, if the sponsor was been in Ireland  until
         March 2016, it is unclear how he was in the  UK  renting  a  garage
         several months earlier. The sponsor's  co-tenant  is  Sharifa,  his
         sister, but she is also said to be in Ireland.  I note that regular
         payments are made from  the  sponsor's  business  bank  account  to
         Sharifa for "monthly wages". This is not explained.

     56. I have also had regard to the gas bills submitted. These cover  the
         period between 8 May 2015 and 18 September 2015. I am not told  why
         there are no bills for the rest of the claimed period of residence.
         Further, the bills only related to the supply of  gas  at  Alandale
         Orchard. Even those addressed to Frederick House are only  for  the
         supply at the other address.

     57. The letter from the Irish Asian Association is dated 30 June  2016.
         This is several months after the sponsor and appellant returned  to
         the UK. No explanation is offered other than that the date must  be
         wrong but the same date appears on both  membership  letters.  Both
         are issued at the Frederick House address to  which  the  appellant
         and sponsor did not move until the end of August 2015 and at  which
         they were not residing when the letters were issued. The  documents
         appear to be membership application  forms;  there  is  nothing  to
         confirm that membership was issued.

     58. I now compare the documentary evidence adduced  for  the  sponsor's
         business in the UK.  This  makes  the  limited  and  unsatisfactory
         nature of the evidence for the Irish business even more pronounced.
         The sponsor has adduced evidence from accountants setting  out  his
         net income. The accountants in Ireland gave no  information  as  to
         earnings. There are accounts for the sponsor's business; none  were
         produced for the company in Ireland. There is  evidence  from  HMRC
         that the sponsor paid tax. I saw no evidence of any tax having been
         paid in Ireland.  There are bank statements from  a  business  bank
         account. No business bank account was opened in Ireland and no bank
         statements even from a personal bank account were adduced.

     59. The sponsor openly admitted to the First-tier Tribunal that he took
         "the easy option, which was Ireland" and that he  planned  to  stay
         for one year. Whilst this  is  not  fatal  to  the  case,  or  even
         damaging it itself, as it  is  open  to  an  EU  national  to  take
         advantage of the benefits of free movement to another member state,
         the evidence before me  shows  that  there  has  not  been  genuine
         residence and self employment in Ireland. I am satisfied  that  the
         respondent has discharged the  burden  on  him  to  show  that  the
         sponsor was not genuinely exercising treaty rights in Ireland  and,
         it follows, that residence was not genuine  either.  Setting  aside
         the motivation of  the  move,  as  I  am  required  to  do  by  the
         authorities cited, I conclude that there has  not  been  a  genuine
         exercise of treaty rights by a UK national in another member state.
         The evidence I have is far too limited and  contradictory  to  show
         genuine self-employment.  It has not been argued that the appellant
         should qualify  under  reg.  7(1)(b)  and  indeed  no  evidence  of
         comprehensive sickness cover in the host member state was adduced.

     60. I am conscious of the fact that  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal that the sponsor and appellant resided in Ireland and  had
         family life there, were preserved and so although  I  have  serious
         concerns about whether the appellant and sponsor were in continuous
         residence  in  Ireland  for  the  entire  period  claimed,  I  have
         proceeded on the basis that they were.  Even  then,  the  oral  and
         documentary evidence  is,  for  the  reasons  set  out  above,  not
         indicative of a genuine exercise  of  treaty  rights  and  that  is
         required in order for the appellant to qualify for a residence card
         in the UK.

     61.  Having  considered  the  Regulations,  the   Directive   and   the
         authorities relied on, I am satisfied  that  it  is  only  "genuine
         residence" in the host member state of the Union  citizen  and  the
         third country family member which creates on return  to  the  Union
         citizen's state of origin, a derived right  of  residence  for  the
         third country citizen (paragraph 56: O and B). I note  that  it  is
         for  the  court  to  determine  whether  the  parties  are  genuine
         residents in the host state and that the scope of Union law  cannot
         be extended to cover abuses such as to obtain an advantage from the
         EU rules by artificially creating  the  conditions  laid  down  for
         obtaining it. The fact that the appellant was  issued  a  residence
         card in Ireland does not automatically entitled her to the issue of
         the same status in the UK as is clarified by O and B (at  paragraph
         60). So,  whilst  the  appellant  and  sponsor's  family  life  was
         strengthened by the birth of their son, the residence in  the  host
         state was not genuine to begin with. The obstacle  referred  to  in
         the Directive (and clarified at paragraphs 47-51 of O and  B)  does
         not, therefore, arise.

     62. In conclusion I find that the residence of the  appellant  and  the
         sponsor in Ireland was not genuine as the sponsor was not genuinely
         exercising treaty rights there.

     63. Decision

     64. The appeal is dismissed.

     65. Anonymity

     66. No anonymity order was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  no
         request for one was made to me.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 20 December 2018


