
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08363/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2019                               |On 16 May 2019                |
|Decision given orally after hearing           |                              |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr Elvis Ageboh Lekeate
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office
                                 Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Lekeate):    Mr T Mahmood, Counsel, instructed by
                                 ASL Solicitors & Advocates






                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Sangha, promulgated on 20  June  2018  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham  on  16  March  2018,  in  which  he  allowed  Mr
    Lekeate's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision refusing  to
    grant him an EEA residence card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  For ease of reference,  throughout
    this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary of  State,  who  was  the
    original respondent, as "the Secretary of State" and to Mr Lekeate, who
    was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Cameroon who was born in April 1987.   He
    entered the UK in 2014 with entry clearance as a Tier 4  Student  valid
    until 30 January 2016.  He sought a Tier 2 visa for leave to remain  in
    November 2015 (that is at a time when he was still here lawfully) which
    was refused but prior to the expiry of his then current visa in January
    2017 he sought leave to remain on the basis of his Article 8 family and
    private life rights which was refused.   It  seems  he  sought  further
    leave to remain in March 2017 (after the expiry of his leave) which was
    rejected but then in April 2017 he applied for an EEA residence card as
    the spouse of an EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK
    following his marriage to which reference will be made below.

 3. This application was refused by the Secretary of State  in  a  decision
    made on 22 September 2017 and it is in respect of this refusal that the
    claimant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  as  already  noted,
    following a hearing at Birmingham in March the following year 2018,  in
    a decision and reasons promulgated some three months later on  20  June
    2018, his appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals against that decision, leave having been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Elizabeth Simpson on 23 July 2018.



 4. The basis of the claimant's application was that he was married to  his
    EEA national sponsor, Ms [LM], and she was exercising treaty rights  in
    this country.  It is accepted by the Secretary of State that there  was
    factually a marriage between the parties in April 2017  (permission  of
    the Secretary of State was sought prior to this marriage) and it is not
    contended on behalf of the Secretary of State either that Ms [M] is not
    an EEA national or that she was not at  the  relevant  time  exercising
    treaty rights in this country.  It was considered by the  Secretary  of
    State that the "marriage" was a sham marriage, that is  a  marriage  of
    convenience, in that the parties did not genuinely intend  to  continue
    living with one another but entered  into  the  marriage  in  order  to
    facilitate the grant of a residence card to the claimant.

 5. The couple, that is the claimant and his spouse, were both  interviewed
    on 11 September 2017 and it is the Secretary of State's case that those
    interviews contained a number of discrepancies.  Following a home visit
    on 11 April 2017, that is just one week after the date of the marriage,
    to the  claimant's  sister's  house,  during  which  the  claimant  was
    discovered hiding in a cupboard, and having regard to  the  disparities
    in the interview, the Secretary of State reached  the  conclusion  that
    the marriage was not a genuine one.

 6. Reasons are set out in the refusal letter to which  this  Tribunal  has
    had regard, but it is not necessary for the purpose of this decision at
    this stage to set out these reasons in full.  Where necessary reference
    will be made to the reasons below.  For the purposes of this decision I
    shall not set out either all the arguments which were made before  this
    Tribunal on behalf of the parties but I have had regard  to  everything
    which was said to me as well as to all the documents  contained  within
    the file, whether or not specific reference is made to  any  individual
    part of the submissions or documents below.

 7. In his decision, having  heard  evidence  from  the  claimant  and  his
    spouse, who were both cross-examined, and  following  consideration  of
    all the documents (which are specifically referred to at paragraph 5 of
    his decision) Judge Sangha decided that the  claimant  and  his  spouse
    were telling the truth and that he believed  their  account  which  was
    that this was a genuine marriage between a couple who intended to  live
    together permanently and was not simply a marriage  of  convenience  as
    the Secretary of State believed.  At paragraph 23 the judge referred to
    the relevant law and in the earlier paragraphs which are quite  lengthy
    he dealt with much of the evidence specifically.  When dealing with his
    findings of fact at paragraph 18 he begins by saying that he had  heard
    evidence "from both the appellant and his wife and I found them  to  be
    generally credible witnesses and I accept their evidence  they  started
    and established a relationship in August 2015".

 8. He goes on to record some of the evidence as follows:

         "They decided that they did not want to marry straightaway  because
         the appellant's new spouse had a previous relationship out of which
         she had two children who lived with their father in France whom she
         went to see on a regular basis."

 9. The judge then refers to difficulties with the  claimant's  application
    to renew his visa during which time the evidence before the  judge  was
    that the claimant had "continued  to  live  with  his  sister  and  her
    children".

10. Then at paragraph 19 (which is  a  very  long  paragraph  amounting  to
    almost an entire page) the judge  records  how  the  claimant  and  the
    sponsor had given notice to marry and that the Secretary of  State  had
    granted permission to marry and how at the same time the  claimant  had
    lodged an application for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  family
    life with his sister and her children.  The judge says that he  accepts
    the claimant's evidence that he had  not  made  any  other  application
    other than that application on  human  rights  grounds,  although  this
    appears on its  face  inconsistent  with  what  is  stated  earlier  at
    paragraph 2 where the judge refers to  an  application  being  made  in
    January 2017 on the basis of the claimant's  family  and  private  life
    followed by another application on the basis of family and private life
    made in March 2017.  However Mr Clarke on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State  has  not  taken  any  point  with  regard   to   this   possible
    inconsistency within the judgment  and  it  does  not  appear  to  this
    Tribunal to be material to the decision now in issue.

11. A point was taken by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter  that
    had it been a genuine marriage it would have  been  expected  that  the
    claimant's sister would have attended that marriage which she did  not.
    However the judge records that both the claimant and  the  sponsor  had
    said that she had other commitments because she was "a business  owner"
    and for some reason which is not entirely clear was  unable  to  attend
    the marriage.  The point is taken both in the grounds and  also  by  Mr
    Clarke in argument  before  this  Tribunal  that  the  judge  does  not
    specifically deal with this argument  and  that  it  was  not  adequate
    reasoning for him merely to accept the account of the claimant and  the
    sponsor his spouse without hearing some evidence  from  the  claimant's
    sister herself.  Apparently the claimant's sister was  present  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal but she  was  not  tendered  for
    cross-examination.   Mr  Clarke  suggests  that  absent   such   cross-
    examination there was not adequate  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  to
    allow the First-tier Tribunal Judge to accept any explanation as to why
    this lady had not been at the wedding.  Mr Mahmood's  instructions  are
    that Counsel representing the claimant at the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal had stated in terms that the sister would be prepared  to
    answer any questions if anybody thought she ought to but  that  neither
    the judge nor importantly the Home Office Presenting  Officer  at  that
    hearing considered that this was necessary.

12. One of the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons  for  suggesting  that  the
    reasoning of the judge is inadequate is that  insufficient  weight  was
    given to this particular gap in the evidence  before  him  and/or  that
    this aspect of his decision was  inadequately  reasoned.   The  way  Mr
    Clarke put his case on this point, and the others  to  which  reference
    will be made below, is that the judge, having found initially that  the
    Secretary of State had satisfied the original burden of proof which was
    on him to show that the marriage may very well not be  a  genuine  one,
    the burden then shifted to the claimant to show that the  marriage  was
    in fact a genuine one.  However, Mr Clarke accepts that notwithstanding
    the shifting burden  of  proof,  the  overall  burden  remains  on  the
    Secretary of State throughout.

13. The other arguments made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  include
    the failure of the judge to deal at all with  the  point  made  in  the
    first bullet point at page 2  of  the  refusal  letter.   In  this  the
    Secretary of State had noted that the claimant  had  claimed  that  his
    spouse had travelled to France over the previous  two  weeks  and  that
    apparently the  claimant  did  not  know  how  old  the  sponsor's  two
    children's father (that is the father of his wife's children)  was,  or
    if he worked or if he had any medical problems.  He also did  not  know
    the type of accommodation his wife had stayed  in  or  who  she  stayed
    with.  He had apparently suggested that the house  that  his  wife  had
    stayed in may have been the one she had before her divorce but  all  he
    could confirm was that she stayed with her children but he did not know
    if this was throughout the time she was there or  if  they  spent  time
    back with their father.  The claimant also did not apparently know what
    family his wife had in France.

14. This was not  entirely  consistent  with  the  evidence  given  by  the
    claimant's spouse, who confirmed that the father of  her  children  was
    retired and because he was rather older, certainly than  the  claimant,
    being over 60 years old, suffered from various medical ailments such as
    diabetes.   (The claimant's wife no doubt considers that being over  60
    is an advanced age.)   In  any  event  none  of  this  was  dealt  with
    specifically by the judge in his decision.

15. The Secretary of State has also relied within the refusal letter on the
    fact (as noted above) that when the Immigration  Officers  had  visited
    the claimant's sister's house in order to carry out  investigations  as
    to whether the marriage was  genuine,  when  he  saw  them  coming  the
    claimant hid in a  cupboard,  which  it  is  said  indicated  that  the
    application was not an honest one.  It was suggested also that  he  was
    not cooperative.  It is said  further  that  this  was  something  that
    apparently the claimant never told his wife which it  is  suggested  he
    would have done had this been a genuine  relationship.   While  in  his
    decision the judge does deal with  the  undisputed  evidence  that  the
    claimant had indeed hid in a cupboard he records at paragraph  19  that
    "The appellant has not attempted to deny that fact and says that he was
    simply scared and consequently hid in the wardrobe".  He goes on to say
    that the  claimant  "denies  that  he  failed  to  cooperate  with  the
    Immigration Officers and denied that he ever stated  that  he  was  not
    cohabiting with his wife" (that is at paragraph 19).  At  paragraph  10
    the judge had said earlier that "the appellant asserts that although he
    initially hid in a wardrobe when the Home Office officials attended  at
    his residence he nevertheless fully cooperated with them  and  answered
    all their questions and denies being uncooperative".   The  judge  also
    records the claimant's assertion that the couple continue to reside  at
    his sister's address, which is the address where he was found hiding in
    the cupboard.

16. The point made on behalf of the Secretary of State is  that  the  judge
    has failed to understand it seems that the relevance of this particular
    challenge is not just that the claimant had hidden within the  cupboard
    but that he had not told his wife that this had happened, which  it  is
    argued suggests that this  was  not  a  genuine  marriage  because  the
    parties were  not  communicating  as  one  would  expect  a  couple  to
    communicate.

17. In answer to this point it is said on behalf of the claimant  that  the
    evidence was that the applicant did not tell his wife  because  he  was
    ashamed (this is not a matter recorded within the decision)  and  that,
    as the judge did record, the reason he hid in the cupboard was  because
    he was scared.

18. Some other points are taken on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  as
    well, such as that the judge made no finding as to whether or not there
    was some disparity concerning whether the couple had been saving to buy
    a property together.  It is also submitted  that  there  had  not  been
    evidence that the claimant was employed, although  in  this  regard  it
    would perhaps be a little odd if such evidence had been volunteered  by
    the claimant who did not have permission to work.  It is noted  however
    that the Secretary of State has not taken issue with the claim that the
    sponsor was working in this country, which she would have had to be  in
    order to be exercising treaty rights.

19. Essentially the Secretary of State suggests that in the  face  of  very
    strong evidence the judge needed  to  deal  far  more  fully  with  the
    reasons given by the Secretary of State for finding that  the  marriage
    was a sham marriage and that he  should  not  just  have  accepted  the
    evidence of the claimant and his spouse at face value.

20. In response to these submissions essentially Mr Mahmood submitted  that
    the judge had set out the law correctly and although he had  not  dealt
    specifically with everything he had summarised the evidence, having set
    out at paragraph 5 all the evidence which had been put in front of him.
     He had found that the chronology given by the couple was accurate  and
    accepted the reasons given as to why  the  claimant's  sister  had  not
    attended the marriage.  The judge's findings had been open to him.



Discussion

21. The task of this Tribunal is not to remake the decision (absent finding
    of material error of law by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge)  but  to
    consider whether or not the findings made by the First-tier Judge  were
    findings open to him on the evidence and are adequately reasoned.  This
    Tribunal did not hear the evidence and cannot say whether or not had it
    been in the position of the First-tier Tribunal  it  would  necessarily
    have made the same decision.  However, in  this  Tribunal's  judgement,
    the judge set out the law correctly, looked at all the  evidence  which
    had been adduced and gave reasons why he made the findings he did.   He
    heard two witnesses who were  both  cross-examined,  acknowledged  that
    there had been some discrepancies within the  evidence  but  considered
    also that a  number  of  the  answers  the  witnesses  had  given  were
    consistent and helpful  to  their  case.   Having  considered  all  the
    evidence in the round he believed that the claimant and the sponsor had
    been telling the truth.

22. A judge in a case like this is not required to  set  out  every  single
    piece of evidence in full (as this Tribunal has not done either; it  is
    sufficient if he or she writes enough so that  both  parties  know  the
    reasons why the decision has  been  made.   This  decision  is  in  the
    judgment of this Tribunal adequately reasoned and is by no  means  over
    short, running to some nine pages, which have  clearly  been  proofread
    carefully and in which the judge has summarised his findings.   He  was
    entitled having heard the evidence to believe  the  witnesses  and  has
    given adequate reasons for so doing.  While another judge on  the  same
    evidence may have made different findings, the findings that this judge
    made were open to him and are adequately reasoned.

23. It follows that this challenge of the Secretary of State must fail  and
    I will so order.



Decision

This appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed and the decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the  Secretary
of State's decision  refusing  to  grant  him  an  EEA  residence  card,  is
affirmed.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 13 May 2019

