
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA085002016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 22 June 2017                                 |On 26 June 2017            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 RITA ADOMAH
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the claimant: Not represented
For the appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Rita Adomah, date of  birth  27.3.85,  is  a  citizen  of
    Ghana.

 2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pacey  promulgated  14.11.16,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    22.6.16, to refuse her application for  a  derivative  Residence  Card,
    pursuant to Regulation 15A(4A) of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006, as amended.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 9.11.16.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Garro  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    27.3.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek granted permission  to  appeal
    on 21.4.17.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 22.6.17 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons briefly summarised below, I found such error of law  in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require the
    decision of Judge Pacey to be set aside.

 7. Judge Pacey accepted that the appellant is the  primary  carer  of  her
    child E, now 18 months of age, who is a British citizen and present  in
    the UK, and concluded that the child would be unable to reside  in  the
    UK or another EEA member state if the appellant were required to leave.



 8. In reaching that conclusion, the  judge  failed  to  provide  a  direct
    answer to and clear reasoning for the  crucial  issue,  despite  citing
    Ayinde and Thinjom (careres - Reg 15A -  Zambrano)  [2015]  UKUT  00560
    (IAC), at [20] of the decision. The judge appears to have justified the
    decision allowing the appeal by finding  that  removal  of  the  mother
    would seriously impair the quality and standard of  the  child's  life,
    relying on the decision of Maureen Hines v LB Lambeth [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    600, in which the Court of Appeal held that in answering  the  question
    as to whether the child would be unable to reside in the UK or  another
    EEA member state, it was necessary "to  consider  the  welfare  of  the
    British citizen child and the extent to which the quality  or  standard
    of his life will be impaired if  the  non-EU  citizen  is  required  to
    leave."

 9. However, the judge misdirected herself in law in failing to  appreciate
    that the Court of Appeal did not  alter  the  fundamental  test  to  be
    applied, and that as explained in  Harrison  v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1736,"nothing short of a situation where the EU citizen  is  forced  to
    leave the territory of the EU" is sufficient  to  engage  the  Zambrano
    principle. The Court of Appeal expressly did not state that  impairment
    of quality of life is the test, but that it is relevant to  the  strict
    test required under the regulations.

10. As Judge Kopieczdek noted in granting permission to  appeal,  "It  does
    not appear that any consideration was given to the question of  whether
    her son would be able to remain in the  UK  to  be  cared  for  by  his
    father.

11. In the circumstances, the decision cannot stand and must be  set  aside
    for material error of law.

12. In remaking the decision,  I  adopt  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the child E is a British citizen present in  the  UK  and
    for whom the appellant is the primary carer.

13. I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant,  cross-examined  by  Mr
    Harrison.

14. She has two other children, still in Ghana, aged 7 and 9, who live with
    their father's family. She was previously married  to  an  EEA  citizen
    (Belgian), but he is not the father of her child E  and  there  are  no
    children from that relationship, which began in the UK.  The father  of
    the child lives in Northampton and has had little to do with E,  having
    only seen him twice since birth. Apparently, he has another partner and
    children,  but  does  not  live  with  them.  The  Social  Services  in
    Northampton have prevented the appellant from taking  the  child  E  to
    live  with  his  father.  It  is  not  clear  why,  and  there  is   no
    documentation in support, but the appellant told me it was something to
    do with his partner and children in Northampton. They have  refused  to
    give her any further details. She understands that even if they wanted,
    the child E would not be able to live with  or  be  cared  for  by  his
    father. As she described it, the father is father in name only.

15. The appellant lives alone with the child in Bolton. She works as a care
    support worker on a zero hours  contract.  She  produced  receipts  for
    nursery fees for the child E. She is able to work  flexibly  to  enable
    her drop off and collect her child from nursery.

16. On the evidence, taken as a whole, I am satisfied that not only is  the
    appellant the primary carer, but the sole carer, with no  financial  or
    other support from the father of the child, who takes no  role  in  his
    care. It is not entirely  clear  why  the  Social  Services  would  not
    consent to the child living with the father, but in any  event,  it  is
    clear that the father does not and I am satisfied would  not  agree  to
    care for the child. In all the circumstances, including the  young  age
    of the child E, I am fully satisfied that if the appellant were  to  be
    required to leave the UK, the child E would  be  forced  to  leave  and
    would not be able to remain in the UK or any other member state.

17. It follows that the appellant is entitled to the  derivative  residence
    card sought.

Conclusions:

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions  were  made  on  the  issue.  Given  the
circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appellant failed to provide adequate  evidence  to  enable  the
Secretary of State to make a decision informed by  the  true  facts  of  the
case.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated

