
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08947/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2018                             |On 16 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                              MR BI HERMANN TIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Y Din, counsel instructed by ADA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A
    Khan in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Ivory Coast, against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  his
    application for permanent residence as the family member of a  European
    Economic Area national exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The application under appeal was  refused  on  20  October  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge M A Khan on papers on 13  March  2018  and
    was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The application was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford on 9 August 2018 in the following terms

       It is arguable that the  Tribunal  may  have  erred  in  overlooking
       relevant evidence  including  evidence  of  employment  of  the  EEA
       national sponsor with De Vere from 01/04/2008 to 31/10/2010 at  page
       88-94 of the appeal bundle and the  dates  of  absence  of  the  EEA
       national sponsor and child from the  UK  for  medical  treatment  in
       France (stated in Ground 5 of the appeal grounds as 30 March 2015 to
       30 December 2015).




Background


 3. The history of this appeal is detailed above. The Appellant is a
    citizen of Sierra Leone born on 2 November 1977. The Appellant arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 15 February 2004. He is married Leonie Ble, a
    French national on 28 August 2009. On 2 September 2010 the Appellant
    was issued with a residence card as the family member of a European
    national exercising Treaty rights. On 18 January 2017 he made an
    application for permanent residence.




 4. The Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  application  not  being
    satisfied that evidence had been submitted to show that the Appellant's
    wife had been exercising treaty rights for a  continuous  period  of  5
    years. The Secretary of State was satisfied that evidence was submitted
    showing employment for 4 years and 2 months.


 5. The Judge dismissed his appeal finding the Appellant had  not  provided
    further evidence to establish employment beyond the period of  4  years
    and 2 months or to show that the  Sponsor  had  travelled  abroad  with
    their child for urgent medical treatment as submitted in the grounds of
    appeal.




Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Din  appeared  for  the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Tarlow for the Respondent. Mr Din confirmed that he and Mr  Tarlow  had
    spoken, and that error of law was conceded. There were  various  errors
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal but in particular the  Judge
    had overlooked evidence showing employment in excess  of  5  years.  Mr
    Tarlow confirmed that the appeal was conceded and  suggested  that  the
    matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  again.  I
    asked whether the Secretary of State now  accepted  that  evidence  had
    been provided showing 5  years  continuous  employment  and  Mr  Tarlow
    accepted that it had. In the circumstances I asked  Mr  Tarlow  whether
    there was any reason why I should not remake the decision allowing  the
    Appellant's appeal and he confirmed that there  was  not.  I  therefore
    gave an extempore decision setting aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and remaking the decision by allowing the Appellant's appeal.


Decision


 7. This was an application for permanent residence  by  the  spouse  of  a
    French national exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Appellant  already  held  a  residence  card  as  a  result   of   this
    relationship. The  refusal  letter  accepted  that  evidence  had  been
    submitted showing that the  Appellant's  spouse  had  exercised  Treaty
    rights for a continuous period  of  4  years  and  2  months  being  29
    November 2010 to 23 January 2015.  The grounds of appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal submitted that during the period  30  March  2015  to  30
    December 2015 his spouse had travelled abroad with her child for urgent
    medical treatment and that this period  should  have  been  taken  into
    account in accordance with regulation 3(1) (2) of the EEA regulations.

 8. The appeal was dealt with as a paper case. The  Appellant  submitted  a
    bundle of documents under cover of a letter dated 10 January 2018.  The
    covering letter confirmed that a  further  bundle  would  be  submitted
    "consisting of French Medical Reports and translations".

 9. When the appeal was dealt with the First-tier Tribunal Judge refers  to
    the Appellant as "she" throughout and describes the Appellant's  spouse
    a "a Swiss national". The Appellant is male, and his spouse is  French.
    These errors of fact certainly indicate that the papers were not  given
    thorough consideration. A further error, and in my judgement a material
    error was that the decision states (at paragraph 17) that the Appellant
    does not mention the period of his spouse's  absence  from  the  United
    Kingdom for medical treatment when the grounds of appeal (at  paragraph
    5) gave the period as 30 March 2015 to 30 December 2015.  I  set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for this reason.

10. Were it not for Mr Tarlow's concession a difficulty would arise at this
    point. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal refer (at paragraphs
    1 and 5) to the documents before the First-tier Tribunal including  the
    Appellant's  witness  statement,  a  skeleton  argument,  corroborative
    medical records from a hospital in Toulouse  and  wage  slips  from  an
    earlier employment. I can find none of these  documents  on  the  Court
    file prior to  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  only
    document that I have concerning medical treatment is contained (but not
    indexed)  in  the  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is
    untranslated,  but  it  is  dated  17  June  2015  and   confirms   the
    hospitalisation of Henri Maximilien Seninhouon (aged 17) from 9 June to
    17  June  2015  for  correction  of  lumbar  scoliosis.  Following  the
    operation, the letter recommends the wearing of a corset  for  about  2
    months and radiological follow up after 3  months.  On  the  assumption
    that Henri is the child of the Appellant's sponsor  this  is  at  least
    some corroboration of the claim that she was absent during the relevant
    period. The failure to consider this document is, in  my  judgement,  a
    further error.

11. In any event documents were submitted to the Upper Tribunal  confirming
    the Appellant's spouse's employment with De Vere Hotels  from  1  April
    2008 to 31 October 2010 which, added to the  accepted  4  years  and  2
    months, more than make up a  5-year  period  of  continuous  employment
    showing that the Appellant met the requirements of the EEA regulations.
    These documents are referred to in the grounds of appeal and indeed the
    grant of permission to appeal as being at pages  88-94  of  the  appeal
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal. The bundle  before  me  ends  at
    page 63 with the untranslated medical  letter  referred  to  above.  If
    these documents were indeed before the First-tier Tribunal  that  is  a
    further material error of law in that they were not considered.

12. I am satisfied given Mr Tarlow's concession and the evidence now before
    me that there are material errors of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal. I am further satisfied on the documents  now  before  me
    that the Appellant's spouse was continuously  employed,  and  therefore
    exercising Treaty Rights, from 1 April 2008 to 23 January 2015 and that
    on  this  basis  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of   the   EEA
    regulations.

Summary of Decision

13. On Mr Tarlow accepting that there was evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant's spouse had been exercising Treaty  Rights
    for a continuous period of five years prior to the relevant date I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake  the  decision
    by allowing the appeal.


Signed                                  Date: 10 October 2018
[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


