

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08581/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                                                   |            |            |Decision sent to parties        |
|Decision sent to parties                                               |            |            |                                |
|On 8th October 2018                                                    |            |            |                                |
|On 15th October 2018                                                   |            |            |                                |
|                                                                       |            |            |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                  Rajah [A]

                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by Polpitiya & Co
solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS



Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   1 July 2016 to refuse him a permanent  right  of  residence  pursuant  to
   Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
   Regulations 2006.  The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

Background

2. The appellant was a lawful visitor to the United Kingdom from 2001, on  a
   frequent basis.  In 2005, he married his first wife in  Pakistan.   On  3
   February 2006, the couple applied to come to the United Kingdom for their
   honeymoon.  The appellant was given a 5-year multi-entry  visa,  but  his
   wife received only a 6-month  visa  and  returned  to  Pakistan  when  it
   expired. In October 2006 and June 2008, the couple had children together.
    The  parentage  of  the  younger  child  is  not  disputed:  it  is  the
   appellant's child, born following a second visit she made to  the  United
   Kingdom, with the elder child, in February 2007. Again, the wife returned
   to Pakistan at the end of her visit.

3. In July 2007, the appellant served notice of  intention  to  divorce  his
   wife on her in Pakistan.  The divorce was finalised in October 2007.  The
   relationship must have continued to some extent, given that their younger
   child was born  in  June  2008  and  therefore,  probably,  conceived  in
   September/October 2007.

4. In the meantime, in August 2006, the appellant had met  the  sponsor  who
   became his second wife.   In January 2009, he proposed to the sponsor and
   they were interviewed for a certificate of authorisation to marry,  which
   was issued on 14 December 2009, the respondent then being satisfied  that
   the proposed marriage was genuine. They married on 6 November 2009 and on
   15  September  2010,  the  appellant  successfully  applied  for  an  EEA
   residence card as the sponsor's spouse.

5. In 2013, the appellant's first wife  and  children  came  to  the  United
   Kingdom, the first wife as a student, and the children as her dependants.
    Her student visa was extended to 30 December 2016, but then curtailed in
   December 2015 due to revocation of the College's  sponsor  licence.   The
   first wife applied for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds,  saying
   that it had always been her intention to settle in  the  United  Kingdom.
   The appellant's case is that he does not see his first wife, but does see
   his two children about once a month, and  telephones  also  to  speak  to
   them.  If he sees the children in London,  then  the  first  wife  brings
   them.  He told the First-tier Tribunal that he did  not  know  his  first
   wife's immigration status or that of his children.

6. In  January  2016,  the  appellant  applied  for  a  permanent  right  of
   residence as his sponsor wife's spouse.  Immigration officers visited the
   sponsor at home on 8 June 2016, finding no sign of the  appellant  there,
   except a bottle  of  aftershave.   The  respondent  refused  a  permanent
   residence on the basis that the marriage between the  appellant  and  the
   sponsor was a marriage of convenience.

7. The evidence about the sponsor's marital status was that  she  threw  the
   appellant out in 2012, but the First-tier Judge found that  she  did  not
   tell HMRC that she was a single person until 2016.   The  sponsor  had  a
   miscarriage in 2017.  The appellant produced letters from friends, and  a
   witness statement from the  sponsor's  young  daughter  from  an  earlier
   relationship.  The child was present and willing to give evidence to  the
   First-tier Tribunal, but was not called as the Presenting Officer said he
   did not wish to cross-examine her. Her evidence must therefore  be  taken
   to be accepted.

8. There were also photographs from the wedding  ceremony  and  photographs,
   receipts and travel documents from various family holidays taken  by  the
   appellant and sponsor.  The First-tier Judge accepted that they holidayed
   together for 3 days in Venice in August 2013, for 3  days  in  Zurich  in
   March 2015, and for 2 days in southern Spain in July 2015.

First-tier Tribunal decision

9. The First-tier Judge  considered  all  the  evidence,  finding  that  the
   appellant and sponsor's accounts diverged on a number of material matters
   and concluded that the marriage was a sham, and always intended to be  so
   by  the  appellant.   The  First-tier  Judge  found  that  the  sponsor's
   involvement with  the  marriage  was  genuine,  but  that  the  appellant
   'frequently stayed away from the property and did just enough to keep the
   marriage alive in order to acquire his permanent  status'  including  the
   three brief holidays of which credible evidence had been produced.

10. The decision concluded:

         "30. I find that the appellant was still in a relationship with his
         first wife at the time he served her with divorce papers, as  their
         child was born 11 months later.  I find that he did  not  tell  the
         sponsor she was in the United Kingdom because he did not  want  her
         to know.  I find that he did not have clothes, toiletries or papers
         at the [sponsor's home] in June 2016  because  he  was  not  living
         there, and I find he did the bare minimum to keep this relationship
         going in order to be able to successfully apply in January 2016 for
         permanent residence.  I find, on the balance of probabilities, that
         this is why he took two very brief trips in 2015 which are so  well
         documented.

         31.  The evidence of [the sponsor having] a miscarriage in 2017  is
         not evidence that the appellant was the father of the unborn  child
         and so I attach little weight to it.  I have already found a  large
         number of inconsistencies and untruths  in  the  evidence  of  both
         parties.  When looking at the factors in Papajorgi I find that  the
         inconsistencies lead  me  to  find  that  this  is  a  marriage  of
         convenience entered into  at  the  time  for  the  purpose  of  the
         appellant gaining immigration status. ..."

11. The Judge dismissed the appeal.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the First-tier  Judge
   erred in failing to give weight to the step-daughter's evidence, and also
   in concluding that the sponsor had not miscarried  his  child,  an  issue
   which had not been put to the sponsor or the appellant in evidence at the
   hearing.

Rule 24 Reply

13. There was no Rule 24 Reply.

14. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

15. For the appellant, Ms Allen argued that the First-tier Judge's  decision
   related to the state of the marriage at a much later date  than  that  of
   the marriage; there had been a marriage interview, just after the parties
   contracted their marriage, and the  Secretary  of  State  had  then  been
   satisfied that the marriage was genuine.

16. The burden of proof  was  on  the  respondent,  not  the  appellant  and
   sponsor, to show that the marriage was not genuine and the respondent had
   not discharged that burden.  It was not open to the Judge to  decide  the
   parentage of the sponsor's miscarried child without giving the parties an
   opportunity to respond to such a serious allegation.  The decision of the
   First-tier Tribunal was bad for lack of procedural fairness and should be
   set aside.

17. For the respondent, Mr Clarke argued that the  step-daughter's  evidence
   did not advance the appellant's case; the Judge had been entitled to find
   that the appellant was duped at the date of  the  marriage.  Nor  was  it
   relevant whether the miscarried child was the child of the appellant  and
   sponsor; that would have made no difference.

18. There was a discrepancy between the appellant and sponsor as to  whether
   he was home when the immigration officers visited: he said  he  was  not,
   but she said that he was.  The  Judge  had  found  both  of  them  to  be
   unreliable  witnesses.   The  step-daughter's   witness   statement   was
   mentioned in the decision and the Upper Tribunal should not conclude that
   it had not been taken into account.

The step-daughter's witness statement

19. The uncontested evidence of the appellant's step-daughter  was  set  out
   in her witness statement of 14 November 2017.  She was then 17 years old.
    She said she had known the appellant since she was 6 years old, in 2006,
   when her mother met her at the school  gate  with  a  man  who  was  then
   introduced as a friend.  She described him as 'very pervasive'.  Meetings
   between the step-daughter, her mother, and the appellant  continued.  The
   appellant would drop her  off  at  the  weekends  to  her  Explorlearning
   tuition and her Stagecoach theatrical classes for children.

20. She remembered a day out in 2008 in the school holidays,  and  trips  to
   parks and restaurants.  In 2012, her cousins visited from Uzbekistan  and
   the appellant took all the children out every other  weekend  to  Dragons
   Den, Shrek's Adventure, Woburn  Safari  Park,  Thorpe  Park,  Chessington
   World of Adventures, and many more places.   The  best  memories  of  her
   childhood were of the appellant and her cousins.

21. The sponsor had married at 17 in Germany but the marriage had  not  gone
   well.  She had 'faced many  troubles'  and  now  suffered  a  major  mood
   disorder.  The  step-daughter  said  that  there  had  been   matrimonial
   difficulties  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor.   They  argued,  and
   sometimes her mother did not allow the appellant to come to the house, so
   that  the  step-daughter's  studies  would  not  be  affected  by   their
   arguments.

22. The statement concluded:

         "However, I can confirm that [the appellant] has always been living
         with us and he is the kindest human being I have  ever  met  in  my
         life, and despite their differences, [the appellant] and my  mother
         loves each other a lot."

23. Having opted not to cross-examine  on  that  statement,  the  respondent
   must be taken to have accepted it.

Discussion

24. The  first  question  is  whether  proper  consideration  of  the  step-
   daughter's statement might have made a difference to the outcome  of  the
   appeal.  I am satisfied that it might have done, and that  therefore  the
   omission to take it properly into account is a material error.

25.  The  second  question  is  whether  the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the
   sponsor's  pregnancy  might  not  have  been  the  appellant's  child  is
   material; again, I am satisfied that it was, as  it  contributed  to  his
   overall disbelief that the marriage was still subsisting.

26. The First-tier Tribunal decision must be set aside.  I  have  considered
   whether I can remake the decision on the basis of the evidence before  me
   and the findings of the First-tier Judge.  I consider that it is possible
   to do so.

Remaking the decision

27. I am guided in my approach to marriages of convenience by  the  judgment
   of Lord Justice Richards, with whom  Lord  Justice  Moore-Bick  and  Lord
   Justice Floyd  agreed,  in  Rosa  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2016] EWCA Civ 14  that  the  definition  of  a  marriage  of
   convenience, as set out by the House of Lords in R (Baiai) v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department (Nos 1 and 2) [2008] UKHL 53  can  properly
   be derived from Article 1 of EC  Council  Resolution  97/  C382/01  of  4
   December 1997 as:

         "a marriage concluded between a national of a  Member  State  or  a
         third-country national legally resident in a  Member  State  and  a
         third-country national, with the  sole  aim  of  circumventing  the
         rules  on  entry  and  residence  of  third-country  nationals  and
         obtaining for the third-country  national  a  residence  permit  or
         authority to reside in a Member State."

   The First-tier Judge accepted that the sponsor wife, at least, intended a
   genuine marriage.  The respondent also accepted  that  the  marriage  was
   genuine at the date of the marriage interview.

28. The appellant's former wife did not come to  the  United  Kingdom  until
   later, and the fact that  he sees his children  (including  the  daughter
   born to them after the divorce) is not necessarily suggestive of any more
   than that they have a civilised relationship, in  the  interests  of  the
   children.

29. I consider whether  the  marriage  when  contracted  was  genuine,  with
   regard to the guidance given in Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
   convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC), approved  in  Rosa,  the  Upper
   Tribunal gave the following guidance:

         i) There is no burden at the outset of an application on a claimant
         to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national  is  not  one  of
         convenience.

         ii)  IS  (marriages  of  convenience)  Serbia   [2008]   UKAIT   31
         establishes only that there is an evidential burden on the claimant
         to  address  evidence  justifying  reasonable  suspicion  that  the
         marriage is entered into for the predominant  purpose  of  securing
         residence rights.

         iii) The guidance of the EU Commission is noted and appended.

30. The European Union Commission guidance has both  positive  and  negative
   indicative criteria.  The positive criteria suggested are that the  third
   country spouse would have no problem obtaining a right  of  residence  in
   his own capacity, or has already lawfully resided in the  European  Union
   citizen's Member State; that the couple were in a relationship for a long
   time; that they had a common domicile or household for a long time;  that
   they have a mortgage or other long-term financial commitment together; or
   that the marriage has lasted for a long time.

31. In relation to these criteria,  this  couple  met  in  2006  and  had  a
   relationship before their marriage.  The appellant already had  a  5-year
   visa for the United Kingdom and had no obvious need for the assistance of
   the sponsor to obtain a right of residence, as he  had  been  coming  and
   going since 2001. There is no suggestion that  the  marriage  has  ended,
   although it has not been without difficulty, and there is the uncontested
   evidence of the appellant's step-daughter about  the  way  in  which  the
   appellant became part of  her  life  and  the  good  times  they  enjoyed
   together.   There was also the accepted evidence of three family holidays
   over the years.

32. The negative criteria are that the  couple  had  not  met  before  their
   marriage; that they are inconsistent about  the  circumstances  of  their
   first meeting or other important personal  information  concerning  them;
   that they have no common language, that money changed hands (other than a
   dowry) when the marriage was contracted; that one or both of the  spouses
   had previously entered into a marriage of convenience or  other  form  of
   abuse or fraud  to  acquire  a  right  of  residence;  that  family  life
   developed only after the expulsion order was adopted; or that the  couple
   divorced shortly after the  a  permanent  right  of  residence  had  been
   granted.

33. This couple were consistent  about  the  circumstances  of  their  first
   meeting, though not about where he was on the night  of  the  Immigration
   Officers' visit.  They have a common language and  it  is  not  suggested
   that the sponsor was paid to marry him.   Nor is it suggested that either
   of the parties has a previous history of  fraud,  abuse  or  marriage  of
   convenience.   There is no expulsion order, and their marriage and family
   life, such as it is, has developed over the past 16 years.

34. The evidence relied upon by the respondent comes to this, that in  2016,
   the appellant had few possessions at the sponsor's house.   That  is  not
   probative of his intention in 2009 and 2010, and it is accepted that  her
   intentions were genuine throughout.  On the balance of probabilities, and
   having regard to all the accepted evidence, I am not satisfied  that  the
   respondent discharged the burden of  showing  that  this  marriage,  when
   contracted, was contracted for the sole purpose of allowing the appellant
   to remain in the United Kingdom.

35. It is not necessary for the appellant to show that the  marriage  was  a
   successful one: as long as it was not a marriage of convenience, and  the
   sponsor continued to exercise Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom,  that
   is sufficient.  Even if (of which there is no  evidence)  the  miscarried
   child in 2017 was not the appellant's child, if the marriage was not  one
   of convenience when contracted and  the  parties  remained  married,  the
   appellant was in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with  the  Rules  and
   accruing time towards a permanent right of residence.

36. This appeal is therefore allowed.

DECISION

37. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by allowing the
   appeal.

Date:         9 October 2018                 Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson




