
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08372/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 March 2018                               |On 5 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                             mr adewale adesina
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Nelson-Iye, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 17 June 2016  to  refuse  to  issue  a
    residence card as the family member of an EEA national, his brother, Mr
    Ademola Mosudi Adesina, a national of Belgium pursuant to provisions of
    Regulation 7 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("The EEA Regulations").

2.   The respondent doubted that the EEA sponsor was  employed  as  claimed.
    The respondent also considered the application under Regulation 8(2) of
    the  EEA  Regulations  and  noted  that  the  appellant  had  submitted
    extensive evidence of his residence  in  the  UK  but  found  that  the
    appellant had failed to provide any evidence of dependency on  his  EEA
    sponsor in the UK.

3.   Permission was granted on the basis that it is arguable that the  judge
    may not have considered all the documentary evidence  relevant  to  the
    issue of the appellant's sponsor exercising EEA treaty rights.

4.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 6 December 1982.   On  8
    December 2015 his solicitors applied on his behalf for a residence card
    as a confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant which she recorded  at
    paragraph 6 of her decision.

6.   The judge set out her findings at paragraph 7.

7.   The judge said that the respondent refused the application as  she  was
    not satisfied that the EEA sponsor was exercising treaty rights in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge said she had considered the totality of  the
    evidence before her and noted from the interview the appellant had with
    the Department for Works and  Pensions  that  the  appellant  said  his
    brother was in Belgium in 2013 and that he had gone to Nigeria in 2011.
     The appellant submitted no evidence of the sponsor's  bank  statements
    and payslips or other evidence  to  support  his  claim  that  the  EEA
    sponsor was in the United Kingdom, other than evidence of a  wage  slip
    and P60 and P45 dating from 2009 and a single letter  from  HM  Revenue
    and Customs dated February 2014 advising the EEA  sponsor  of  his  tax
    code.

8.   The judge said that  the  appellant  produced  no  statement  from  his
    brother or any evidence to corroborate the claim that his  brother  was
    exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  or  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2009.  It was the appellant's evidence to DWP that
    his brother had gone to Nigeria in 2011 and to Belgium in 2013.

9.   The judge did not find the  appellant's  claim  that  his  brother  was
    living in the United Kingdom but only receiving  medical  treatment  in
    Belgium as this was contradicted by his  interview  to  the  DWP.   The
    appellant claimed he was dependent for everything upon his brother  and
    received funds from his brother  but  again  produced  no  evidence  to
    support his claim and it was completely undermined by the evidence from
    the Royal Borough of Greenwich which demonstrated  that  the  appellant
    was housed by them and was in receipt of financial  support  from  them
    pursuant to Section 21 National Assistance Act 1948 as  a  person  with
    nil recourse to public funds.

10.  The judge was not satisfied that any  satisfactory  evidence  has  been
    submitted that the EEA sponsor was resident in the  United  Kingdom  or
    that he was a worker or self-employed person who has  ceased  activity.
    There was no evidence in respect  of  the  EEA  sponsor  save  for  the
    documents dated in 2009 and the  single  letter  from  HM  Revenue  and
    Customs dated February 2014 to indicate that he was in receipt  of  any
    income or that he had ceased  activity  as  a  result  of  a  permanent
    incapacity to work.

11.  The judge noted that the appellant had been granted  a  residence  card
    which was issued on 14 December 2010 until 14 December 2015 and it  was
    submitted that he has acquired a right of  permanent  residence  having
    lived in the United Kingdom for five years as a family  member  of  his
    brother.  However, the judge  did  not  find  that  the  appellant  has
    established that he was living in the United Kingdom either as a family
    member or other family member of his brother in accordance with the EEA
    Regulations as there was no satisfactory evidence that the EEA national
    was in the UK exercising treaty rights after 2009.

12.  The judge said that the appellant had also raised a human rights  claim
    in his grounds of appeal but noted that  the  Court  of  Appeal  upheld
    decisions of both the First-tier and Upper Tribunal that  human  rights
    cannot form part of any EEA appeal (Amirteymour v SSHD EWCA  Civ  353).
    The judge said the reasoning behind the Court of Appeal's  decision  is
    that the right of appeal (under Regulation  26(1))  is  specifically  a
    right of appeal against an EEA decision.  The EEA appeal  should  focus
    on EEA law (note: the ruling  relates  to  cases  where  there  are  no
    removal directions in place).  The EEA Regulation that gives the  right
    of  appeal  does  not  create  a  general  arena  where  arguments   on
    Immigration Rules and human rights can be raised.

13.  Having considered all the evidence in  the  round  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant has established that the  EEA  sponsor  is
    exercising treaty rights and accordingly the appellant was not entitled
    to the issue of a residence card.

14.  Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that the only issue before the Tribunal was  as
    set out in the first paragraph of the notice  of  immigration  decision
    refusing to issue a residence card dated 17 June 2016.  It said this:

         "You have applied for a residence card as confirmation of  a  right
         of residence as a family member of an EEA national,  but  your  EEA
         family member has failed  to  provide  evidence  that  they  are  a
         qualified person as set out in  Regulation  6  of  the  Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2006."

15.  Mr Tarlow confirmed that this was the only issue before the Tribunal.

16.  Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that his first ground was  in  respect  of  the
    judge's decision at paragraph  7.1,  which  contains  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusing the appellant's application.   He  submitted  that
    the respondent's reasons as to  the  lack  of  documentation  from  the
    sponsor were incorrect as much more documentary evidence was  submitted
    on behalf of the EEA sponsor.  He said that documents at pages  62  and
    63 of the  appellant's  bundle  contained  the  sponsor's  most  recent
    Belgian  ID  card  and  his  Belgian  passport.   At  page  72  of  the
    appellant's bundle were two sets of letters; the  first  was  a  letter
    from HM Revenue and Customs dated 17 March  2008.   I  note  that  this
    letter was asking the EEA sponsor whether he needed to pay tax  on  the
    interest on his savings in banks and building  societies.   The  second
    letter was also from HM Revenue and  Customs  dated  8  September  2014
    informing the EEA sponsor that he was due a repayment of income tax for
    the tax year 2013-2014.

17.  Mr Nelson-Iye referred to three further  letters  from  HMRC  dated  26
    February 2014 informing the EEA sponsor of his new tax code, a  further
    letter dated 26 February 2014 informing the EEA sponsor of his new  tax
    code for the year from 6 April 2013 to 5  April  2014,  and  a  further
    letter dated 8 September  2014  which  has  already  been  referred  to
    telling him that he was due a repayment of income tax for the same  tax
    year.

18.  Mr Nelson-Iye referred to a letter at page 299 which was a  certificate
    stating that Ademola Adesina has  been  awarded  a  Level  1  Award  in
    Coaching Football (QCF).  The certificate was dated 20 May 2014.

19.  Mr Nelson-Iye referred to further documents - a letter in  French  from
    the Orthopaedic Department which he said was evidence  of  the  sponsor
    receiving ongoing treatment in Belgium for the knee injury he suffered.
     Indeed, at page 109 is a scan of the EEA sponsor's knee.

20.  Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that these documents  before  the  judge.   The
    relevance of these documents he said are set  out  in  the  appellant's
    statement.  The appellant said in his statement that he arrived in  the
    UK in December 2002, clandestinely from Belgium.  Prior to his  arrival
    in the UK, he was a footballer in Nigeria.  His brother Ademola Adesina
    is a Belgian national of Nigerian descent.  He lived with  his  brother
    in Belgium prior to arriving in the United Kingdom.   His  brother  was
    working with UPS in Belgium and was transferred to  the  UK  branch  in
    2005 and started exercising treaty rights in the UK.

21.  The appellant said at paragraph 11 of his  witness  statement  that  in
    2012/2013 his brother had an accident at  work  and  sustained  a  knee
    injury to his left leg.  As a result of this injury he  was  unable  to
    walk and left work.  He was treated briefly in  the  UK  but  he  later
    travelled to Belgium to obtain further treatment.  His brother's family
    and children remained in the UK.  His knee was operated on  in  Belgium
    around 2015.  Further to  the  operation  on  his  left  knee,  it  was
    discovered that his right knee also had a problem.  As  a  result,  his
    right knee was also operated on around September/October 2017 and he is
    still receiving treatment.  Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that  the  evidence
    at page 108 relates to the sponsor's treatment in Belgium.

22.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied on Regulation 5(3)(a)(ii) to  argue  that  as  the
    appellant's brother continued to work until his injury and continues to
    be treated for his injury, he remains a qualified person  both  at  the
    time of application and at the time  of  hearing.   He  submitted  that
    there was sufficient information before the judge to support  the  fact
    that the EEA  sponsor  is  a  qualified  person  and  consequently  the
    appellant is entitled to a residence permit.

23.  He submitted that the failure by the judge to consider  Article  8  was
    an error of law.  He relied on the decision in  Khan  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1755.  Mr Nelson-Iye submitted that whilst they could not argue Article
    8, because of Khan there  was  an  exercise  of  discretion  which  the
    Secretary of State could have undertaken in respect of the family.   He
    submitted that the Secretary of State did not exercise her discretion.

24.  Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge's  decision  disclosed  no  material
    error of law.

25.  The appellant's application for a residence card as confirmation  of  a
    right of residence as the family member of an EEA national was  refused
    under Regulation 6(1)  and  Regulation  8(2).   Regulation  6  defines,
    "qualified person" as follows:

         "6-(1)   In these Regulations, 'qualified person'  means  a  person
              who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as -


              (a) a jobseeker;


              (b) a worker;


              (c) a self-employed person;


              (d) a self-sufficient person; or


              (e) a student.


        Regulation 6(2) states:


        [Subject to Regulation 7A(4)  and  the  alternative  and  7B(4),  a
        person who is no longer working shall not cease to be treated as  a
        worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if -]


             (a)  he is temporarily unable to work  as  the  result  of  an
                  illness or accident;


             (b)  he is in duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
                  having been employed in the United Kingdom, for  at  least
                  one year, provided that he


                  (i)   has registered as  a  jobseeker  with  the  relevant
                      employment office; and


                  (ii)     satisfies conditions A and B."

26.  Mr Nelson-Iye did not rely on Regulation 6(2).

27.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied on Regulation 5(3):

         "Worker or self-employed person who has ceased activity".


         It says at paragraph 5(3):


             "A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if -


             (a)  he terminates his activity in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
                  worker or self-employed person as a result of a  permanent
                  incapacity to work and


             (b)  either -


                  (i)  he resided in the  United  Kingdom  continuously  for
                      more than two years prior to the termination; or


                  (ii) the incapacity is the result of an accident  at  work
                      or an occupational disease  that  entitle  him  to  a
                      pension payable in full or in part by an  institution
                      in the United Kingdom."

28.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied on Regulation 5(3) because it  appeared  from  the
    evidence that the EEA sponsor has terminated his activity in the UK  as
    a worker as a result of his knee injury. Mr Nelson-Iye  said  that  the
    EEA sponsor was relying on his savings to maintain himself financially.
      This  meant  that  the  EEA  sponsor  could  not  satisfy  Regulation
    5(3)(b)(ii).

29.  The remaining question is whether the EEA national has resided  in  the
    UK continuously for more than two years prior to the termination.

30.  I find that the documents relied on by Mr  Nelson-Iye  would  not  have
    made any difference to the judge's decision.  In particular the judge's
    decision at paragraph 7.2 wherein the judge stated that  the  appellant
    produced no statement from his brother or any evidence  to  corroborate
    his claim that his brother was exercising treaty rights in the  UK,  or
    that he has been in the  UK  since  2009.   The  judge  relied  on  the
    appellant's evidence to DWP that his brother had  gone  to  Nigeria  in
    2011 and to Belgium in 2013.  Indeed, at paragraph 6.3 the appellant in
    evidence said he had no documents showing his brother was in the United
    Kingdom after 2009 other than a letter sent  to  his  brother  from  HM
    Revenue and Customs dated 28 February 2014 at page 73 advising  of  tax
    codes.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied on further documents from HM  Revenue  and
    Customs advising of tax codes but I find that these  documents  do  not
    show that the appellant's brother was in fact in the UK at the time  he
    was being advised of his tax codes.  The appellant said in his  witness
    statement that as a result of his knee  injury  his  brother  has  been
    unable to  work  since.   Although  the  appellant  claimed  that  this
    accident happened in 2012/2013,  his  evidence  to  DWP  was  that  his
    brother had gone to Nigeria in 2011 and to Belgium in 2013.  He said at
    paragraph 12 of his witness  statement  that  his  brother's  knee  was
    operated on in Belgium around 2015 and he had a  further  operation  on
    the other knee in September/October 2017.  So as  found  by  the  judge
    there was no evidence that has been produced by the appellant or  drawn
    to my attention to indicate that the appellant's brother  has  been  in
    the United Kingdom since 2009.

31.  Mr Nelson-Iye relied on the certificate awarded to Ademola  Adesina  on
    20 May 2014.  Mr Nelson-Iye said the certificate awarded to Mr  Adesina
    for a course he undertook in  football  coaching.   I  find  that  this
    evidence falls short of establishing that the EEA sponsor was in the UK
    continuously for more than two years prior to the  termination  of  his
    working activity in the UK.  In any event, I find that the  appellant's
    evidence was inconsistent in respect of his brother's residence in  the
    UK.  If, as the appellant said his brother's knee was  operated  on  in
    Belgium  around  2015,  and  his  other  knee  was   operated   on   in
    September/October 2017, there was no evidence  that  at  the  date  the
    appellant made his application that is 8 December 2015, his EEA sponsor
    was resident in the UK, was exercising treaty rights  and  therefore  a
    qualified person under Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations.

32.  I note that the judge's findings in  respect  of  the  refusal  of  the
    appellant's application under Article 8 of the EEA Regulations have not
    been challenged.

33.  I also find that the judge did not  err  in  law  in  her  reliance  on
    Amirteymour v SSHD (EWCA) Civ 353 which held that  the  EEA  Regulation
    that gives the right of appeal does not create a  general  arena  where
    arguments on Immigration Rules and human rights can be raised.

34.  For these reasons I find that the judge's decision does not disclose  a
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

35.  The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

36.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun


