
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/08503/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 February 2019                  |On 25 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                Jamshed Khan
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan of SZ Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         the  appellant  in  respect  of  the  determination  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Obhi dismissing his appeal on 27 September 2018.

      2. The appellant is an Indian national born  on  5  October  1966.  He
         initially entered the UK as a visitor in 2005  and  overstayed.  He
         was served with removal papers in June 2011 and in August  2011  he
         married a Portuguese national  and  unsuccessfully  applied  for  a
         residence card. A subsequent application was, however, granted  and
         on 18 July 2012 a card was issued to him. It  is  his  unsuccessful
         application for a permanent residence card, made in  February  2017
         and refused on 19 September 2017,  that  is  the  subject  of  this
         appeal.

         The Hearing

      3. The appellant and his  wife  attended  the  hearing  but  were  not
         required to give evidence as the issue was only whether  the  judge
         had made material errors of law.

      4. For the appellant, Mr Chohan relied on the  grounds  and  submitted
         that although the judge found that the burden was on the respondent
         and that the only ground raised in the decision  letter  (the  non-
         attendance at interviews)  had  been  explained,  she  nevertheless
         dismissed the appeal. Her decision was, therefore,  irrational.  No
         reasonable judge could have reached that decision.   The  appellant
         and sponsor both attended the hearing. The respondent had,  in  the
         decision letter, done no more than made  an  assertion.  The  judge
         acknowledged it was  difficult  to  proceed  without  a  Presenting
         Officer so she should have adjourned the hearing so that one  could
         attend. No reasons had been given for the dismissal of the appeal.

      5. I then heard submissions  from  Mr  Lindsay.  He  argued  that  the
         grounds did not particularise the error of law  being  alleged.  It
         now appeared to be a rationality challenge, but the judge had given
         a number of reasons for her conclusion and  had  properly  directed
         herself to the standard/burden of proof. She noted that, as  stated
         in the decision letter, the appellant had married the sponsor  just
         a few weeks after being  served  with  removal/enforcement  papers,
         that there had been no guests at their wedding,  that  inconsistent
         evidence had been given about the non-attendance of guests and that
         there had been a paucity of evidence to show the  relationship  was
         as claimed. The appellant  had  not  pleaded  that  the  judge  had
         stepped into the arena as Judge Bird had  suggested  when  granting
         permission to appeal but, in respect of that allegation, Mr Lindsay
         submitted that the judge had been wary of overstepping the line and
         had been very careful in the way in which she put her questions.

      6. Mr Chohan responded. He submitted  that  an  explanation  had  been
         given for the absence of guests at the wedding.  The  Secretary  of
         State had already accepted the  marriage  was  genuine  because  he
         issued a residence card to the appellant in 2012 so  he  could  not
         now say that it was a sham and nor could the judge.  He  questioned
         what more  evidence  the  appellant  could  have  produced  and  he
         submitted that the judge should have asked more questions  to  test
         the evidence although he then submitted that it was not her role to
         do so. He submitted that the decision was irrational, and the judge
         had done the job of a Presenting Officer. There should be a de novo
         hearing.

      7. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.

         Discussion and Conclusions

      8. I have considered all the evidence before me and have had regard to
         the submissions made.

      9. My first observation is that the grounds  pleaded  before  me  bear
         little resemblance to those contained in the written grounds and no
         application to amend the grounds was made either prior to or at the
         hearing.

     10. I deal firstly with the grounds as contained in the application.  I
         accept fully that the judge was careless  when  she  described  the
         appellant as being a Pakistani and not an Indian national. However,
         as the appeal does not hinge on any issues of return,  the  mistake
         over the country of origin, whilst regrettable, is not material.

     11. It is also argued that the judge gave the date of  the  appellant's
         birth as 5 June 1966 rather than 5 January 1966. I  note,  however,
         that the appellant's passport copy gives it as 5  October  1966  as
         does his application  form  for  a  residence  card,  the  decision
         letter, the notice of appeal and various  items  of  correspondence
         from the appellant's representatives.  Again, the  judge  has  been
         careless (indeed, so have the representatives) but nothing turns on
         this.

     12. The third example of carelessness on the part of the judge is  that
         she referred to the appellant's representative as Mr Sharma  rather
         than Mr Khan. I note that the judge does refer to Mr  Khan  in  the
         body of the determination but again, this kind  of  mistake  should
         not happen. It is hoped that the judge will  have  regard  to  this
         determination and take more care with such matters in  the  future.
         Again, however, this does not impact upon the decision.  I  invited
         Mr Chohan to tell me whether there were any errors with  regard  to
         the facts of the case as pertaining to this appellant, but  he  was
         unable to refer me to any.

     13. The next point argued in the grounds is that the judge ignored  the
         fact that the appellant had already been granted a  residence  card
         previously and "considered it as an  'issue'  whether  the  parties
         married for the purpose of enabling the appellant to remain in  the
         UK! ". I am unclear as to the need for an exclamation mark here but
         plainly as the application had been refused on the basis  that  new
         matters had led the respondent to conclude that  the  marriage  was
         one of convenience, the judge was obliged to consider this. She did
         not make this an issue of her own volition; it was made an issue by
         the respondent's decision letter. I would add that the issue  of  a
         residence card does not bind  the  respondent  to  having  to  make
         positive decisions from then  on.  If  matters  arise  which  raise
         concerns, it is wholly open to the respondent to revoke a residence
         card or to refuse to grant permanent residence. It was  not  argued
         that the appellant had a legitimate expectation that  he  would  be
         granted permanent residence because  he  had  obtained  an  initial
         residence card. Indeed, such an argument would have  been  hopeless
         as no unambiguous promise was made and no assurance  was  given  to
         him by a public official (Mehmood (legitimate  expectation)  [2014]
         UKUT 469).

     14. It is then argued that the respondent did not  field  a  presenting
         officer and that the burden had been on him and not  the  appellant
         to prove the allegation of a sham marriage.  The  judge  was  fully
         aware of this. She confirms at paragraph 40  that  "the  burden  of
         proving that the marriage is a marriage of convenience  is  on  the
         respondent". She reminds herself  of  the  principles  in  Sadovska
         [2017] UKSC 54 and Seferi [2018] EWHC 287  (at  paragraph  41)  and
         then at paragraph 42 again  refers  to  the  burden  being  on  the
         respondent.

     15. It is maintained that "Respondent did not  even  represent  herself
         what to speak of any evidence (sic). The FTT Judge made  a  finding
         without any evidence". As  can  be  seen  from  the  determination,
         however, the judge sets out the respondent's case  (at  14-15)  and
         then notes the appellant's response (at 42).  She  then  once  more
         refers to the respondent's reasons and considers whether  they  are
         sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial  burden  of  proof  (at  43
         onwards), concluding that they are.  She also  has  regard  to  the
         explanations provided  by  the  appellant  and  sponsor.  there  is
         nothing to support the contention that findings were  made  without
         evidence and, indeed, the grounds do not give any examples of this.

     16. The grounds then argue that the respondent's refusal "was  base  on
         assumptions (sic)" because the judge had found that  the  appellant
         had probably not  received  the  correspondence  inviting  him  for
         interview.  It is correct that the judge found in  the  appellant's
         favour on this point. That shows she approached the  case  with  an
         open mind and did not simply rubber stamp the respondent's refusal.
         She makes it clear, however, that there were  other  reasons  which
         gave rise to concern and so whilst it may be  that  the  respondent
         was wrong to draw adverse inferences based on the non-attendance at
         interviews, it does not follow that that vitiates the decision.

     17. The grounds maintain that the judge had evidence covering a  number
         of years  to  show  that  there  was  a  genuine  relationship.  At
         paragraphs 55-59, the  judge  addresses  the  documentary  evidence
         adduced, which given the length of  the  claimed  relationship,  is
         very limited and raised further difficulties. She gave full reasons
         as to why she concluded  that  the  documentary  evidence  did  not
         establish that there was a genuine relationship.

     18. It is then argued that the appellant and  sponsor  gave  consistent
         replies to questions they would only be able to answer if they were
         in an intimate relationship. Unhelpfully,  these  replies  are  not
         identified, and I cannot see any questions of  an  intimate  nature
         that were put to the parties.

     19. Finally, it is argued, that the judge did  not  take  a  number  of
         documents into account. No further details are provided. I asked Mr
         Chohan several times to clarify which documents it was alleged  the
         judge had disregarded but he was unable to  point  to  any.  Having
         looked through the evidence myself,  and  in  the  absence  of  any
         assistance from the appellant's  representatives,  I  can  find  no
         documents which were not referred to by the judge. I note  in  fact
         that the judge confirms that all the evidence  was  considered  and
         that in addition she  also  took  account  of  fresh  evidence  not
         previously submitted and available on the  sponsor's  mobile  phone
         (at 12).

     20. There is nothing, therefore, in the  grounds  which  even  remotely
         identify any material errors in the judge's approach.

     21. I referred earlier to the shift in the  way  the  case  was  argued
         before me. Mr Chohan raised the following new  grounds  during  the
         course of his submissions at the hearing: (1) that the judge should
         have adjourned the appeal hearing so  as  to  enable  a  Presenting
         Officer to  attend;  (2)  that  the  decision  was  irrational  and
         perverse and (3) that the judge did the job of the respondent.

     22. It is not helpful and not appropriate for new grounds to be  argued
         at a hearing without any application for permission to amend  those
         already put forward, either prior to or at  the  hearing.  No  such
         application was made by Mr Chohan  at  any  time.  However,  as  Mr
         Lindsay did  not  indicate  that  he  was  disadvantaged  by  these
         submissions, I proceed to consider them.

     23. On the first point, I  find  there  is  no  merit  whatsoever.  The
         appellant was legally represented at the hearing and no application
         for an adjournment was  made.  Nor  was  it  suggested,  until  the
         hearing before me, that it had been an error for the judge to  have
         proceeded without a PO. Plainly this  is  an  afterthought  by  the
         appellant's representative and it does not assist him at all.

     24. With regard to the second argument, I have already  considered  the
         judge's findings and set out why I conclude that she  was  entitled
         to  make  the  findings  she  did.  The  threshold   to   establish
         perversity/irrationality is very high and it has not been met here.



     25. The third complaint is tied up to some extent with  the  first  and
         probably inspired by Judge Bird's comment in granting permission. I
         have examined the determination closely to see  if  the  judge  did
         indeed step into the arena, but I conclude that she did not  do  so
         for the following reasons. It is clear that the judge was not happy
         about the absence of a Presenting Officer (at 39) but equally it is
         plain that she was fully aware of her  limitations  in  questioning
         the appellant and the sponsor. She was very careful  in  making  it
         clear  to  the  appellant,  sponsor  and  representative  that  her
         questions were designed for clarification and  assistance  (at  11,
         20, 26, 39 and 52) and she made this known to them at the outset of
         the proceedings (at 20). No objections were raised by Mr  Khan  who
         represented the appellant either  at  that  stage,  or  during  the
         course of the hearing or at its conclusion. The questions asked  by
         the judge are fully set out in the determination  and  are  plainly
         open ended rather than interrogative as one  might  expect  from  a
         representative of the respondent. In no way can they be compared to
         a cross-examination and  the  assertion  that  the  judge  did  the
         respondent's job is wholly unsupported by any evidence. I note that
         whilst Mr Chohan was quick to make the allegation and criticize the
         judge, he did not actually point to any  part  of  her  questioning
         which could be said to be inappropriate.

     26. For all these reasons, therefore,  I  conclude  that  there  is  no
         material error of law in the judge's decision. It is  open  to  the
         appellant to make a fresh application, is  he  so  wishes,  and  to
         provide the respondent with more satisfactory documentary evidence.



     27. Decision

     28. The judge did not make any errors of law. The appeal is dismissed.

     29. Anonymity

     30. I make no order for anonymity.




    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge
    Date: 21 February 2019
