
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:   EA/08267/2016 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 13 July 2020                      |On 27 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                           MUHAMMAD QASIM GULRAIZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. A Badar, Counsel, instructed by Ashton Rose Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Stedman ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 16  October  2019
    by which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent
    to  refuse  to  grant  him  an  EEA  Family  Permit  was  refused.  The
    respondent's decision is now of some age, having been issued on 21 June
    2016.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum granted the appellant permission to appeal on
    all grounds.

Remote hearing

 3. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing room at  Field
    House. The hearing room and the building were open to the  public.  The
    hearing and its start time  were  listed  in  the  cause  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way as if we  were
    together in the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this  constituted  a
    hearing in open  court;  that  the  open  justice  principle  has  been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as  there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest,  it  is  justified  as
    necessary and proportionate.

 4. The  parties  agreed  that  all  relevant  documents  were  before  the
    Tribunal.  The  video  and  audio  link  to  Mr.  Badar  was  connected
    continuously throughout the hearing. Mr. Clarke only enjoyed access  to
    the hearing via an audio link but  was  content  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing. Both  representatives  confirmed  at  the  conclusion  of  the
    hearing that it had been completed fairly and they  were  content  with
    the process.

 5. The appellant did not attend the  hearing.  The  sponsor,  Mrs.  Nasir,
    attended remotely.

Anonymity

 6. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and no request was  made
    by either party for such direction to be issued.

Background

 7. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born in 1989 and is now
    aged 31. He applied for entry clearance as an  extended  family  member
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 seeking
    to join his sponsor, his sister-in-law, in this country. His sister-in-
    law  is  a  Romanian  national  who  resides  with  her  husband,   the
    appellant's brother, in this country.

 8. The respondent refused the application for an EEA Family Permit on  two
    grounds: (i) the appellant had failed to  provide  sufficient  evidence
    that he is the brother of the sponsor's wife; and  (ii)  he  failed  to
    establish that he was wholly or mainly  financially  dependent  on  the
    sponsor. Upon providing DNA evidence  the  first  issue  is  no  longer
    pursued by the respondent.

 9. The appellant's appeal  first  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Davidson, who dismissed the appeal  by  means  of  a  decision
    dated 12 February 2019. The appellant was granted permission to  appeal
    to the Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal's decision was  set  aside,
    with no findings of fact preserved, consequent to  a  decision  of  UTJ
    Pickup dated 8 May 2019.

Hearing Before the FtT

10. The appeal came  before  the  Judge  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  30
    September 2019. The sponsor attended with her  husband  and  both  gave
    oral evidence.

11. The Judge raised concerns with  the  witnesses,  and  counsel  for  the
    appellant, as to issues he  perceived  as  arising  from  the  evidence
    before him. The new issues were not identified within the  respondent's
    decision letter. The Judge concluded that the family  circumstances  he
    was presented with were a fa�ade and false. He further concluded as  to
    the purported dependency, at [24]:

         24. The refusal of a family permit in this case is justified on the
            evidence because, as I have analyzed it, I  am  unable  to  find
            that the appellant is dependent on the sponsor. There is  wholly
            insufficient evidence of  that.  There  is  some  evidence  that
            remittances have been sent by the sponsor to the appellant and I
            accept that, but these must be viewed in light of  my  findings,
            and thus take on a completely different  meaning  -  namely  the
            sponsor simply seeking to enhance the  appellant's  standard  of
            living. The evidence that the appellant was in any  need  of  an
            income was lacking. There was no clear reason why he  could  not
            support himself and indeed whether he was  deriving  any  income
            for his own use from his father's land  in  [addition]  to  free
            accommodation.

Grounds of Appeal

12. The appellant initially sought permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal
    from the First-tier Tribunal by means of grounds of appeal authored  by
    Mr. Badar, dated 23 October 2019.  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Osborne refused the application by way of a decision dated 24  February
    2020. Detailed grounds of  appeal  were  subsequently  drafted  by  the
    appellant's solicitors,  dated  5  March  2020,  and  filed  with  this
    Tribunal. The identification of the two separate grounds of  appeal  is
    relevant for reasons addressed below.

13. The grounds advanced by the  March  2020  document  are  discursive  in
    nature and read as submissions  rather  than  as  carefully  calibrated
    grounds  of  challenge.  However,  the  four   grounds   advanced   are
    interrelated, and primarily submit that the  First-tier  Tribunal  went
    beyond the  scope  of  the  respondent's  decision  in  making  adverse
    findings of fact. Additionally, it is asserted that the  Judge  applied
    the wrong standard of proof when considering the issue of dependency.

14. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Blum reasoned, inter alia:

         'The grounds variously contend that the judge was not  entitled  to
         reach his conclusions and that he acted in  a  procedurally  unfair
         manner. It is arguable that the judge developed his own  theory  of
         the case, one that was not advanced by the respondent and one  that
         had not been identified  in  an  earlier  decision  that  had  been
         overturned by the Upper Tribunal.  Although  it  appears  that  the
         judge  did  make  his  concerns  known  to  the  parties,   it   is
         nevertheless arguable that the judge's  approach  was  procedurally
         unfair, that he went beyond the scope of the case advanced  by  the
         respondent, and that he reached conclusions not  supported  by  the
         evidence.'


Decision on Error of Law

15. Prior to the hearing Mr. Clarke filed and served  a  copy  of  a  post-
    hearing note prepared by counsel who represented the respondent at  the
    hearing, Mr. Graham, in relation to the hearing before the  Judge.  The
    note is dated 30 September 2019, the day  of  the  hearing.  Mr.  Clark
    filed and served a judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Lim  v.  Entry
    Clearance Officer, Manila [2015] EWCA Civ 1383; [2016] Imm.  A.R.  421.
    He further relied upon two decisions of this Tribunal: JK  (Conduct  of
    hearing)  Cote  d'Ivoire  [2004]  UKAIT  00061   and   XS   (Kosovo   -
    Adjudicator's conduct  -  psychiatric  report)  Serbia  and  Montenegro
    [2005] UKIAT 00093.

16. At the outset of the  hearing  Mr.  Clarke,  with  his  usual  candour,
    conceded on behalf of the respondent  that  the  Judge  had  materially
    erred in law by failing to lawfully consider medical evidence filed  on
    behalf of the appellant when reaching  the  following  conclusions,  at
    [10], [24]:

         '10. ... The appellant is a fit and healthy  30-year  old  man  and
            there was no reason why, being physically and mentally able,  he
            could not simply get himself a job in Pakistan.


         ...


         24.  ... There was no clear reason why he could not support himself
            and indeed whether he was deriving any income for  his  own  use
            from his father's land in [addition] to free income.'

17. Though the respondent's  position  is  that  the  medical  evidence  is
    insubstantial, Mr. Clarke accepted there was a material  error  in  the
    clear failure by the Judge to expressly consider it  when  making  such
    findings of fact that subsequently infected the dependency assessment.

18. In making the concession, Mr. Clarke expressly acknowledged para. 10 of
    the October 2019 grounds of appeal:

         '10. ... The applicant's statement at paragraph 5 also sets out how
            he is unwell and is unable to work. It is  also  submitted  that
            the applicant's medical treatment, which the  sponsor  has  paid
            for, was part of  the  applicant's  claim  and  evidence,  which
            clearly does not materialise in the judgment.'

19. This ground of appeal was not advanced  by  means  of  the  March  2020
    grounds and so permission was  not  granted  upon  it.  As  Mr.  Clarke
    observed it is an 'obvious' point. I note  that  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect professional representatives to set out appeal grounds  with  an
    appropriate degree of  particularity  and  legibility  and  a  Tribunal
    should be hesitant in forensically examining the decision  to  identify
    grounds beyond those advanced by a professional representative. This is
    particularly so when a professional representative 'drops' a ground  of
    challenge when renewing an appeal on behalf of their  client.  However,
    there remains a duty upon the Tribunal  to  consider  points  that  are
    obvious: R v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department,  ex  parte
    Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162. The Tribunal enjoys a power to consider any
    other point arising from a decision if  the  interests  of  justice  so
    require. I observe my indication to the parties at the hearing that  it
    was a point that I had  noted  in  preparing  for  the  hearing.  I  am
    satisfied that the  failure  by  the  Judge  to  consider  the  medical
    evidence filed in this matter  constitutes  a  material  error  of  law
    because the conclusion drawn as to  the  appellant's  fitness  to  work
    lacks adequate reasoning and because the Judge proceeded to  rely  upon
    the conclusion when making his finding as to dependency.

20. As to the primary contention  raised  by  the  grounds  of  appeal  the
    principle underpinning the appellant's complaint  is  fairness,  namely
    that the Judge unfairly made his own  assessment  as  to  the  relevant
    family dynamic which was not an issue relied upon by the respondent  in
    either the decision of June 2016, nor before JFtT Davidson  earlier  in
    2019.

21. When laying down a definition that permits the rule  of  law  to  stand
    alone alongside human rights and democracy in the twenty-first century,
    Lord Bingham opined that all trials and court processes should be  fair
    and this was a broader requirement that the right to a fair  trial.  At
    page 90 of his seminal work, 'The Rule  of  Law'  (Allen  Lane)  (2010)
    first edition, Lord Bingham noted:

         '... it must be recognised that fairness  means  fairness  to  both
         sides, not just one.  The  procedure  followed  must  give  a  fair
         opportunity for the prosecutor or claimant to  prove  his  case  as
         also to the defendant to rebut it. ...  fairness  is  a  constantly
         evolving concept, not frozen at any moment of time ...'

22. The adjudicative procedures provided by the State should be  fair.  The
    rule of law would seem to require no less. The application of this sub-
    rule to  ordinary  tribunal  processes  is  largely  unproblematic  and
    certain core principles have come to be accepted: that a matter  should
    not be finally decided against any party until he has had  an  adequate
    opportunity to be heard; that a person should be adequately informed of
    what is said against them;  and  that  a  party  should  make  adequate
    disclosure of material helpful  to  the  other  party  or  damaging  to
    itself. As to the  application  of  the  last  point,  see  the  recent
    Presidential panel decision in BH (policies/information: SoS's  duties)
    Iraq [2020] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

23. The requirement that the First-tier Tribunal deal with cases fairly and
    justly is enshrined as  an  overriding  objective  by  rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

24. In R v. Secretary of State for the Home Department,  ex  parte  Pierson
    [1998] AC 559, 591A Lord Steyn observed that the rule  of  law  in  its
    wider sense has procedural and substantive effect.  Further,  at  591F,
    Lord Steyn noted that the rule of law  enforces  minimum  standards  of
    fairness, both substantive and procedural.

25. I observe that a party to proceedings is to be given a fair opportunity
    to meet points that may ultimately be held against  them,  particularly
    where their honesty is in question. Fair proceedings require sufficient
    notice of an issue to be given to a party or a witness.

26. During the course of the hearing, and in his decision,  the  Judge  was
    concerned by an issue that did not form a  ground  of  refusal  in  the
    respondent's decision letter of 2016 and had not  formed  part  of  the
    respondent's case before JFtT  Davidson  earlier  in  2019.  The  Judge
    raised his concerns with the sponsor,  as  confirmed  at  [13]  of  the
    decision,  and  with  the  appellant's  brother,  at  [14].  The  Judge
    proceeded  to  give  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's   counsel   an
    'opportunity to either take  instructions  or  even  alert  me  to  any
    professional concerns that [counsel] may have had', at [14].

27. Having been informed by counsel that he did not have  any  professional
    concerns, the Judge details at [14]:

         14 ... I was satisfied that the sponsor and the appellant's brother
            were given every opportunity to comment on the view I had  taken
            on the evidence and that the hearing was fair to them ...'

28. In placing the sponsor and her husband on notice as to the issue on his
    mind, which was not relied upon  by  the  respondent  in  the  decision
    letter, the Judge is presumed to have had in mind the common  law  rule
    of evidence identified by the House of Lords in Browne v. Dunn (1893) 6
    R. 67, namely that it is only fair to witnesses that if their  evidence
    is to be disbelieved, they must be given a  fair  opportunity  to  deal
    with the allegation. As observed by Lord Herschell L.C., at [70]-[71]:

         'I cannot help  saying  that  it  seems  to  me  to  be  absolutely
         essential to the proper conduct of a cause, where it is intended to
         suggest that a witness is not speaking the truth  on  a  particular
         point, to direct his attention to the fact by some questions put in
         cross-examination showing that that imputation is  intended  to  be
         made, and not to take his evidence and  pass  it  by  as  a  matter
         altogether unchallenged, and then, when it is impossible for him to
         explain, as perhaps he might have been able to do if such questions
         had been put to  him,  the  circumstances  which  it  is  suggested
         indicate that the story he tells ought not to be believed, to argue
         that he is a witness unworthy of credit. My Lords,  I  have  always
         understood that if you intend to impeach a witness you  are  bound,
         whilst he is in the box, to give him an opportunity of  making  any
         explanation which is open to him; and as it seems to  me,  that  is
         not only a rule of professional practice in the conduct of a  case,
         but is essential to fair play and fair dealing with witnesses.'

29. Newey LJ confirmed in Howlett v. Davies [2017] EWCA Civ 1696; [2018]  1
    W.L.R. 948, at [39]:

         39. It is  perhaps  worth  adding  two  comments.  First,  where  a
            witness' honesty is to be challenged, it will always be best  if
            that is explicitly put to the witness.  There  can  then  be  no
            doubt that honesty is in issue. But what ultimately  matters  is
            that the witness has had fair notice of a challenge  to  his  or
            her honesty and an opportunity to deal with it. It may  be  that
            in a particular context a cross-examination which does  not  use
            the words "dishonest"  or  "lying"  will  give  a  witness  fair
            warning. That will be a matter for the trial  judge  to  decide.
            Secondly, the fact that a party has not  alleged  fraud  in  his
            pleading may not preclude him from suggesting to  a  witness  in
            cross-examination that he is lying. That must,  in  fact,  be  a
            common occurrence.

30. The purpose of the rule is well-grounded; witnesses should be given  an
    opportunity to respond to competing versions of events.

31. The duty is generally one that is placed upon an advocate  representing
    a party as it requires a matter is to be put directly to a witness if a
    party is going  to  later  adduce  evidence  to  impeach  the  witness'
    credibility or present contradictory evidence. However, as observed  by
    the Court of Appeal in Howlett v. Davies, at  [31],  judges  are  often
    required  to  characterise  witnesses  as  having   been   deliberately
    untruthful even where there has been no prior assertion of  dishonesty.
    The question arises as to whether  a  judge  can  intervene  and  raise
    concerns as to credibility during  the  course  of  a  hearing.  In  JK
    (Conduct of Hearing)  Ouseley  J,  sitting  as  the  President  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, confirmed the position to  be  adopted  by
    the judiciary, at [43]:

         43. ... An Adjudicator ought not to interrupt  examination-in-chief
            or cross-examination except in the  circumstances  to  which  we
            have referred or for other reasons associated with  the  general
            conduct  of  the  case  and  the  court  room.  If   there   are
            inconsistencies between documents and oral evidence  or  between
            answers which have been given already, it is nearly always  best
            to wait until after cross-examination and re-examination to  see
            what matters are put. However, it is wholly legitimate  for  the
            Adjudicator to ask  his  or  her  own  questions  on  issues  of
            inconsistency, points raised in the refusal  letter  or  matters
            which trouble the Adjudicator, whether or not they are raised by
            the other party. What is important,  whether  or  not  they  are
            raised by the other party is that  the  Adjudicator  should  not
            develop a different case from that being present  by  the  other
            party or pursue his or her own theory of  the  case.'  [Emphasis
            added]

32. Consequently, whilst a judge may indicate to the parties  any  concerns
    held as to a witness' credibility, and ask his or her own questions  in
    the manner identified by the Tribunal in JK, it is for the  parties  to
    put forward their own case. For a judge to impose his or own theory  of
    a  case  upon  the  parties  and  to  determine  accordingly  would  be
    procedurally unfair.

33. Mr. Clarke informed me as to the respondent's position  which  is  that
    the Judge did not pursue his own theory of the case. Rather, he  raised
    concerns which were then adopted by the respondent at the hearing.  The
    difficulty for this Tribunal is that the decision is unclear as to  who
    led the questioning of the witnesses on the issue.  On  behalf  of  the
    respondent Mr. Graham's post-hearing note is sparse on detail.  Further
    whilst complaint is made as to the approach adopted by the  Judge,  Mr.
    Badar did not file a witness statement detailing events at the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal and therefore could not give evidence to
    me as a witness  because  of  his  role  as  an  advocate  before  this
    Tribunal. The failings of the parties to provide clear witness evidence
    as to the circumstances  in  which  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's
    brother  were  cross-examined,  including  who  asked  them   questions
    relating to the new issues, is stark.

34. Proceeding on the basis that  the  respondent's  position  before  this
    Tribunal is correct, and that Mr.  Graham  expressly  adopted  the  new
    issues as part of the respondent's case before the Judge, the  question
    arises as to who was given notice in this matter. In the  hearing  room
    the new issues were  addressed  to  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's
    brother-in-law. However, the appellant was over 3,500 miles and several
    time zones away in Pakistan. Whilst the appellant had previously  filed
    written evidence with the First-tier Tribunal it did  not  address  the
    concerns raised by the Judge, and adopted by  the  respondent,  at  the
    hearing. It is appropriate to observe  that  the  appellant  cannot  be
    criticised for failing to address the new issues raised  by  the  Judge
    when he prepared his case. He was entitled  to  rely  upon  the  issues
    relied upon by the respondent of which he had notice.

35. It is often the case that in entry clearance appeals a sponsor  at  the
    hearing  can  provide  evidential  clarification  to  issues   arising.
    However, in this matter the appellant was provided  no  opportunity  to
    address significant credibility concerns raised for the first  time  at
    the hearing. Unfortunately, counsel for the appellant was  content  for
    the hearing to proceed without adequate instructions from his client on
    the new issues and did not seek an adjournment to permit his client the
    opportunity to address them. This  approach  was  adopted  despite  the
    Judge indicating that counsel could have time to take instructions,  at
    [14]. Such failure may possibly have encouraged the  Judge  to  proceed
    with the hearing and to make significant, adverse credibility  findings
    without permitting the appellant the opportunity to address them. If an
    adjournment application had been  made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
    seeking to protect his position, the Judge would have been required  to
    consider the fairness of proceeding in the absence of  the  appellant's
    direct evidence on the new issues. As explained by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC),  if  a
    Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such  decision
    could, in principle, be erroneous in law in several respects and  these
    include denying the party concerned a  fair  hearing.  In  all  of  the
    circumstances, the decision by the Judge to proceed  with  the  hearing
    without the appellant being able to provide written evidence addressing
    the new issues of concern raised at the hearing, which were significant
    in nature, was a  breach  of  procedural  fairness  and  constituted  a
    material error of law.

36. I informed the representatives at the hearing that a further  'Robinson
    obvious' point  arose  in  this  matter.  The  Judge  aired  suspicions
    concerning the personal circumstances  of  the  sponsor's  children  at
    [18]. Having aired them, he curtly observed that he drew  no  'specific
    conclusion' upon them. The suspicions, if correct, would be significant
    and highly adverse to the children. The Judge then proceeded to make  a
    finding at [23] of his decision as to the arrangement presented by  the
    appellant, his brother and the sponsor being a 'facade and false',  and
    to make further observations closely aligned to the  suspicions  raised
    at [18]. I further observe the Judge acknowledges at [13]  that  during
    the course of the hearing when giving notice to  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant's brother as to the new issues, he identified his  suspicions
    as being 'glaringly obvious' and in doing so expressly  made  reference
    to  the  suspicions  he  subsequently  addressed  at   [18].   In   the
    circumstances it is appropriate to read  the  views  expressed  by  the
    Judge at [13] and [18] into his finding of fact at [23].  The  concerns
    raised are of grave significance to the children, who are  now  subject
    to the judicial observations made  as  well  as,  importantly,  to  the
    finding made in the last three lines of [23].

37. I have significant concerns as to why  the  hearing  was  permitted  to
    proceed, rather than adjourned,  in  light  of  the  Judge's  expressed
    concerns to the representatives in relation to the  children,  who  are
    not parties to these proceedings and whose parents  are  witnesses  and
    not parties, in circumstances where the children were not permitted the
    opportunity to seek and secure  evidence  that  may  prove  capable  of
    allaying judicial concerns that go to  the  heart  of  the  appellant's
    appeal. It is striking that neither counsel appearing before the  Judge
    believed it appropriate to identify that the Tribunal, as well  as  the
    respondent, are subject to a duty to act in the best interests  of  the
    children under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Asylum  Act
    2009. I am satisfied that the decision of the Judge to proceed  onwards
    to consider the circumstances of the children,  and  make  far-reaching
    personal findings of fact, without permitting an  opportunity  for  the
    children  to  seek  to  protect  their  position  by  means  of  filing
    appropriate evidence, was a flagrant  failure  to  act  in  their  best
    interests. Whether or not the Judge's suspicions as to particular facts
    are accurate, the Tribunal is satisfied that both the Judge and counsel
    lost sight of the basic requirement to act fairly towards the  children
    in this matter and to act in their best interests. Such  failure  is  a
    material error of law.

Remaking the Decision

38. Both representatives confirmed that  this  matter  should  properly  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

39. I observe that this appeal commenced  in  2016  and  has  so  far  been
    considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  this  Tribunal  on  four
    separate occasions. There is much to suggest that it should  remain  in
    this Tribunal. However, I have given careful consideration to the Joint
    Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
    concerning the disposal of appeals in this  Tribunal.  I  am  satisfied
    that the effect of the material errors identified  above  has  been  to
    deprive the appellant of a fair hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    and so it would be just to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal:
    paragraph 7.2(a) of the Joint Practice Statement.

40. On behalf of the appellant Mr. Badar conceded that  the  appellant  now
    has personal notice of the new issues, which Mr. Clarke  confirmed  the
    respondent continues to rely upon, and so will be expected  to  address
    them at the next hearing without the  requirement  of  a  new  decision
    being issued.

41. The parties addressed me upon whether the evidence of the  sponsor  and
    the appellant's brother as presented orally to the First-tier  Tribunal
    could be relied upon by the respondent at  the  next  hearing.  As  the
    appellant's position as to the  new  issues  raised  by  the  Judge  is
    presently opaque, it would not be appropriate for the Tribunal to  make
    a determinative finding on this issue, save as to observe that both the
    sponsor and the appellant's  brother  had  notice  of  the  nature  and
    substance of the judicial concerns when giving oral  evidence.  If  the
    appellant proceeds with his appeal, it may well be  that  when  listing
    this matter the First-tier Tribunal can expect additional  time  to  be
    required to consider this, and potentially other,  preliminary  issues.
    The representatives before me indicated that up to one extra  hour  may
    be required for preliminary argument.

Direction

42. Whilst directions should  properly  be  a  matter  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in order to permit time for the sponsor's children to  secure
    further evidence the representatives were in agreement that the hearing
    of this matter should not take place until  16  November  2020  at  the
    earliest, a period of four month from the hearing of this appeal before
    the Tribunal.

43. I therefore direct:

         i) The hearing of this appeal by the First-tier Tribunal sitting at
            Hatton Cross, should take place on the first available  date  on
            or after 16 November 2020.

44. It is appropriate that the First-tier Tribunal, and not this  Tribunal,
    consider as to whether this matter should  be  conducted  remotely,  by
    means of a hybrid hearing or at a face-to-face hearing.


Notice of Decision

45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    16 October 2019 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

46. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing
    before any judge other than Judges of the First-tier Tribunal  Davidson
    and Stedman.

47. No findings of fact are preserved.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan              Dated: 15 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
