
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08540/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                           Mrs Mariam Khvedelidze
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna (instructed by Sterling & Law Associates
LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons promulgated by Judge Chudleigh in the First-tier
    Tribunal following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 6th December 2017.  The
    appeal was by a citizen of Georgia who was married to an  EEA  national
    and who had sought residence on that basis.   It  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State, the Secretary of State having  reasonable  grounds,
    it was said, to suspect this was a  marriage  of  convenience  and  the
    Secretary of State's reason for doing so was  that  despite  apparently
    two invitations to attend a marriage interview neither had  been  taken
    up.

 2. The case, when it came before the Judge, unfortunately was not  without
    its difficulties.  The matter had originally been on the  list  of  one
    Judge who was taken ill on the day and therefore placed before  another
    Judge at what I can only assume was much later in the day by which time
    there was no Home Office Presenting Officer available.  The  Judge  was
    then in some difficulties in how the case could proceed and clearly was
    very careful about what questions ought to be asked  of  the  Appellant
    and witness.

 3. The Judge was left with effectively the documentary evidence, which  in
    the main consisted of various pieces of correspondence addressed to the
    Appellant  and  her  spouse  at  various  addresses  and  a  number  of
    photographs.  The Judge found  that  this  indeed  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  She did so disbelieving the Appellant's  excuse  for  not
    attending the second interview, having given her  the  benefit  of  the
    doubt that she was not aware of the first.  She also looked at some  of
    the photographs, of which there were numerous copies in the bundle  and
    a set of five originals. At paragraph 35 of the  Decision  and  Reasons
    the Judge sets out six criticisms of some of the photographs.

 4. The Judge placed heavy reliance on her criticism of those  photographs.
    Unfortunately, however, that does not tell the whole story because,  of
    the original photographs that were produced, two  are  date-stamped  by
    the camera.  One of them, showing the couple cuddling on a  settee,  is
    dated November 2011, which was prior to the  Appellant's  detention  by
    the Secretary of State and prior to the application, the subject of the
    appeal.  There was another date-stamped photograph, dated  March  2012,
    and the Judge has not given any consideration to  those  dated  photos.
    That alone is enough to find  that  the  conclusion  that  this  was  a
    marriage of  convenience  was  inadequately  reasoned  and  Mr  Wilding
    accepted that.  He also agreed that the appropriate  course  of  action
    was to set aside the Decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

    For the above reasons the appeal by the Appellant to the Upper Tribunal
    is allowed to the extent that it is remitted for a  full  rehearing  on
    all matters by the First-tier Tribunal.   There  is  necessity  for  an
    anonymity order and I do not make one.  The appropriate hearing  centre
    is Hatton Cross.


Signed                              Date 12th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
