

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/08385/2016

                                                  EA/08387/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2017                       |          On 20 June 2017         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            FLORENCE ANAYO CHIDI
                                     S N
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr Sadozai of Sadozai Solicitors
For the Respondent:         Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Lucas ('the Judge') promulgated on 24 November 2016  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellants' appeals  against  the  respondent's
        refusal to issue a Permanence Residence Card.
     2. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born on 31 January 1974  and
        26 February 2009 respectively.
     3. The appellants asked for the matter to be considered on the papers,
        as a result  of  which  the  Judge  considered  the  material  made
        available before concluding at [16]:


        16.  This appeal has no prospect  of  success.  The  Appellant  and
             Sponsor have stated that the evidence submitted with the claim
             made on  13  January  2016  was  either  incorrect  or  simply
             inadequate. She has gone on to produce new documents in a  new
             bundle which include new contact numbers and addresses for his
             employer,  together  with  a  variety  of  new   evidence   of
             employment, salary and residence which  were  not  before  the
             Respondent when this claim  was  considered.  The  purpose  of
             these claims is not to permit rolling disclosure because  this
             would make  the  task  of  the  Respondent  to  be,  at  best,
             impossible. It is the responsibility of the Appellant, no  one
             else, to ensure that evidence  is  adequate  at  the  time  of
             application.  It is not appropriate - in effect - to present a
             fresh claim after the Refusal decision.


     4. The Judge stated that the correct approach was for  the  appellants
        to lodge an entirely fresh claim and that as it  was  admitted  the
        evidence provided with the application  was  either  inaccurate  or
        inadequate,  the  claim  had  no  prospects  of  success  and   was
        accordingly dismissed.
     5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal.  The operative parts of the grant being in the  following
        terms:


        2.   Despite the application having been lodged on  behalf  of  the
             appellants by a firm of solicitors  the  grounds  asserted  no
             error of law in  the  decision.  The  Judge  did  not  say  no
             evidence not was lodged with the application as is asserted by
             the appellant.


        3.   There is an arguable error by the  Judge  not  raised  by  the
             appellant's representatives which is that an appellant  in  an
             EEA application must lodge documents which show at the date of
             hearing evidence of five years exercise of  treaty  rights  by
             the EEA national. It appears  that  there  was  such  evidence
             before the Judge in the form  of  P  60s  for  six  years  and
             subsequent bank statements.



Error of law


     6. The Judge makes a fundamental misdirection of law  at  [1]  of  the
        decision where it is stated "... Appeal against the decision of the
        Secretary of State made on 28 June 2016 to  refuse  to  grant  them
        permanent residence in the UK as the family member of Ebera  Chidi,
        an Italian national".  A Residence Card does not grant status  upon
        an individual entitled to the same.  The right of any EEA  national
        or family member to  reside  in  accordance  with  the  Regulations
        arises if they can satisfy the appropriate specified criteria.  For
        example, if an EEA national resides in a host member  state  for  a
        period of five years as a worker, exercising  treaty  rights,  they
        will have acquired the right to remain in that state for the period
        they continue to exercise treaty rights (in whatever capacity) from
        the date of entry up to the expiration of the five-year period  and
        thereafter a right of permanent residence, which can only  be  lost
        in limited circumstances. This right does not come  into  existence
        because it is granted by the Secretary of State.
     7. A Residence Card is evidence of a right acquired under the terms of
        the Regulations which reflect the Free Movement Directive and later
        case law. In this case, the Secretary of State did  not  refuse  to
        grant permanent residence for the Secretary of State has  no  power
        to  refuse  permanent  residence  if  the   requirements   of   the
        Regulations or EU law are satisfied and the person entitled to such
        a right has not conducted themselves  in  a  manner  that  warrants
        their removal from the Member State.  The  Secretary  of  State  is
        entitled to refuse to issue a Residence Card but only if  satisfied
        that the relevant criteria cannot be met. It is not a case,  as  it
        is with domestic immigration rules, of a right only  accruing  once
        grant by the Secretary of State.
     8. Whether a person is exercising treaty rights  and  has  acquired  a
        right of residence or  permanent  residence  is  a  fact  sensitive
        analysis. It is also an ongoing process. The Judge therefore  erred
        in limiting the date at which the issues were to be  considered  to
        the date of the application. Whilst there is a specific timeline in
        relation  to  some  domestic   applications,   to   the   situation
        appertaining at the date of application, such a restriction is  not
        arguably permitted in relation to EU law issues and  the  right  of
        Free Movement.
     9. It is not disputed that the information provided to  the  Secretary
        of State with the application was incorrect or  inadequate.  It  is
        not disputed that an additional addendum bundle has  been  provided
        containing a considerable number of  documents  which  support  the
        contention the EEA national has been exercising treaty  rights  and
        has resided in the UK in accordance  with  the  Regulations  for  a
        continuous period of five years, as a  worker,  and  that  the  EEA
        member's spouse, Florence Chidi, and their daughter  SN  has  lived
        with the EEA national in accordance with the  Regulations  for  the
        requisite period. This is accepted by Mr Tufan.
    10. Accordingly, at the date of the previous hearing and  this  hearing
        the appellants' have discharged the burden of proof  upon  them  to
        the required standard to show that the EEA national has acquired  a
        right of permanent residence  as  he  has  been  exercising  treaty
        rights for more than five years as a  worker  and  the  appellants'
        have also resided in the UK in accordance with the Regulations  for
        a continuous period of five years  as  family  members  of  an  EEA
        national exercising treaty rights. On this basis, the  decision  of
        the Judge is set aside. The decision  is  re-made.  The  appeal  is
        allowed.

Decision

    11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity


    12. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 19 June 2017



