

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
EA/08770/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 22nd February 2019                  |On 19th March 2019            |
|                                       |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                            MRS MARIANA BENYAKOVA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Peter Grant-Hutchison allowing an
      appeal by Mrs Mariana Benyakova (hereinafter referred to as "the
      claimant").

   2. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of
      the Secretary of State refusing her permanent residence as an EEA
      national on the basis of exercising Treaty rights in the UK for a
      continuous period of five years.  On the evidence before him the Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that this requirement was met
      for the period from 6th November 2012 until 6th November 2017.

   3. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal in respect of
      the judge's decision covering the limited period of three months from
      2nd September 2016 to 4th December 2016.  It was acknowledged that the
      judge's findings and reasoning covered a period from March 2016 to 1st
      September 2016, during which period the claimant was in receipt of
      Jobseekers Allowance (JSA).  The judge omitted to give findings and
      reasoning for the succeeding three months up to 4th December 2016,
      after which JSA was awarded.  Permission was granted on this basis.

Submissions
   4. Before me Mr Winter referred to the skeleton argument for the
      claimant, which was before the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and
      was referred to at paragraph 9 of the judge's decision.  This showed
      that in the three month period up to 4th December 2016 the claimant
      was in receipt of Disability Living Allowance (DLA).  Although there
      was no documentary evidence from the DWP to show payment of this, I
      was referred to payments of DLA on the claimant's bank statements on
      4th October 2016, 1st November 2016, 23rd December 2016 and 31st
      January 2017.  Mr Winter submitted that although this was a material
      point not expressly mentioned in the judge's decision it was clearly
      part of the evidence relied upon by the judge, who had accepted the
      skeleton argument.

   5. For the Secretary of State, Mr Matthews emphasised that the claimant
      had to show five years' continuous residence while exercising Treaty
      rights.  For this purpose findings of fact were required for the whole
      period and it was not enough to say that the position was covered by
      extrapolation of the judge's reasoning, or that the judge had accepted
      the reasoning in the skeleton argument.  It was contended for the
      claimant that during the period in question the claimant was
      temporarily incapacitated for work but the award of DLA did not
      establish this.  The HMRC records showed the claimant was claiming JSA
      during the same period.  There was a letter from the claimant's GP
      saying she was incapable of work but this did not cover the whole of
      the disputed period.  There were inconsistencies in the evidence as to
      whether the claimant was temporarily incapacitated during this period.

Discussion
   6. It is not disputed that during the three months up to 4th December
      2016 the claimant was in receipt of DLA.  This is not enough to allow
      her to succeed.  She must also show that during this period she was
      unable to work owing to temporary incapacity, in terms of regulation
      5(7) of the EEA Regulations 2016.

   7. Mr Matthews referred to a letter dated 6th February 2018 from HMRC at
      pp 25-26 of the claimant's second bundle.  The information in this
      letter includes the claimant's sources of income for the year ending
      5th April 2017.  The letter refers to JSA from 08/09/2016 to
      27/11/2016 but no figure is given by way of payment. Mr Matthews
      acknowledged that this information was confusing and it would have
      been preferable if clarification had been obtained from the DWP.

   8. To me the information in the HMRC letter of 6th February 2018
      indicates that although a claim for JSA may have been made for the
      period from 8th September 2016 to 27th November 2016 no payment of
      benefit was made.  This suggests that the claim was not accepted.  It
      was pointed out at the hearing that not infrequently when a person
      claims benefits a dispute arises as to whether the person is incapable
      of work.  The DWP may take a different view on this from a person's
      own doctor.  A person may pursue a claim for benefits not knowing
      whether the claim will be accepted.  The significant point is then not
      that a claim was made but whether a payment of benefit was made.  It
      seems to be the case here that a claim was made but no benefit was
      paid.  It does not necessarily follow from the reference in the HMRC
      letter to JSA for the period 8th September 2016 to 27th November 2016
      that the claimant was in receipt of JSA for this period and was not
      temporarily incapable of work.

   9. I was referred to a letter dated 18th April 2018 from the claimant's
      GP stating that between April 2016 and November 2016 the claimant
      sought treatment for low mood, poor sleep and anger problems.  The GP
      states that the claimant was not fit for work during this period.  Mr
      Matthews pointed out that for part of the period covered by this
      letter the claimant was in receipt of JSA, and therefore holding
      herself out as fit for work, but the letter did not cover the period
      from 28th November to 4th December 2016.  This meant that even if the
      letter was accepted as evidence of incapacity, it did not cover all of
      the disputed period.

  10. Certain observations may be made in response to this submission.  The
      first is, as already mentioned, that the DWP may not take the same
      view as a claimant's GP about fitness to work.  It may therefore be
      assumed that for the period up to 1st September 2016, when the
      applicant was in receipt of JSA, the DWP took the view that she was
      fit to work.  The second observation, which was advanced by Mr Winter,
      is that the claimant need establish her case only on the balance of
      probabilities.  The evidence for the period from 28th November 2016 to
      4th December 2016 shows that the claimant was not working and was in
      receipt of DLA, and her GP's evidence shows that she was regarded as
      unfit for work up to the end of November.  If, as appears to be the
      case, the claimant regarded herself as incapable of work from the end
      of November until 4th December 2016, then there is evidence, in the
      form of her receipt of DLA and her GP's evidence as to her incapacity
      in the immediately preceding period, to support the claimant's
      contention, having regard to the ordinary civil standard of proof.
      The claimant's own perception of her capacity may be taken into
      account along with the other evidence.


  11. Accordingly, I am satisfied on the basis of the evidence before the
      First-tier Tribunal that the claimant was temporarily incapacitated
      from working in the period from 2nd September to 4th December 2016.
      The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred by omitting to make a
      finding for this period.  Nevertheless the findings and reasoning of
      the First-tier Tribunal for the remainder of the five year period up
      to 6th November 2017 have not been challenged and still stand.

  12. The result is that I set aside the decision of the Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal and amend the findings made for the period from 2nd
      September to 4th December 2016.  In accordance with my findings and
      reasoning set out above, I am satisfied that the claimant was
      temporarily incapacitated for this period, in terms of regulation
      5(7).  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal for the rest of the
      five year period remain unchanged.  The claimant therefore succeeds in
      showing that she was exercising Treaty rights for the five year period
      up to 6th November 2017 and is entitled to the document sought showing
      her entitlement to permanent residence.

Conclusions
  13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  14. The decision is set aside.

  15. The decision is re-made allowing the appeal.



Anonymity
No direction for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have not
been asked to make such direction and see no reason of substance for doing
so.


Fee award              (N.B. This is not part of the decision)
No fee has been paid or is payable so no fee award is made.



M E Deans
                                13th March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

