
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08167/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision by Consent and Directions    |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15th November 2018                 |On 30th November 2018                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                              Raja Usman bashir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                     DECISION BY CONSENT AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and by the consent of the parties the following order is made:

      i) Upon the parties' agreement that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal promulgated on 17th August 2018 discloses a material error
         of law, it is hereby ordered by consent as follows.

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors  of  law  in  the  manner
         described in the grounds of appeal and as  pleaded  by  Appellant's
         Counsel in the following respects:

         It was agreed between the parties  that  the  key  issue  at  stake
         before the First-tier Tribunal and which was  the  subject  of  the
         application was whether the Appellant was able to  meet  Regulation
         10(5)(d)(iv) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 in  relation
         to whether he had retained a  right  of  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom   which   was   warranted   by   "particularly    difficult
         circumstances, such as ... domestic violence whilst the marriage or
         civil partnership was subsisting".  In this regard Counsel for  the
         Appellant directed my attention to paragraphs  4,  5,  10,  12  and
         15.a. of the Appellant's witness statement which  referred  to  the
         issue of domestic violence.  Mr Wilding accepted  that  this  issue
         had not been determined and it was the backbone of the application,
         as he put it.  There was some brief discussion as to  whether  that
         error may be immaterial in respect of the further issue  raised  in
         the refusal letter in terms of the  identity  of  the  Sponsor  not
         being established by virtue  of  a  provision  of  the  former  EEA
         Sponsor's passport or valid identity document, however my attention
         was directed briefly to Regulation 42 of the 2016  EEA  Regulations
         which  provides  that  alternative   evidence   of   identity   and
         nationality can be produced and that "the Secretary  of  State  may
         accept alternative evidence of identity and nationality  where  the
         person is unable to obtain or produce the required document due  to
         circumstances  beyond  the  person's  control".    Alongside   this
         Regulation there is also guidance published  by  the  Secretary  of
         State entitled "Free movement rights: retained rights of  residence
         Version 3.0" published on 7th February 2017 and still in force  (as
         far as I am aware) which states on page 21 that where it is  agreed
         that additional enquiries can be made the applicant  must  give  as
         much detail as they can about the EEA national Sponsor and if  they
         cannot "provide proof  of  the  EEA  national  Sponsor's  identity,
         nationality or proof of relationship, then you must check  existing
         records on CID to see if their identity has been established in any
         previous applications".  I am told by the parties that the  Sponsor
         had previously provided a copy of her valid identity and  therefore
         there may be a copy of an existing  record  on  CID  but  which  Mr
         Wilding did not have any further information at  present,  but  did
         not refute that there  would  not  be  a  record  on  CID  equally.
         Therefore in that light, given that the key  complaint  reveals  an
         error which is material by virtue of  the  fact  that  the  further
         issue regarding the identity of the EEA  Sponsor  may  be  in  fact
         established by virtue of the CID notes  which  the  Respondent  may
         have in his possession, the above agreed  errors  in  the  decision
         reveal material errors of law such that the decision should be  set
         aside.

 2. As a consequence of the above agreed errors, the decision is hereby set
    aside in its entirety and is remitted to  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted bench.

 3. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed.

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for legal error by
    consent.

Directions

 5. I make the following  directions  for  the  continuation  and  remitted
    hearing that is to shortly follow before the First-tier Tribunal:

      1) The appeal is to be remitted to Hatton Cross.

      2) No interpreter is required.  One witness is to be called  according
         to Counsel's instructions.

      3) The time estimate given is two hours.

      4) No special directions have been requested.

      5) I do not make any anonymity  direction  as  my  decision  does  not
         disclose, or require me to discuss, the identity  or  interests  of
         any children.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini            25 November 2018
