
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08687/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 January 2018                            |On 26 April 2018              |
|Prepared on 24 January 2018                   |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                    joao antonio De araujo vale e azevedo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, counsel instructed by GSG Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Portugal,  date  of  birth  17  May  1957,
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 20  June
    2016, to refuse admission in accordance with Regulation 19 of the  2006
    Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)   Regulations   (the    2006
    Regulations).

2.   The appeal was entered by application on behalf of the Appellant  dated
    27 July 2016.

3    As a fact was the appeal made out  of  time.   An  application  for  an
    extension of time to  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walters (the judge) on 22 February 2017.  Representations were made  on
    behalf of the Appellant in respect of the out of time application.  The
    Home Office made representations and sought to address it simply on the
    issue that it was an out of time appeal.  The grounds of appeal,  as  I
    have seen, do not include any human rights claim and that may  well  be
    because the general understanding was that to  pursue  a  human  rights
    claim required a separate application.  In any event, if it was  raised
    as Ms Jones tells me, it came at  a  later  stage  through  either  her
    grounds or skeleton argument in  submissions  made.   Either  way,  the
    merits of the appeal and indeed  Article  8  issues  were  not  pursued
    before the judge.  The issues were simply whether or not the appeal was
    out of time, the reasons for it being so and should time  be  extended.
    The matter appears to  have  been  somewhat  protracted  by  reason  of
    difficulties in assessing the threat or potential  threat  of  criminal
    proceedings against the Appellant in Portugal: Also by  the  fact  that
    the Secretary of State had been asked to reconsider the  decision:   On
    20 July 2017 the Secretary of State refused to readdress the issue  and
    gave reasons therefor.

4.   The Judge refused to extend time and dismissed the appeal as being  out
    of time: No other issues were therefore pursued.  The position is  that
    permission to appeal  the  judge's  refusal  was  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shimmin and no issue was taken  as  to  whether  or  not
    there were  any  rights  of  appeal  against  the  adverse  preliminary
    decision made by the judge.

5.   On 1 November 2017 permission  to  appeal  was  given  and  the  matter
    therefore proceeded until today:  When, for the first time,  the  issue
    was raised of whether there was any jurisdiction to entertain an appeal
    at all and, secondly, whether or not the decision to refuse  to  extend
    time was an "excluded decision" in relation to a  procedural  ancillary
    or preliminary decision under Regulation 26 of the 2006 Regulations.

6.   Having considered the grounds, it seemed to me that on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant an out of country appeal had been made which was provided for
    under the Rules and, as far as I can tell, no jurisdictional point  was
    taken at any stage about that issue.  On the basis that there therefore
    was a jurisdiction to  hear  an  out  of  country  appeal  pursuant  to
    Regulation 19 and 27 of the 2006 Regulations.

7.   However, the matter does not stop there  because  the  consequences  of
    Section 4 of the Amendments to the Appeals (Excluded  Decisions)  Order
    2009 by the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  (Miscellaneous
    Provisions) Order 2010 it is clear that the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal is an excluded decision.  If that was in dispute it seemed  to
    me that the case of NA V Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (excluded decision: identifying  judge)  Afghanistan  [2010]  UKUT  444
    showed why a decision not to extend time by the First-tier Tribunal  is
    not justiciable by the Upper Tribunal.  The analysis of NA came  to  be
    further considered through the issues raised in the case  of  Adjo  and
    Anwar [2010] EWCA Civ 1275  [19-23]  which  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    whether or not a court  may,  notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  the
    Rules, proceed in the absence of objection from  the  parties  to  deal
    with issues which otherwise would not fall to be considered.

8.   The court in Adjo considered  the  subtle  distinction  that  sometimes
    exists between circumstances where an issue of jurisdiction is,  or  is
    not taken.  If it is taken on jurisdictional grounds early enough, then
    notwithstanding a Tribunal proceeds to carry on and  determine  it,  it
    may well be there still remained no jurisdiction to do so.

9.    In  certain  circumstances  if  the  point  is  not  taken,  and  that
    discretion or decision is exercised, then there is jurisdiction.  I  do
    not have to resolve that interesting question  because,  quite  simply,
    under the provisions of an excluded decision, the matter never went any
    further before the Judge than simply the issue of the extension of time
    and the merits of  any  claim  have  never  been  considered.   In  the
    circumstances I agree with  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent that there was no right of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the decision of the judge.

10.  It also  seemed  to  me  that  as  a  matter  of  approach  no  greater
    jurisdiction was given simply by the grant of leave  and  nor  has  the
    Secretary of State waived the point in relation to jurisdiction  so  as
    to clearly have accepted that the Upper Tribunal should proceed  on  to
    hear this matter further on its merits.   For  these  reasons,  putting
    aside as I do because I make no decisions on it the alleged  unfairness
    and unreasonableness of the Secretary of State's decisions  to  exclude
    or maintain exclusion, it seemed to me  that  there  was  no  right  of
    appeal and therefore that is the end of  the  matter.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.

11.  For the avoidance of doubt, whilst Ms Jones has invited me  to  address
    the wider issues namely of the extent to which it  appears  that  after
    the event an Immigration Officer wrote a  note,  signed  and  dated  28
    August 2016, was simply after the event addressing  the  considerations
    under paragraph 19 in the context  of  Regulation  21(5)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  The issue is somewhat difficult to deal with  because  on
    one hand the officer writing the note  expressed  himself  entirely  in
    this respect in the past  tense  indicating  that  he  'was'  therefore
    satisfied or that he  also  considered  or  was  satisfied  further  on
    various matters: Which all suggest a past consideration  of  the  issue
    even if the note did not contain the analysis that Ms  Jones  complains
    of.  It could be she was right in  saying  that  the  entirety  of  the
    document is written after the event looking back, in the light  of  the
    complaint made by the Appellant's representative in connection with the
    decision and whether it was properly given to exclude the Appellant.  I
    cannot resolve that matter.  I have not heard evidence and the argument
    has not been developed further but, if it is so, that might  have  been
    grist for the mill for a proper challenge by  way  of  judicial  review
    which seemed to me to have been the alternative and available remedy to
    challenge the decision to refuse to extend time.

12.  For these reasons therefore I do not find that there is any  actual  or
    apparent prejudice or disadvantage by the outcome of  this  matter  and
    nor does it seem to me it infringed the rights under Articles 31 and 33
    of the 2004  Directive  in  relation  to  the  Directive  2004/38/Entry
    Clearance Officer (Citizens Freedom Movement) Directive.

12.  In these circumstances as I  have  indicated  the  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

13.  The appeal is dismissed.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 28 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
P.S. I regret the delay in promulgation which  was  due  to  the  case  file
    being miss-located.

