
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08192/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2018                     |On 26 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                NIELA KREMTZ
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Lal (the judge), promulgated on 4 December 2017, in which he
       dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision
       dated  15  September  2017  refusing  him  admission  to  the  UK  in
       accordance with regulations 23 and 24 of  the  Immigration  (European
       Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the 2016 Regulations).



Factual Background

    2. The appellant is a national of Germany, date of birth  21  May  1990.
       According  to  the  decision  under  challenge  (headed  'Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 Refusal of Admission  Under
       European Community Law (no in-country right of appeal') the appellant
       sought admission to the UK pursuant to his  right  of  free  movement
       enshrined in regulation 11 of  the  2016  Regulations.  The  decision
       refusing him admission is dated 15 September  2017  and  I  therefore
       assume that this was the date that the appellant arrived in  the  UK.
       Removal directions were issued for his removal at 07:50 hours  on  16
       September 2017.

    3. In refusing to admit the appellant the immigration officer stated,

           "In your personal belongings you have  items  of  clothing  with
           slogans and symbols indicative of  far-right  extremism  and  by
           your own admission you have previously attended  an  Ian  Stuart
           Donaldson concert.

           As such I believe that your  activities  whilst  in  the  United
           Kingdom bear a serious threat to the  fundamental  interests  of
           society and are likely to insight [sic] tensions  between  local
           communities in the United Kingdom.

           I therefore refuse your admission to enter the United Kingdom in
           accordance with Regulations 24 and 23."

    4. There was no further description of the slogans and  symbols  on  the
       appellant's clothing. In respect of the reference to the  Ian  Stuart
       Donaldson concert, I take judicial notice that Ian  Stuart  Donaldson
       was a neo-Nazi singer who died in 1993.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    5. The appellant elected to have his appeal decided on the papers  only.
       The grounds of appeal were accompanied  by  a  covering  letter  from
       Alexander Heinig, a 'Rechtsanwalt' (legal  counsel)  in  Germany.  Mr
       Heinig was identified in the appeal notice as the  appellant's  legal
       representative. The covering letter claimed that the appellant had no
       clothing matching the respondent's description and that  even  if  he
       wished to attend the concert  it  was  one  that  was  known  to  the
       authorities and went ahead. It was claimed that if the concert really
       was a threat to the fundamental interests of British society, or that
       it would incite tensions between local communities, it would not have
       proceeded. There was said to be no reason to stop  a  single  person,
       such as the appellant, from attending the concert.  The  concert  had
       taken place every year since 1994 and it  was  claimed  that  it  had
       never caused any tensions between local communities in  the  UK.  The
       decision was said to be  unconstitutional  and  a  violation  of  the
       appellant's personal freedom.

    6. There was very limited documentary evidence  before  the  judge.  The
       decision  under  challenge  was  not   accompanied   by   any   other
       documentation. The grounds of  appeal  were  only  supported  by  the
       German lawyers covering letter.

    7. At paragraph 5 of his decision the judge stated,

           "The Tribunal has applied the civil standard  of  a  balance  of
           probabilities, namely whether is [sic] something is more  likely
           than not to have happened and or will happen in the  future.  In
           immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the Appellant."

    8. The judge accepted that the  appellant  was  stopped  with  far-right
       material  in  the  form  of  clothing   with   neo-Nazi/White   Power
       iconography on it. The judge also found that, in all probability,  it
       was the appellant's intention  to  attend  an  Ian  Stuart  Donaldson
       Memorial concert. This was noted to be an annual  gathering  of  neo-
       Nazi and white nationalist individuals.

    9. At paragraph 8 the judge stated,

           "The Tribunal finds the presence of the  Appellant  at  such  an
           event is a serious threat to the interests of society and likely
           to incite tensions between local communities in the UK. This  is
           because such an event promotes neo-Nazi  ideology  in  terms  of
           fundraising  and  the  maintenance  of  international   contacts
           between those that share that ideology. Such ideology is  rooted
           in white  supremacy  and  therefore  likely  to  incite  tension
           between communities here in the UK."

   10. And at paragraph 9 the judge stated,

           "The fact that the event has happened in the past,  albeit  with
           strict policing, is not relevant. Rather it is the  presence  of
           the Appellant at that event as part of fostering and maintaining
           international links within the  neo-Nazi  movement  as  well  as
           presumably being a paid attendee  and  thereby  contributing  to
           that ideology, that is the relevant factor.  Such  a  factor  is
           likely to increase community tension in the UK it was its  [sic]
           to be known that entry had been granted to  overseas  extremists
           to foster and develop such links in the UK."

   11. The judge consequently dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

   12. The grounds are poorly  drafted  and  insufficiently  particularised.
       They note that the concert wasn't stopped  by  the  police  and  went
       ahead and repeated much  of  the  covering  letter  accompanying  the
       initial appeal notice. It was claimed that the decision was not based
       on sufficient evidence and  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
       appellant's presence at the concert was  likely  to  incite  tensions
       between local communities in the UK. There was said to be no evidence
       that the appellant's presence at such a concert  alone  would  incite
       tensions. There was also said to be an absence of evidence  that  the
       appellant intended to foster and maintain international links  within
       the neo-Nazi movement. It is claimed that the appellant would  simply
       listen to music, 'have a couple of drinks' and then go home.

   13. In granting  permission  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Saffer
       stated,

           "The Appellant was seeking to attend  a  memorial  concert  that
           apparently had neo-Nazi associations, had been held since  1994,
           and he had attended before. It is unclear from the decision what
           personal conduct of the appellant the judge had  concerns  about
           (regulation 27  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
           Regulations 2016), however distasteful the appellant's political
           views may or may not be. All grounds may be argued."

   14. No representative appeared on behalf of the appellant at  the  'error
       of law' hearing. At the commencement of the hearing I indicated to Mr
       Bramble that I had several concerns with the determination. The judge
       appeared to proceed on the basis that the burden of proof in  respect
       of a refusal to admit an EEA national on  public  policy  and  public
       security grounds rested on the appellant. This is not the  case.  The
       judge did not accurately cite the test in respect  of  public  policy
       and public security considerations and there appeared to be little if
       any evidence capable of supporting his  finding  that  the  appellant
       intended to foster and develop links within the neo-Nazi movement.

   15. Mr Bramble accepted that the judge appeared to invert the  burden  of
       proof. I took into account his additional submissions  and  indicated
       my satisfaction that the decision was vitiated by a material error of
       law. I indicated that I would remake the decision and gave Mr Bramble
       an opportunity to make any further submissions. In the absence of any
       further substantive submissions I indicated that I  would  allow  the
       appeal.

Discussion

   16. Under regulation 11(1) of the 2016 regulations an EEA  national  must
       be admitted to the United Kingdom on  arrival  if  the  EEA  national
       produces a valid national identity card or passport issued by an  EEA
       State. There is  no  suggestion  in  any  other  documents  that  the
       appellant did not produce  a  passport  or  valid  national  identity
       document issued by the German state.

   17. Regulation 23(1) of the 2016 Regulations states,

           'Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

           This section has no associated Explanatory Memorandum

           (1)    A person is not entitled to be  admitted  to  the  United
           Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 if a refusal  to  admit  that
           person is justified on grounds of public policy, public security
           or public health in accordance with regulation 27.'

   18. Regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations  concerns  decisions  taken  on
       grounds of public policy, public  security  and  public  health.  The
       regulation states, in material part,

           '...

           (2)    A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
           ends.

           ...

           (5)    The public policy and public security requirements of the
           United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by
           these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental  interests
           of society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
           public policy or public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-

                (a)    the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                proportionality;

                (b)     the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                personal conduct of the person concerned;

                (c)    the personal conduct of the person must  represent  a
                genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  affecting
                one of the fundamental interests  of  society,  taking  into
                account past conduct of the person and that the threat  does
                not need to be imminent;

                (d)    matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                which relate to considerations of general prevention do  not
                justify the decision;

                (e)    a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                themselves justify the decision;

                (f)    the decision may be taken  on  preventative  grounds,
                even in the  absence  of  a  previous  criminal  conviction,
                provided the grounds are specific to the person.

           (8)    A court or tribunal considering whether the  requirements
           of this regulation are met must (in particular) have  regard  to
           the considerations contained in Schedule  1  (considerations  of
           public policy, public security and the fundamental interests  of
           society etc.).'

   19. Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations establishes various considerations
       relevant to any decision involving public policy, public security and
       the fundamental interests of society.  Paragraph  7  of  Schedule  1,
       headed 'The fundamental interests of society', states,

           'For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,   the   fundamental
           interests of society in the United Kingdom include-

                (a)    preventing unlawful  immigration  and  abuse  of  the
                immigration  laws,  and  maintaining   the   integrity   and
                effectiveness of the immigration control  system  (including
                under these Regulations) and of the Common Travel Area;

                (b)    maintaining public order;

                (c)    preventing social harm;

                (d)    preventing the evasion of taxes and duties;

                (e)    protecting public services;

                (f)    excluding or  removing  an  EEA  national  or  family
                member of an EEA national with a conviction (including where
                the conduct of that person is likely to  cause,  or  has  in
                fact  caused,  public  offence)   and   maintaining   public
                confidence in the ability of  the  relevant  authorities  to
                take such action;

                (g)    tackling offences likely to  cause  harm  to  society
                where an immediate or direct  victim  may  be  difficult  to
                identify but where there is wider  societal  harm  (such  as
                offences related to the misuse of  drugs  or  crime  with  a
                cross-border dimension as mentioned in Article 83(1) of  the
                Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union);

                (h)     combating  the  effects  of   persistent   offending
                (particularly in relation to offences,  which  if  taken  in
                isolation,  may  otherwise   be   unlikely   to   meet   the
                requirements of regulation 27);

                (i)     protecting  the  rights  and  freedoms  of   others,
                particularly from exploitation and trafficking;

                (j)    protecting the public;

                (k)    acting in the best interests of  a  child  (including
                where doing so entails refusing a  child  admission  to  the
                United Kingdom, or otherwise taking an EEA decision  against
                a child);

                (l)    countering terrorism  and  extremism  and  protecting
                shared values.'

   20. Headnotes (i) and (ii) of Arranz (EEA  Regulations  -  deportation  -
       test) [2017] UKUT 00294 (IAC) read,

           "(i)   The burden of proving that a person represents a genuine,
           present and sufficiently [serious] threat affecting one  of  the
           fundamental interests of society under  Regulation  21(5)(c)  of
           the EEA Regulations rests on the Secretary of State.

           (ii)   The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities."

   21. The reference to regulation 21(5) in Arranz  is  to  the  Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. Regulation 21(5) has  been
       transposed to regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations (see paragraph 18
       above).

   22. It is apparent from Arranz that the burden of proving that  a  person
       represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious   threat
       affecting one of the fundamental interests of society  rests  on  the
       respondent. At paragraph 5 of his decision  the  judge  inverted  the
       burden of proof. This is a fundamental legal error and undermines all
       the judge's subsequent findings. On this basis alone, I am  satisfied
       that the judge's decision is unsustainable.

   23. I am satisfied  that  there  are  other  material  legal  errors.  In
       paragraph 8 the judge found that  the  appellant's  presence  at  the
       concert was a "serious threat to the interests of society and  likely
       to incite tension between local communities in the UK." The existence
       of a 'serious threat' is only part of the test in  regulation  27(5).
       Nowhere in the decision does the judge consider  whether  the  threat
       said to be posed by  the  appellant  was  genuine  or  present.  More
       significantly, there was simply  no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
       attendance at the concert was to foster  and  develop  links  between
       communities of neo-Nazis and other right wing extremist  groups.  The
       appellant was  found  to  have  clothing  with  slogans  and  symbols
       indicative of far-right extremism and to be attending what appears to
       be an annual memorial concert for a neo-Nazi. While such clothing  is
       unarguably objectionable to any right-minded member of  society,  the
       respondent has produced little if any evidence capable  of  entitling
       the judge to conclude that the appellant wished to foster and develop
       such links.  While  the  judge  and  the  respondent  may  harbour  a
       suspicion  that  the  appellant  may  wish  to  develop  links,  mere
       suspicion, without any further evidential support, is insufficient to
       discharge the  burden  of  proof  to  the  balance  of  probabilities
       standard. There was no evidence that the appellant was a member of an
       extremist group or that he held any role in such a group,  there  was
       no evidence that he had a criminal history or that he had  previously
       been identified as someone whose activities were likely  to  threaten
       the fundamental interests of society. There was no  evidence  that  a
       criminal offence was likely to be committed at the concert, which, it
       is said, would have  a  heavy  police  presence,  and  there  was  no
       evidence that the appellant's presence at the  concert  would  itself
       incite tension between communities in the  UK.  While  the  appellant
       admitted having previously attended an Ian Stewart Davidson  Memorial
       concert there was no  suggestion  that  his  presence  had  increased
       community  tensions  or  undermined  the  fundamental  interests   of
       society.

   24. For these reasons I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
       decision is unsafe.

Remaking the decision

   25. I proceed to remake the decision. The burden rests on the  respondent
       to prove, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  appellant's
       personal conduct  represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
       serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society,
       taking into account his past conduct and that  the  threat  does  not
       need to be imminent. I take into account all of the  public  interest
       factors identified in Schedule 1 to the 2016  Regulations,  including
       the need to maintain social order, protect  the  public  and  prevent
       social harm. I note that a decision under regulation 27 may be  taken
       on  preventative  grounds,  even  in  the  absence  of   a   criminal
       conviction, provided that the grounds are specific to the person.

   26. I have no reason to doubt  that  the  appellant  was  found  to  have
       clothing with neo-Nazi and far right insignia  amongst  his  personal
       belongings. The respondent's  decision  does  not  suggest  that  the
       appellant was wearing such  clothing  when  he  entered  the  UK.  No
       evidence has been produced suggesting that the appellant is a  person
       with a criminal history or that he is actively involved in  any  neo-
       Nazi or far right organisation. While his  political  views  will  be
       repugnant to the overwhelming majority of those residing in  the  UK,
       there is nothing to suggest that his attempt to gain admission to the
       UK was for any reason other than attend a gathering of neo-Nazis at a
       music concert.  The  concert  is  apparently  held  annually  and  is
       strictly policed. There is simply no evidence  that  the  appellant's
       presence at  the  concert,  even  if  wearing  clothing  with  highly
       offensive iconography, is likely to incite community tensions in  the
       UK. There is  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  intends  to  foster
       international links between extremist groups. I am not satisfied that
       the requirements of regulation 27(5), with reference to Schedule 1 of
       the 2016 Regulations, have been met. I  consequently  find  that  the
       respondent has not discharged the burden of  proof  upon  her  and  I
       therefore allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The judge made material errors of law.

I remake the decision, allowing the appellant's appeal.


[pic]
Signed   Date 22 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
