
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/08113/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 March 2019                              |On 02 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                              MUHAMMAD IBRAHIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He married  his  spouse  ('the
    sponsor'), a Spanish  citizen  in  March  2012.   He  was  subsequently
    granted a residence card, expiring on 20 October 2017.  He divorced the
    sponsor on 27 March 2017 and shortly after this applied  for  permanent
    residence under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  ('the  2016
    Regulations').

 2. On 5 September 2017 the  respondent  refused  to  grant  the  appellant
    permanent residence.  The respondent acknowledged  that  the  appellant
    had previously been issued with a residence card as the  spouse  of  an
    EEA citizen but  said  this:  "looking  at  all  of  the  evidence  now
    submitted  this  does  cast  doubt  on   the   genuineness   of   [the]
    relationship".  The respondent then concluded that  the  appellant  did
    not provide adequate evidence that his spouse was  a  qualified  person
    when the marriage was terminated.  The respondent did not consider that
    the evidence relied upon supported the assertion that the sponsor  was,
    as claimed, an employee of  the  Applicant's  cousin,  Mr  Rafiq  ('the
    cousin') from April 2013.  The cousin  is  said  to  be  the  owner  of
    Crystal Shine Motors Ltd ('the company').

 3. In grounds of appeal prepared by  the  appellant's  solicitors  it  was
    submitted, inter alia, that the cousin's home address is [~]  Road  but
    that the company operates from Williams Road.  The  appellant's  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') was heard on 9 August 2018.  The
    appellant attended the hearing and relied upon witness statements  from
    himself and the cousin.  The cousin did not attend  the  hearing.   The
    FTT found that  the  appellant's  evidence  as  well  as  the  cousin's
    evidence to be "wholly incredible".   The FTT found the marriage to  be
    a sham and did not accept that the sponsor exercised Treaty  rights  at
    any material time.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT and relied upon two
    grounds of appeal drafted by his solicitors.

          1) The FTT erred in law  in  assessing  the  genuineness  of  the
             marriage when this is not a requirement of  regulation  10  of
             the 2016 Regulations, and this tainted his findings  regarding
             the sponsor's employment.

          2) The FTT erred in law in finding the cousin incredible when  he
             did not attend the hearing and was not cross-examined.

 5. On 1 October 2018, FTT Judge Simpson granted the  appellant  permission
    to appeal and made five observations: (i) and (ii) relate to background
    matters; (iii) correctly points  out  the  absence  of  a  clear  legal
    framework within the decision but as  I  set  out  below,  the  parties
    agreed there was one crucial issue to be decided by the  FTT;  (iv)  is
    addressed below; (v) was not the subject of the two pleaded grounds.

 6. At the beginning of the hearing before me Ms Faryl indicated  that  she
    did not have any of the crucial documents in the appeal  including  the
    FTT decision and the grant of permission to  appeal.   I  provided  her
    with copies but indicated  that  this  state  of  affairs  demanded  an
    explanation from her instructing solicitors, together with an assurance
    that it would not be repeated.  I therefore  made  it  clear  that  the
    solicitors  should  provide  a  written  explanation,  marked  for   my
    attention, within seven days.

 7. Ms Faryl relied upon the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission.



 8. Mr Tam submitted that the FTT decision  may  well  indicate  errors  in
    approach but none of these are material to the central  finding:  there
    was insufficiently credible evidence to  support  the  claim  that  the
    sponsor ever exercised Treaty rights.

 9. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved my decision which I
    now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

10. Although I invited Ms Faryl to clarify the  existing  legal  framework,
    she was unable to do so.  I summarised my understanding of it, and both
    parties agreed with this.   In  order  to  obtain  permanent  residence
    pursuant to regulation 15, the appellant must have resided in the UK in
    accordance with the 2016 Regulations for five years and at the  end  of
    that period must have been a family member who retained  the  right  of
    residence.  Both representatives agreed that in  order  to  retain  the
    rights of residence for the purposes of regulation 10, on the facts  of
    this case, the appellant had to provide sufficient  evidence  that  the
    sponsor was employed by the cousin.  I note that the important date  to
    consider this is the date of commencement of divorce proceedings -  see
    Baigazieva v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1088.  However nothing on  the  facts
    of this case, turns on the specific date considered.


11. It follows that the crucial issue for  determination  by  the  FTT  was
    whether the sponsor was an employee of  the  company  as  claimed.   In
    determining that issue, the  FTT  was  entitled  to  consider  all  the
    evidence available to  it,  including  doubts  about  the  relationship
    itself.  Although the FTT expressed itself in a  robust  and  trenchant
    manner, it was entitled  to  reject  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
    sponsor was an employee as claimed.  The reasons provided may not be as
    clearly expressed as is to be expected in a decision such as this,  but
    they are adequate.  In short, the  appellant  has  been  provided  with
    adequate reasoning for his  submissions  on  the  crucial  issue  being
    unsuccessful.

12. First, the FTT did not accept the appellant provided credible evidence.
     The FTT  was  entitled  to  be  concerned  regarding  the  conflicting
    evidence provided regarding the couple's home address.

13. Secondly, as the respondent had raised doubts about the relationship in
    the decision letter, the FTT  was  entitled  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant was able to address those concerns.  This is  not  because  a
    genuine relationship before divorce is a requirement in order to obtain
    permanent residence but because  it  is  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    general credibility.  I note that the  decision  letter  refers  to  an
    absence of original documents.  This  was  not  rectified  at  the  FTT
    hearing.  The FTT was also entitled to note a complete absence  of  any
    credible independent supporting evidence to support the  claimed  five-
    year marriage.  Although the FTT  was  not  required  to  consider  the
    genuineness of the marriage for the purposes of a  permanent  residence
    application, it was entitled to adjudicate upon the doubts expressed by
    the respondent and to weigh that in the balance when making findings on
    the crucial issue in the appeal.  For this reason ground  one  and  the
    matter raised at (iv) by Judge Simpson in the grant  of  permission  is
    not well-founded.

14. I entirely accept that in so far as the FTT made an adverse credibility
    finding against the cousin based entirely upon its  assessment  of  the
    appellant's evidence, it erred.  However when the decision is read as a
    whole, the FTT was really doing no more than attaching little weight to
    the cousin's evidence because he did not attend  the  hearing  and  his
    evidence was inconsistent in material respects.  It follows that ground
    two is not made out.

Decision

15. The FTT decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve  the
    making of a material error of law.  That decision stands.

16. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the UT is dismissed.



Signed                                                    Dated
M. Plimmer                                            27 March 2019

Melanie Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

