
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08862/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 May 2019                        |On 19 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                          EMMANUEL OSAWARU OGBEBOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jamil
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 12 September 1973 and is a  male  citizen  of
    Nigeria. He appeals against  a  decision  of  the  respondent  dated  6
    January 2018 refusing him a residence card as  a  family  (or  extended
    family) member of an EEA citizen exercising Treaty Rights in the United
    Kingdom. The First-tier  Tribunal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  27
    December 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal heard the appellant's appeal together with that
    of his partner, Ms Augustine. The Secretary of State  argued  that  the
    appellant and partner were not married but agreed that they were  in  a
    relationship.  The  appellant  claims  that  his  family  member,   Tor
    Holmberg, a Swedish  citizen  is  his  father-in-law;  Mr  Holmberg  is
    married to Ms Augustine's mother, Mary Osagie.

 3. A number of issues arose in the appeal. One concern the validity  of  a
    proxy marriage in Nigeria. The appellant's  representative  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  argued  that  the  respondent  had   refuse   the
    application under the wrong regulation (7 rather than 8). The appellant
    also argues that the judge had improperly imposed an income requirement
    as regards qualification [29].

 4. Leaving aside the question of the validity  of  the  marriage  for  the
    moment, it appears that the appellant believes that he may only succeed
    under  regulation  8  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006. First, the appellant  asserts  that  Mr  Holmberg  is
    exercising Treaty Rights and, secondly, that is  partner's  mother  may
    also act as EEA sponsor. Grounds failed to address the  findings  which
    the judge makes at [28], namely that  Mr  Holmberg  is  not  exercising
    Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom. The judge notes that, 'My  reasons
    for so finding [that Mr Holmberg is not exercising Treaty  Rights]  are
    that the documents before me established that he is a Swedish national.
    He is a merchant seaman working for a  Swedish  company  on  a  Swedish
    passenger ship out of Stockholm. He is not a worker in  the  UK.'  That
    finding was available to the judge on the evidence. I see no reason  to
    interfere with it.  If  Mr  Holmberg  is  not  the  sponsor,  then  the
    appellant's second position is that Mrs Osagie may act as  sponsor.  It
    is for the appellant  to  establish  on  the  evidence  that  there  is
    dependency upon the wife (his claimed mother-in-law) so as  to  satisfy
    the requirements of Regulation 8. At  [29],  the  judge  made  a  clear
    finding that there was no such dependency. In this paragraph the  judge
    has not imposed an arbitrary income  threshold  test.  Rather,  he  has
    drawn attention to the fact that  the  evidence  did  not  support  the
    appellant's claim that he was dependent on Mrs Osagie. Again this was a
    finding available to the judge  on  the  evidence.  Since  the  grounds
    misunderstand what the judge has written at [29], they  fail  to  raise
    any arguable challenge to the judge's findings that neither Mr Holmberg
    nor his wife may act in  the  capacity  of  sponsor.  Accordingly,  the
    appellant could not  succeed.  In  the  circumstances,  the  appeal  is
    dismissed and there is no need for me to consider the remaining grounds
    of appeal.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

