
[pic]


|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: EA/08937/2016         |
|                                                                            |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House               | |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On       |12 April 2018             |On 17 April 2018   |                   |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |Laddawan Ninsinghkhon                             |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Entry Clearance Officer, Bangkok                  |Respondent   |

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M West, of Counsel,  instructed  by  City  Heights
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer.




                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Thailand born on  11  February  1981,  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Beg (hereafter the "judge"  unless  otherwise  indicated)
    who, in a decision promulgated on 17 August 2017 following a hearing on
    7 August 2017, dismissed her against a decision of the respondent of 20
    June 2016 to refuse her an EEA family  permit  in  order  to  join  her
    husband, a Mr Catalin Paraschiv (hereafter the "sponsor") in the United
    Kingdom. The sponsor is a  Romanian  national  said  to  be  exercising
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent refused  to  issue  an  EEA  family  permit  because  he
    concluded that the marriage entered into between the appellant and  the
    sponsor on 18 March 2016 in Thailand was a marriage of convenience.

 3. The judge found that the marriage was a marriage  of  convenience,  for
    reasons that she gave in her decision.

The issues and the grounds

 4. The issues/grounds may be summarised as follows:

    (i)  Whether the judge materially erred in law in her self-direction as
         to the burden of proof. At para 18, she referred to the decision of
         the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal   in   IS   (marriages   of
         convenience) Serbia p2008] UKAIT 00031 where the Tribunal held that
         the burden of proving  that  a  marriage  was  not  a  marriage  of
         convenience rests on the appellant.

    (ii)  Whether  her  assessment  of  the  evidence   was   unreasonable,
         irrational and/or insufficient to sustain her conclusion.

 5. I heard detailed submissions from Mr West and  Mr  Kotas.  It  is  only
    necessary for me to  summarise  their  submissions  very  briefly,  for
    reasons which will become apparent.

 6. Mr Kotas accepted that the judge erred in law in her self-direction  as
    to the burden of proof. However, he submitted that this error  was  not
    material. In his submission, she did not materially err in law  in  her
    assessment of the evidence at paras 18-26 where she considered  whether
    the appellant  had  addressed  the  concerns  raised  by  a  report  by
    immigration officers following a visit to the sponsor's address  on  14
    January 2016. He submitted that, if the judge had not materially  erred
    in law in her assessment of the evidence, it is impossible to  see  how
    she could have reached a different decision if she had not erred in her
    self-direction concerning the burden of proof.

 7. Mr West submitted that the judge's error in self-direction  as  to  the
    burden of proof  was  fatal.  In  any  event,  he  submitted  that  her
    reasoning at paras 18-26 failed to take account of  relevant  evidence,
    placed too much weight on third-hand hearsay evidence of the lodger who
    was spoken to by the immigration officers on the day of the  visit  and
    failed to reconcile  contradictions  which  materially  undermined  the
    reliability of his hearsay evidence.

Assessment

 8. In relation to her self-direction on the burden of proof and as  stated
    above, the judge referred to IS at  para  14  and  the  fact  that  the
    Tribunal held in IS that the burden of proving that a marriage was  not
    a marriage of convenience rests on the appellant. Having found, at para
    17, that the visit of immigration officers to the  sponsor's  residence
    on 12 January 2016 provided "prima facie  evidence  that  the  marriage
    between the appellant and the sponsor  raises  a  reasonable  suspicion
    that the marriage had been entered into for the predominant purpose  of
    securing residence rights", she said, in the first sentence of para 18,
    that the "burden of proof" shifted to  the  appellant  "to  demonstrate
    that her marriage to the sponsor [was] not a marriage of convenience".

 9. The judge appeared to be unaware of  the  judgments  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Agho v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 and Rosa v SSHD [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 14 and the judgment of the Supreme Court in Sadovska v SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 54. There was no recognition by the judge that the  overall  legal
    burden of proof rested on the respondent to establish that the marriage
    was a marriage of convenience. Indeed, this would have been contrary to
    the judge's self-direction at para 14. Importantly, in my judgment, the
    first sentence of para 18 set the context in which the judge considered
    the evidence at paras 18-26.

10. In my view, it is impossible and, indeed wrong in law,  to  attempt  to
    separate the judge's reasoning  from  her  self-direction.   A  judge's
    assessment of evidence does not take place in a vacuum but against  his
    or her self-direction concerning the applicable burden and standard  of
    proof. An incorrect self-direction as to the burden of proof is  fatal,
    in my view. It would be wrong in law to decide that, if the  judge  did
    not materially err in law in her reasoning at paras 18-26, any error in
    relation to her self-direction concerning the burden of proof  was  not
    material. In this particular case, the first sentence of para 18  shows
    that the judge's reasoning at paras 18-26 was  inextricably  linked  to
    her incorrect self-direction on the burden of proof.

11. Accordingly, I have concluded that Mr West is correct in his submission
    that the judge's error in  her  self-direction  as  to  the  applicable
    standard of proof is fatal to her decision.

12. It is therefore unnecessary for me to deal with the detailed reasons Mr
    Kotas gave in submitting that the judge had not materially erred in law
    in her reasoning at paras 18-26 or the detailed reasons Mr West gave in
    submitting that the judge materially err in law in her reasoning.

13. Accordingly, I set aside the decision of the judge in its entirety.

14. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") and the Upper Tribunal  (the  "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

15. In my judgment this case falls within para 7.2 (b). I  therefore  remit
    the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to the FtT.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
material error of law. The decision is set aside in its entirety. This  case
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues  on
the merits by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Beg.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 16 April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
