
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/08081/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2018 and 19 November    |On 7 December 2018                   |
|2018                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                 RONNY HOFER
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Specialist Appeals Unit)
      Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (Specialist Appeals Unit)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Ronny Hofer,  a  citizen  of  Germany  born  20
       August 1984, against the decision of the First-tier  tribunal  of  22
       March 2018 dismissing his appeal, itself brought against the decision
       of the Immigration Officer of 15 September 2017 to refuse  his  entry
       to the UK for reasons of public policy.

    2. The refusal notice states that the decision maker was "satisfied that
       your refusal of admission is justified on serious grounds  of  public
       policy [because] In  your  personal  belongings  you  have  items  of
       clothing with slogans and symbols indicative of far right  extremism.
       As such I believe that your activities whilst in the  United  Kingdom
       bear a serious threat to the fundamental interests of society and are
       likely to [incite] tensions between local communities in  the  United
       Kingdom."

    3. The Appellant's grounds of appeal were supported by a letter from his
       lawyers, Rechtsanwalt Alexander Heinig of  Stuttgart,  of  6  October
       2017, stating that the Appellant had only sought to visit the UK  for
       a weekend; he did not pursue any longer period of residence here. The
       immigration service had obviously assumed that their client wanted to
       go to an Ian Stuart Donaldson Memorial Concert ("ISDMC"). Even if  it
       was true that their client had wished to do so, there was no evidence
       that  such  conduct  would  threaten  the  fundamental  interests  of
       society. The UK authorities had permitted the concert to  take  place
       and it would have taken place within a closed space with no effect on
       those not attending it; accordingly it was illogical  to  suggest  it
       could cause inter-community tensions.  Indeed such concerts had taken
       place without promoting racial tension since 1994.

    4. The First-tier tribunal considered  the  appeal  without  a  hearing,
       noting the Appellant had filed no  evidence  save  for  his  lawyer's
       letter. He had provided no sworn evidence that there was no extremist
       clothing in his possession. It was not accepted that the  solicitor's
       letter could constitute such evidence, even if they  were  acting  on
       his instructions.  As to the ISDMC, there was no  evidence  that  the
       concert had been permitted to take place now or in the  past,  though
       the Judge noted that there was in fact no reference to this event  in
       the refusal notice: accordingly it was treated as a factor of neutral
       effect.

    5. Overall the Judge was not satisfied that the Appellant had discharged
       the burden of proof upon him to demonstrate that he was not a  threat
       to the fundamental interests of society.

    6.  Grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       materially erred in law in overlooking the fact  that  the  Appellant
       was only seeking to visit the UK rather than reside here on a  longer
       term basis, in failing to specify the basis  on  which  the  clothing
       detected by the Immigration Officer on entry was said to be "racist",
       in failing to take account of the  fact  that  the  true  reason  for
       exclusion (as shown by other unspecified entry clearance decisions to
       which it appears the Appellant's lawyer was privy) was attendance  at
       the ISDMC, and in  failing  to  consider  the  extent  to  which  the
       Appellant's exclusion was necessary to protect a fundamental interest
       of society contrary to the approach set out in Arranz which  required
       that a sufficiently serious threat to such an interest  be  expressly
       identified.

    7. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  tribunal  on  25
       June 2018 on the basis that the Judge may have erred in treating  the
       burden of proof as falling upon the Appellant. Before me  Mr  Kandola
       accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law  by
       impermissibly placing the burden of proof  in  a  public  policy  EEA
       exclusion case on the Appellant.

Findings and reasons - Error of law hearing

    8. Regulation 11(1) of the 2016 regulations requires the admission of an
       EEA national to the UK upon production of a valid  national  identity
       card or passport issued by an EEA State.  However,  exclusion  rather
       than admission may  follow  in  specified  circumstances.  Regulation
       23(1) of the 2016 Regulations provides:

           "Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

           (1) A person is not  entitled  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
           Kingdom by virtue of regulation 11 if a refusal  to  admit  that
           person is justified on grounds of public policy, public security
           or public health in accordance with regulation 27."

    9. Regulation 27 of the 2016 Regulations  concerns  decisions  taken  on
       grounds of public policy, public  security  and  public  health.  The
       regulation state materially:

           "(2) A relevant decision may not  be  taken  to  serve  economic
           ends. ...

           (5) The public policy and public security  requirements  of  the
           United Kingdom include restricting rights otherwise conferred by
           these Regulations in order to protect the fundamental  interests
           of society, and where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of
           public policy or public  security  it  must  also  be  taken  in
           accordance with the following principles-"

                 (a)  the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle   of
                 proportionality;

                 (b) the decision must be based exclusively on the  personal
                 conduct of the person concerned;

                 (c) the personal conduct of the  person  must  represent  a
                 genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
                 one of the fundamental interests of  society,  taking  into
                 account past conduct of the person and that the threat does
                 not need to be imminent;

                 (d) matters isolated from the particulars of  the  case  or
                 which relate to considerations of general prevention do not
                 justify the decision;

                 (e) a person's previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                 themselves justify the decision;

                 (f) the decision may be taken on preventative grounds, even
                 in the absence of a previous criminal conviction,  provided
                 the grounds are specific to the person.

           (8) A court or tribunal considering whether the requirements  of
           this regulation are met must (in particular) have regard to  the
           considerations contained in Schedule 1 (considerations of public
           policy, public security and the fundamental interests of society
           etc.)."

   10. Schedule 1 of the 2016 Regulations then provides, at Paragraph 7:

           "For  the  purposes  of  these  Regulations,   the   fundamental
           interests of society in the United Kingdom include-"

           ...

           (b) maintaining public order;

           (c) preventing social harm;

           ...

           (f) excluding or removing an EEA national or family member of an
           EEA national with a conviction (including where the  conduct  of
           that person is likely to cause, or has in  fact  caused,  public
           offence) and maintaining public confidence in the ability of the
           relevant authorities to take such action;

           ...

           (j) protecting the public;

           ...

           (l) countering terrorism and  extremism  and  protecting  shared
           values."

   11. The Headnote in Arranz [2017] UKUT 294 (IAC) sets out:

           "(i) The burden of proving that a person represents  a  genuine,
           present and sufficiently [serious] threat affecting one  of  the
           fundamental interests of society under  Regulation  21(5)(c)  of
           the EEA Regulations rests on the Secretary of State.

           (ii) The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities."

   12. There was indeed a material error of law here. The burden of proof in
       establishing a public interest exception to the free movement  rights
       that are domestically transposed by the EEA Regulations lies upon the
       Secretary of State. However, here the burden of proof  was  reversed:
       that  is  absolutely  clear  from  the  language  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. That is a fundamental error which affects the way in  which
       the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was analysed. Furthermore
       there was no analysis by the Judge of the precise way in which any of
       the fundamental interests of society specified above were  threatened
       by the Appellant's presence in the UK. Accordingly a  re-hearing  was
       appropriate.

   13. Given the serious nature of the allegations made by  the  Immigration
       Officer, I considered it was appropriate in the interests of  justice
       for  the  appeal  to  be  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for   a
       continuation  hearing.  The  Appellant  had  given   only   a   vague
       explanation of his reasons for his presence in the UK, and indeed had
       used rather equivocal language as to whether  or  not  he  sought  to
       attend the concert which he  asserts,  through  his  representatives,
       underlaid the refusal of admission. He asserted that the concert took
       place annually with the acquiescence of the UK authorities,  although
       there was no evidence to this effect.

   14. I also noted at the error of law hearing that, notwithstanding  those
       concerns as to the Appellant's case, as already stated the burden  of
       proof lies upon the Respondent. I emphasised that  the  Secretary  of
       State should appreciate that the adduction of further evidence  would
       be advisable if the Secretary of State wished to discharge the burden
       of proof that lies upon him.

Findings and reasons - Continuation hearing

   15. At the resumed hearing Ms Brocklesby-Weller  candidly  admitted  that
       the Secretary of State had not managed to improve his case since  the
       last hearing, and acknowledged that it would accordingly be difficult
       to discharge the burden of proof to demonstrate exclusion was  indeed
       conducive to the public good.

   16. She was right to so acknowledge. The burden rests on  the  respondent
       to prove, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  appellant's
       personal conduct  represents  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
       serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society,
       taking into account his past conduct and that  the  threat  does  not
       need to be imminent. It is of course essential to bear  in  mind  the
       diverse public interest factors identified in Schedule 1 to the  2016
       Regulations, such as the need to maintain social order,  protect  the
       public and prevent social harm. Regulation 27 decisions may be  taken
       on  preventative  grounds,  even  in  the  absence  of   a   criminal
       conviction, provided that the grounds are case-specific.

   17. I have no reason to doubt the  factual  propositions  underlying  the
       refusal, such as that the Appellant was searched and found to possess
       clothing with neo-Nazi and far right insignia  amongst  his  personal
       belongings.  There is no evidence before me that he has any  criminal
       history or that he is actively involved in any neo-Nazi or far  right
       organisation. The political views that  his  possessions  imply  will
       doubtless be repugnant to the overwhelming majority of those residing
       in the UK, but there is no positive evidence that his attempt to gain
       admission to the UK was  for  any  reason  other  than  to  attend  a
       gathering of neo-Nazis at a concert,  which  it  would  appear  is  a
       regular event that is rigorously policed.

   18. There is no evidence  that  the  Appellant's  presence  at  any  such
       concert, whatever his  garb,  is  likely  to  incite  inter-community
       tensions in the UK, nor that he has any plans to foster international
       links  between  extremist  groups.  I  am  not  satisfied  that   the
       requirements of regulation 27(5), with reference to Schedule 1 of the
       2016 Regulations,  have  been  met.  I  consequently  find  that  the
       Respondent has not discharged the burden of  proof  upon  him  and  I
       therefore allow the appeal.

          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.

    The appeal is accordingly re-determined; and the appeal is allowed.




Signed:                                            Date: 3 December 2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
