
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/08648/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons            |
|                                             |promulgated                   |
|On 11th January 2018                         |On 9th February 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                               MR IMRAN NAZIR
                        (anonymity direction not made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant was sent a notice of  hearing  to  the  address  he  had
    provided to the Tribunal and indeed also to his representatives,  Legal
    Rights Partnership. Neither he nor his representatives had attended the
    hearing in readiness for the listed time of 10am.  When I  got  to  the
    end of my list and there were no other cases to deal with so I returned
    to this case, there not being anything else for me to deal with.  There
    was still no attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant.

2.    Mr Wilding made various submissions  but  by  way  of  background  the
    position is as follows.

3.    By way of a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor  sitting  at
    Taylor House on 9th August 2017 the Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed
    for want of jurisdiction.  The Appellant appealed against that decision
    explaining in his grounds of appeal that  because  there  were  various
    cases of the higher courts that were awaiting judgment then  he  should
    be granted permission to  appeal.  Indeed,  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers. The  learned  judge  had
    said,

         "1.      This "appeal" stands dismissed by a decision of First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Traynor.  By reference to the decision in  Sala
             [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC), circulated on 19 September 2016.   It
             was the judge's assessment that the appeal had to be dismissed
             for want of jurisdiction (his paragraph 7).

         2. The grounds on which the appellant seeks  permission  to  appeal
             are arguable.  As reflected in paragraph 1 of  those  grounds,
             the appellant's  case  is  that  he  is  entitled  to  an  EEA
             residence card as  the  unmarried  partner  ("extended  family
             member") of a Polish national, Ms Iwona Gregoorcyzk.  The crux
             of the grounds (in their second paragraph 1) is that Sala "was
             incorrectly decided and the Appellant, as an EFM  is  entitled
             to appeal against the decision refusing his residence permit".

         3. The appellant should not take this grant of  permission  as  any
             indication that the "appeal" will ultimately be successful."

4.    In the Respondent's Rule 24 response it is said:-

         "The respondent is currently considering the recent Court of Appeal
         decision in 'Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  1755'.   The  respondent
         therefore is not presently in a position to formally respond to the
         merits of the Grounds of Appeal."

5.    Before me today Mr Wilding said the appeal  was  not  opposed  but  he
    said it was relevant to note that there was still no evidence from  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant was  in  a
    durable  relationship  and  the  lengthy  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    explained why the relationship was not accepted.   It  was  of  concern
    that the evidence has still not been submitted.  Mr Wilding invited  me
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing but for me  to
    observe that there was no evidence from the Appellant  in  response  to
    the Secretary of State's decision and that I  should  observe  that  it
    would be expected that the Appellant would submit his  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

6.    Dealing first with the error of law issue it is clear in view  of  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in Khan that there is an  error  of  law  in
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor's decision thereby the case has to be
    remitted for a re-hearing at  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  for  any
    observations that I should make, in my judgment it is for the Appellant
    to take such action that he is advised to take, so as to deal with  the
    evidential matters to enable his appeal to succeed.  The  Secretary  of
    State has made it plain by way of the reasons for refusal letter and by
    way of the submissions today that the basis of the Appellant's  factual
    claim is not admitted and that  it  is  significantly  challenged.   In
    those circumstances it should be abundantly clear to the Appellant that
    if he fails to provide the evidence that the  Secretary  of  State  has
    suggested should be provided then his  case  will  be  the  subject  of
    significant scrutiny by the Secretary of State at the remitted  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

7.    Therefore, with those matters in mind the matter is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a complete  re-hearing  on  all  issues.   This
    hearing will take place at Hatton Cross.  Any  directions  will  follow
    from that Tribunal.

Decision

There is an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  is
therefore set aside.
There shall be a rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: A Mahmood.                                Date: 11 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood





