
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08166/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 December 2018                  |On 22 January 2019                   |
|                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               mr Jabar Ul Haq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Chukwwyulue, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mailer dismissing his appeal under the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who applied for a residence card
    as confirmation on the basis that he is the extended family  member  of
    an EEA national exercising treaty rights here, that  is  on  the  basis
    that he and his partner are in a durable relationship.

 3. The Secretary of State concluded that the requirements were not met and
    in the refusal letter made it clear that there was no right  of  appeal
    against that decision.  The judge however concluded that there  was  no
    valid appeal on the  basis  that  the  applicant  did  not  fulfil  the
    requirement of Regulation 36(3)(b) of the 2016 Regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed against that and was granted permission by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Garratt on 23 October 2018,  the  judge  concluding
    that it was arguable that there was a right of appeal with  respect  to
    whether or not the appellant  complied  with  Regulation  36(3)(b)(ii).
    The Secretary of State accepts that that is so.

 5. The difficulty in  this  case  is  however  not  Regulation  36(3)  but
    Regulation 36(1) which states that there is a right of appeal under the
    EEA Regulations  only  against  an  "EEA  decision"  as  defined.   The
    difficulty that this appellant faces is that "EEA decision" is  defined
    so as to exclude certain decisions.  It expressly states  that  an  EEA
    decision does not include a decision to  refuse  to  issue  a  document
    under Regulation 18(4), that is a decision not  to  issue  a  residence
    card to an extended family member.  That is precisely the decision made
    in this case and accordingly I conclude  that  the  decision  that  was
    sought to be challenged in this appeal is not an EEA  decision  and  on
    that basis there is no valid appeal.  Whilst this has not  been  raised
    before today it raises the jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    it is a matter to which I must have regard.

 6. I would add that it is unfortunate that this was not picked up  earlier
    because the refusal letter makes it clear that there was  no  right  of
    appeal.  While there may well be arguments which have not been advanced
    here as to whether the EEA  Regulations  2016  properly  transpose  the
    Directive which gives rise to them, that is not a matter  which  I  can
    consider here.  I am aware that this issue is being pursued in judicial
    review in a matter to be  heard  by  the  President  of  this  Tribunal
    sitting in the High Court but, as the matter is, I have no jurisdiction
    and therefore I dismiss the appeal.

 7. In conclusion, although the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  concluding
    that it had no jurisdiction owing to the operation of reg. 36(3) of the
    EEA Regulations, that error was not material as, for the reasons given,
    the First-tier Tribunal did  not  have  jurisdiction  to  consider  the
    appeal. I therefore uphold its decision.


Signed                                  Date  11 January 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


