
                                     [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08088/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th November 2018                         |On 30th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                joseph owusu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Mardner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Ross  promulgated  on  14th  August  2018  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    application for confirmation of a residence card on the basis  that  he
    has retained the right of residence following a divorce.  The  decision
    of Judge Ross was appealed and permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes in the following terms:

         "2.  The Judge found the Appellant had not provided a copy  of  his
             wife's passport or identity card and had  no  discretion,  the
             appeal was dismissed.

         3.   The grounds argue that  the  Judge  did  not  have  regard  to
             regulation 42.  It is not clear that this was brought  to  the
             Judge's attention during the hearing but it  is  relevant  and
             should be considered.

         4.   The grounds disclose an arguable error of law  and  permission
             to appeal is granted".

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 reply by the Secretary of  State  but
    was given the indication that the appeal was resisted.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of the  hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give.  I  do  not  find  that  there  is  a
    material error of law in the decision,  such  that  it  should  be  set
    aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 4. In respect of the sole ground of  appeal  the  complaint  made  by  the
    Appellant's  representatives  is  that  the  judge  did  not   consider
    Regulation 42 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.  Miss  Mardner
    who appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  has  again  appeared
    before me today was commendably frank  and  forthcoming  in  disclosing
    that she did not argue that the judge should take account of,  or  have
    regard to Regulation 42 of the 2016 Regulations when  this  matter  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  It therefore came to pass  that  as  a
    consequence of that acceptance by Ms Mardner, there was no error of law
    in the judge's reasoning as the argument  was  not  raised  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Having heard from Mr Wilding  whom  had  sympathy
    for the appeal and whom took a pragmatic stance as to what  the  future
    may hold for the Appellant, suggestion  was  made  that  the  Appellant
    could reapply and seek to take advantage of Regulation 42 in a  further
    application.  Upon  hearing  this,  Miss  Mardner  indicated  that  the
    Appellant would likely follow this suggestion made  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent and would duly make a further application.

 5. I observe that, although the matter was not raised below, had  it  been
    there would have been an error of law in the decision  given  that  the
    terms of  Regulation  42  do  specify  as  follows  under  the  heading
    "Alternative evidence of identity and nationality":

         "where a provision of these Regulations requires a person  to  hold
         or produce a valid national identity card issued by an EEA State or
         a valid passport, the Secretary of  State  may  accept  alternative
         evidence of identity and nationality where the person is unable  to
         obtain or produce the required document due to circumstances beyond
         the person's control".

    Thus, it is plain from the language of Regulation 42  that  alternative
    evidence of the Appellant's former European national  spouse  may  have
    been accepted if he had shown that production of her identity  document
    was beyond his control.

 6. I further note that the  Secretary  of  State  has  published  guidance
    entitled "Free movement rights: retained rights  of  residence  Version
    3.0" published 7th February 2017 (and still in force as  far  as  I  am
    aware) which on pages 20 to 21 discusses the subject of applicants  who
    are unable to provide all of the evidence from their EEA  Sponsor.   On
    page 21 under the heading "Applications for  registration  certificates
    or residence cards" it is specifically stated that additional enquiries
    can be made but that an applicant must give as much detail as they  can
    about the EEA national sponsor.  It is further stated that:

         "If they  cannot  provide  proof  of  the  EEA  national  sponsor's
         identity, nationality or proof of relationship, then you must check
         existing  records  on  CID  to  see  if  their  identity  has  been
         established in any previous applications".

 7. Thus, the language of the guidance indicates that if  an  EEA  national
    has  established  their  identity  in  a  previous  application,   that
    identification would  be  an  acceptable  form  of  establishing  their
    identity in a future application.

 8. I was told by Miss Mardner that evidence of such a nature had now  come
    into the Appellant's hands, albeit that evidence  was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I was told that the Appellant had  now  obtained,
    by indirect means from his former spouse, a  smartphone  photo  of  her
    current EEA passport which had  apparently  been  sent  to  him  via  a
    'WhatsApp' message which had emanated from her and  been  passed  to  a
    sibling and had reached the Appellant's mobile phone after being passed
    through several hands.  I was provided with a printout of that photo by
    Miss Mardner which I am grateful for and which I have placed  on  file.
    The photo reveals that the EEA national's current Belgium passport  was
    issued on 7th December 2017 and was due to expire on 6th December 2024.
     Thus it seems eminently sensible that the Appellant should put forward
    this printout of the photo of the passport and clarify how it came into
    his possession and submit that best evidence in a  further  application
    to the Secretary of State and pray in aid Regulation 42 of the 2016 EEA
    Regulations as well as the relevant guidance, which may perhaps  result
    in a different outcome, however at the Secretary  of  State's  ultimate
    discretion.  That, as I say, is a matter for the Appellant and  is  not
    within my purview, but I have recorded this evidence which was shown to
    me at Ms Mardner's request.

 9. As mentioned above, given that these matters were not before  and  were
    not raised before the First-tier Tribunal, no  material  error  of  law
    arises from Judge Ross's decision.

10. Therefore, in light of the  above  findings,  the  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not reveal a material error of
    law such that the decision should be set aside.



Notice of Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby affirmed.

13. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini            25 November 2018
