
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
EA/08267/2016

                                                EA/00990/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 April 2019                      |      On 08 May 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                           Muhammad Qasim Gulraiz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Badar, Counsel instructed by Ashton Ross Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Davidson promulgated 12 February 2019 dismissing his appeal against
the decision of the Secretary of State dated 21 June 2016 to refuse his
application made for entry clearance as an extended family member to join
his sister-in-law sponsor, a Romanian citizen married to his brother, Mr
Nasir.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to appeal on
20 March 2019 stating:-

         "It is arguable that the Judge has misdirected himself by failing
         to give adequate reasons as to why the Appellant has failed to show
         that he is dependent on the Sponsor."

    For the reasons set out below I find that there was an error of law in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, such as to
    require it to be set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

At the outset of the hearing Mr Jarvis very fairly made observations on
behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer in respect of the judge's decision at
paragraph 23 where the judge on the one hand found both witnesses to lack
credibility and yet in the same paragraph prefer the evidence of Mr Nasir
on the basis that his responses were more plausible and that he was more
likely to know the correct situation relating to his parents and his
brother.  The judge has not explained why both witnesses were found to lack
credibility and there is a tension in that paragraph between the finding
that they lacked credibility and apparently accepting the brother's
evidence, and the brother's evidence was that the appellant was dependent
on his partner as of necessity.  The reasoning is not clear and the
paragraph is difficult to understand.  The judge was faced with a large
quantity of papers and one must have sympathy with a judge in those
circumstances, however, it appears from the very brief findings that no
real engagement was made of the documentary evidence, including evidence
which has been shown to Mr Jarvis today from that bundle demonstrating the
appellant was, for example, buying food for himself, therefore suggesting a
degree of dependency.  In the circumstances Mr Jarvis on behalf of the
Entry Clearance Officer accepts that there are problems with the decision
and that it cannot be defended.  This is not a concession that dependency
has been established, but it does amount to an acceptance of an error of
law in the decision.

Mr Badar for his part submits that the errors are material and that the
matter needs to be reheard.  I fully agree.  Both parties invited me to
remit this matter to the First-tier Tribunal.  Where a decision of the
First-tier Tribunal has been set aside Section 12(2) of the Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either the case is remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal with directions or it must be remade by the Upper
Tribunal.  The scheme of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007
does not assign the function of primary fact-finding to the Upper Tribunal.
 Where the facts or findings are unclear on a crucial issue at the heart of
the appeal as they are in this case, effectively there has not been a valid
determination of those issues.  The errors of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
vitiates the findings and the conclusion from those so that there has not
been a valid determination of the issues.

In all the circumstances, and at the invitation or request of both parties
to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I do
so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within the Senior
President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.  I find it is appropriate
to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to determine the appeal
afresh with no findings of fact preserved.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision should be set
aside.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal in
accordance with the attached directions.


     Signed   DMW Pickup
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated    1 May 2019


Consequential Directions

 1) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton
    Cross.


 2) The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved.

 3) The estimated length of hearing is one-and-a-half hours.

 4) The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge with the
    exception of Judge Davidson and Judge Grant-Hutchison.

 5) No interpreter is required.


Anonymity

I considered whether any parties required protection of an anonymity
direction.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make any such direction.  In
the circumstances, I make no direction.


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I have considered whether to make a fee award, however I make no fee award
because the outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.



     Signed   DMW Pickup
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated    1 May 2019
