
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/08250/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 7 August 2019                     |On 29 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                shantel pryce
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Jamaica against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie.  For reasons given in his decision dated
    14 April 2018, the judge dismissed her appeal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 22 September 2017 refusing her application for a
    residence card.  This had been made as a family  member  of  a  British
    citizen [WP], who has exercised his treaty rights in  the  Republic  of
    Ireland.

 2. Three reasons were given for the  refusal.   The  first  was  that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that the centre of  her  partner's  life
    had been transferred to the Republic of Ireland.  The second  was  that
    she had not provided sufficient evidence  of  her  integration  in  the
    Republic of Ireland and the third was that her first  lawful  residence
    with her partner was in order to circumvent immigration laws.

 3. Home Office records show that on 27 April 2011 and 7 October  2013  the
    appellant had applied for spouse visas  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
    which had been refused.  They had been sponsored by her partner Mr [P],
    who at that time was residing in the United Kingdom.  Whilst the  Irish
    authorities had issued the appellant and her family  with  a  residence
    card the bank statements  submitted  did  not  show  that  her  partner
    generated a significant income  from  her  self-employment  there.   No
    explanation had been provided why her  partner  had  chosen  to  go  to
    Ireland in the first instance.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant  and  her  partner  and  he
    considered that the evidence by the appellant and her partner was clear
    that they had only moved to Ireland because she had  failed  to  obtain
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.  He went on to explain his
    reasons as follows:-

         "34. The amount of income generated as a  TV  repairer  was  wholly
             inadequate to support them given that they were paying rent of
             about E500 per month, running a motor vehicle and  paying  for
             all the other necessary expenses of living there.

         35.  The length of their residence is  relevant  in  assessing  the
             genuineness of their residence in the EEA State and  when  the
             shortness of their sojourn is put into the balance  I  am  not
             persuaded her husband was genuinely exercising Treaty rights.

         36.  I am unable to reconcile the amounts raised on the invoices to
             Mr White with the business account and  the  parties  were  in
             conflict in their evidence on the issue.  The  appellant  made
             no mention of any difficulty in  obtaining  payment  and  said
             that amounts were aggregated by Mr White and  paid.   Most  of
             the invoices are indeed receipted as having been paid.

         37.  All the invoices raised to Mr White with addresses, show  that
             the alleged work was carried out in Northern Ireland and  that
             does not encourage me  to  believe  that  he  was  in  reality
             carrying out any work for him in the Republic of Ireland.

         38.  No significant withdrawals have  been  made  on  the  business
             account consistent with his TV repair enterprise being a  real
             and substantive source of income.

         39.  The evidence is unclear as to what monies Mr [P]  earned  from
             his agency work as an employee in Northern  Ireland  while  he
             was living in the Republic of Ireland.  No  bank  account  has
             been furnished to prove what the scale of these  earnings  was
             relative to what he says he got from Mr White.

         40.  In considering the genuineness of residence in the  EEA  State
             regulation 9(3)(c) requires a  consideration  of  the  British
             national's accommodation in the EEA State, and whether  it  is
             or was his principal residence.  The oral evidence showed that
             Mr [P] retained his property in Shropshire and rented it  out.
             That would suggest that the centre of  his  life  had  not  in
             reality transferred to Ireland (regulation 9(3)(a)).

         41.  The appellant produced a letter from Donegal Volunteer  Centre
             recording that she was an active member of  the  community  in
             2016 and details various activities  she  engaged  upon  of  a
             social or sporting nature.  I have taken that into account but
             am  not  persuaded  that  it  addresses  the  issue   of   her
             integration into the Irish community  in  such  a  way  as  to
             affect my decision when everything else is taken into account.



         42.  Whilst I have noted Mr [P]'s claim that his TV repair business
             was embarked upon hopefully and failed through a lack of  work
             I am not persuaded I can  accept  that  assertion.   The  very
             modest amount apparently obtained, suggests  no  more  than  a
             token enterprise.  Furthermore, there is  no  rational  reason
             why he would leave his paid employment  in  England;  with  no
             previous association with Ireland; with no apparent experience
             of self-employment and go to Donegal for that  purpose,  other
             than to assist  his  wife  in  circumventing  the  Immigration
             Rules."

 5. The judge declined to deal with Article 8 grounds with reference to the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Amirteymour v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    353 and dismissed the appeal.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  judge
    had misdirected himself as to the application of  the  Citizens  Rights
    Directive.  She relied also on her Article 8 rights and  contended  the
    court should have followed the authorities on this basis.

 7. Permission on  a  renewed  application  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Jordan.   He  considered  the  issue  was  whether  the
    presence of the appellant and her partner in Ireland  was  a  means  of
    circumventing UK  immigration  law  and  arguably  the  judge  had  not
    grappled this.  Judge  Jordan  contrasted  evasion  with  avoidance  by
    analogy.

 8. The appellant  appeared  before  me  with  her  husband  without  legal
    representation.  I explained to her that a number of the points  raised
    in the grounds of challenge  related  to  the  proportionality  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention which  the  judge  correctly  declined  to  deal  with  with
    reference to the Court of Appeal authority on the point.  In particular
    this related to paragraphs [1], [2], [5], [6], [7], [8] and [9] of  the
    grounds.

 9. Paragraphs [2] and [10] were in broad terms, the first  raising  issues
    of irrationality, illogicality and unreasonableness  and  [10]  raising
    issues of incorrectness and perversity  with  reference  to  the  Magna
    Carta and natural justice.  I explained to Ms Pryce that these grounds
    were in general terms and did not identify with any  particularity  why
    it was considered that the judge had erred.

10. Paragraph [3] however was one which I considered appropriate for me  to
    consider and on which I invited Ms Pryce to make her  arguments.   That
    paragraph is in the following terms:

         "3.  Furthermore, the court misdirected itself in not applying  the
             EU regulations of the free movement  of  EU  citizens  as  per
             2004/38EC as my husband is an EU citizen  and  exercising  his
             treaty rights in the UK."

11. Paragraph [4] came within the same category as paragraphs [2] and [10],
    being a general assertion that  the  court  had  been  "hoodwinked  and
    mesmerised by the wrong assertions put forward by the Home Office".

12. Ms Pryce explained that the application to the  Home  Office  had  been
    submitted on the basis that the business was based in Dublin  and  that
    even though the repairs had been undertaken in Northern Ireland she and
    her husband had taken that the Dublin base would be taken into account.
     She accepted that the work  had  been  done  in  Northern  Ireland  as
    observed by the judge in [4] of the decision.  Ms Pryce was  unable  to
    explain what factual matters the judge had not taken  into  account  in
    the evidence that was before him.  Extensive material had been provided
    by Ms Pryce in lever arch files and  she  stated  that  the  judge  had
    observed that he had only ten minutes to look at  the  documents.   She
    explained that these had been lodged at the court prior to the  hearing
    some weeks before.

13. By way of response Mr Diwnycz contended that the crux of the matter was
    where the money was earned and where  the  appellant  and  husband  had
    spent their nights.  The money had been earned in Northern Ireland  and
    that they had resided in Ireland.  The judge had dealt with that  issue
    in his detailed decision.

14. By way of response Ms Pryce explained that even though her husband  was
    working in Northern Ireland he had also  been  contracted  to  work  in
    Donegal and had been paid in Euros.

15. I reserved my decision.

16. I begin my conclusions with observations on the  grant  of  permission.
    With respect to the judge whilst  he  was  correct  that  these  is  no
    minimum level of earnings, nevertheless the exercise of  work  pursuant
    to free movement must be effective and genuine.  Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Jordan identified the issue as whether the circumstances  were  a
    means of circumventing UK immigration law and drew on the difference in
    tax law between  evading  and  avoiding  as  something  analogous.   He
    considered that the judge had not grappled with this point.

17. The case that the appellant had to meet was summarised by the judge  at
    [7] to [10] of his decision as follows:

         "7.  The Secretary of State concluded that the  appellant  had  not
             provided adequate evidence to show that her residence  in  the
             Republic of Ireland was genuine for the following reasons.

             .    She had not demonstrated that the centre of  her  British
                  husband's life had transferred to the Republic of Ireland.

             .    She had provided insufficient evidence of her integration
                  in the Republic of Ireland.

             .    It was suspected that her first lawful residence with her
                  husband was in order to circumvent immigration law.

         8.   The bank statements submitted did not confirm that her husband
             generated significant income from his alleged  self-employment
             in Ireland.  A Bank of Ireland  current  account  operated  in
             Donegal during their period there showed the highest amount to
             be  E2739.25  on  15  October  2015.   Had  her  husband  been
             sponsoring an application for  her  from  the  United  Kingdom
             under the Immigration Rules while performing  a  similar  role
             here he would have had insufficient funds  to  enable  her  to
             qualify for entry to the United Kingdom.

         9.   Furthermore, no explanation has been provided as  to  why  her
             husband chose to go to Ireland in the first instance.  He  was
             a British citizen, who originally lived in the United Kingdom.
              There was no evidence that  he  had  any  social,  family  or
             cultural ties in Ireland and no explanation had been given  as
             to why she left Ireland to come to the United Kingdom  shortly
             after she and her husband had been granted permission to  live
             in Ireland  until  2021.   Whilst  recognising  that  she  had
             submitted some documentation in the form of bank statement and
             tenancy agreements, to confirm that she may have spent time in
             Ireland the decision maker stated that she would expect to see
             further  documentation  to  confirm  that  she  had  genuinely
             integrated into the Irish community.

         10.  In view of these findings and taking into account her previous
             unsuccessful attempts to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  it  was
             apparent  to  the  decision  maker  that  it  was  always  her
             intention to live in  the  United  Kingdom  and  her  stay  in
             Ireland was merely to enable her to enter the  United  Kingdom
             under the EEA regulations, when she would otherwise  not  have
             qualified for entry under the Immigration Rules."

18. The judge then directed himself in relation to the law and provided the
    following  extract  from  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 as follows:

         "11. The 2016 Regulations introduced changes to the  provisions  of
             the earlier 2006 Regulations with regard to the application of
             the ruling in the Surinder Singh case as  it  affects  British
             citizens who were residing with  the  non-EEA  family  members
             (i.e. spouses) in another EEA state and who, upon returning to
             the UK, seek to benefit  from  EU  law  instead  of  the  more
             rigorous requirements of the UK Immigration Rules.   They  are
             contained in regulation 9:

                  9 - (1)  If the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied,
                        these Regulations apply to  a  person  who  is  the
                        family member ("F") of a British citizen ("BC")  as
                        though the BC were an EEA national.

                     (2)   The conditions are that-

                        (a)    BC-

                             (i)    is residing in an EEA State as a worker,
                                 self-employed   person,    self-sufficient
                                 person  or  a  student,  or   so   resided
                                 immediately before returning to the United
                                 Kingdom; or

                             (ii)   has  acquired  the  right  of  permanent
                                 residence in an EEA State;

                        (b)    F and BC resided together in the EEA  State;
                             and

                        (c)    F and BC's residence in the  EEA  State  was
                             genuine.

                     (3)   Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA
                        State is or was genuine include-

                        (a)    whether the centre of BC's life  transferred
                             to the EEA State;

                        (b)    the length of F and BC's joint residence  in
                             the EEA State;

                        (c)    the nature and quality of  the  F  and  BC's
                             accommodation in the EEA State, and whether  it
                             is or was BC's principal residence;

                        (d)    the degree of F and BC's integration in  the
                             EEA State;

                        (e)    whether F's first lawful residence in the EU
                             with BC was in the EEA State.

                     (4)   This regulation does not apply-

                        (a)    where the purpose of the  residence  in  the
                             EEA State was as a means for circumventing  any
                             immigration laws applying to non-EEA  nationals
                             to which F would otherwise be subject (such  as
                             any applicable requirement under the  1971  Act
                             to have leave to enter or remain in the  United
                             Kingdom); or

                        (b)    to a person  who  is  only  eligible  to  be
                             treated as a  family  member  as  a  result  of
                             regulation  7(3)   (extended   family   members
                             treated as family members)."

19. In his survey of the evidence over a number of paragraphs between  [12]
    and [31], the judge noted the history of the relationship and  attempts
    to obtain permission to remain in the United Kingdom  and  specifically
    in relation to the move to Letterkenny, the judge noted at [14]:

         "14. When he moved to  Letterkenny  he  became  self-employed  with
             David White TV Repairs, Ballycoolin, Dublin.  Mr  White  would
             send him a TV repair job to be done and he  would  carry  this
             out while she worked in the home.  Twelve invoices to Mr White
             have been produced totalling E1868.34.  He operated a Bank  of
             Ireland business account at  their  Letterkenny  branch.   The
             invoices begin in December 2015 and end in November 2016.  The
             total amount he generated in what he says was a  self-employed
             capacity is reflected in these 12  invoices.   Because  income
             was limited he also went to train with a Mr David Crumlish  in
             Letterkenny in the repair and maintenance of white goods.   He
             operated a business in the  sale  and  repair  of  such.   The
             period with Mr Crumlish overlapped with the work he was  doing
             for Mr White."

20. In his continuing survey, the judge observed the basis  of  the  couple
    coming to Ireland so that they could be together which had been  denied
    in the United Kingdom.  Ms Pryce had not been permitted to work so  she
    had undertaken voluntary work.  Her husband had worked as a TV repairer
    and engineer in the United Kingdom which he had left in September  2015
    and that his three bedroomed house in Shropshire had been  rented  out.
    The judge also noted the evidence that Ms Pryce's husband had  obtained
    agency work through a company called MPA and worked in support services
    at Altnagelvin Hospital, Londonderry  for  four  nights  a  week.   The
    repair work had been during the day.  No documentary evidence from  MPA
    or bank statements vouching payments could be provided.  In respect  of
    her husband's account with the Bank of  Ireland,  the  judge  noted  at
    [19]:

         "19. The first credit to the Bank of Ireland business account was 4
             March 2016 when the account was opened.  The first invoice  to
             Mr White is dated 1 December 2015.  She was asked how in those
             circumstances they survived financially and she said they came
             to Letterkenny with E2000 and that is what they  survived  on.
             They also got help from his  family  and  he  had  the  rental
             income from his property and in Shropshire.   The  E2000  came
             from monies she  earned  in  Jamaica  and  he  had  also  been
             earning."

    And as to credits in the bank account, the judge noted at [20]:

         "20. She was cross-examined regarding credits to the business  bank
             account and she said White invoices were aggregated  together.
             She was asked why the credits on the bank account could not be
             traced to Mr White and she said the bank did not  [allow]  for
             that service."

21. The judge also noted that the monthly rent  on  the  first  Letterkenny
    property was E470 and E500 on the second.  As an aside this entailed an
    annual rental approaching  E6000  in  contrast  with  the  evidence  of
    earnings generated.

22. As to Mr [P]'s evidence, the judge noted that he had  no  intention  of
    circumventing the Immigration Rules and had made a lot of effort to get
    work in Letterkenny without any success.  He had obtained the  work  in
    Ireland from Mr White, having sent him  his  CV  in  Dublin.   Everyone
    working for Mr White did so on a self-employed basis.  He  had  done  a
    lot of jobs in Derry, Ballymena and other locations.  Activities on the
    bank card were explained and Mr [P] also gave evidence that in order to
    advertise his business he had obtained some cards and posters.  He  had
    also worked for Mr David Crumlish  doing  repairs  to  cookers,  fridge
    freezers and the like, for which he was paid cash in hand in the summer
    of 2016.  At [30] the judge records his answers as to his work with the
    MPA agency:

         "30. He said he began to work through the agency MPA but he had  no
             documentary evidence that spoke to this.  It would be at home.
              MPA insisted upon  paying  any  monies  he  received  into  a
             sterling account.  The work was sporadic.   He  worked  a  few
             nights and then went to the ICU  unit  in  the  hospital.   He
             started in April 2016.  He was able to do the MPA work and  Mr
             White's work during the day."

23. In response to questions from the judge Mr [P] explained  that  he  had
    chosen to go to Donegal and no other part of Ireland as the rents  were
    more affordable there.  The judge then asked why very  few  debits  had
    been made to the account with the Bank of Ireland and Mr [P]  responded
    that "they had E2700 in their current  account.   They  had  also  been
    given money by their family".

24. In order to qualify under Regulation 9 an appellant and  in  this  case
    her British national spouse (or durable partner) must:

   i) have resided in another Member State; and


  ii) that residence must have been genuine.


25. An analysis of the relevant case law must  begin  with  Surinder  Singh
    [1992] EUECJ C-370/90 in which the Court of Justice explained at  [25]:



         "25. The answer to the question referred for a  preliminary  ruling
             must therefore be that Article 52 of the Treaty and  Directive
             73/148, properly construed, require a Member  State  to  grant
             leave to enter and reside in its territory to the  spouse,  of
             what- ever nationality, of a national of that  State  who  has
             gone, with that spouse, to another Member State  in  order  to
             work there as an employed person as envisaged by Article 48 of
             the Treaty and returns to  establish  himself  or  herself  as
             envisaged by Article 52 of the Treaty in the territory of  the
             State of which he or she is a national.  The spouse must enjoy
             at least the same rights as would be granted  to  him  or  her
             under Community law if his or her spouse entered  and  resided
             in the territory of another Member State."

26. In O & B v the Netherlands (Case C-456/12) the  Court  of  Justice  was
    asked by the Netherlands Court in two linked cases questions  regarding
    the conditions governing the right of residence  of  persons  of  third
    country nationality who have resided with an  EU  national  in  another
    Member State.  Those questions are as set  out  by  the  court  in  its
    decision at [32]:

         "32. In those circumstances the Raad van State decided to stay  the
             proceedings and to refer the following questions to the  Court
             of Justice for a preliminary ruling, the first three of  which
             are formulated in the same terms in the cases  of  Mr O.  and
             Mr B., with only the fourth question specific to the case  of
             Mr B.:

             '(1) Should Directive 2004/38 ..., as regards  the  conditions
                  governing the right of residence of members of the  family
                  of a Union citizen who have third-country nationality,  be
                  applied by analogy, as in the judgments of  the  Court  of
                  Justice of the  European  Communities  in  [Singh  and  in
                  Eind], where a Union citizen returns to the  Member  State
                  of which he is a national after having resided in  another
                  Member State in the context of Article 21(1)  [TFEU],  and
                  as the recipient of services within the meaning of Article
                  56 [TFEU]?

             (2)  [If the first question is answered in  the  affirmative],
                  is there a requirement that the  residence  of  the  Union
                  citizen in another  Member  State  must  have  been  of  a
                  certain minimum duration if, after the return of the Union
                  citizen to the Member State of which he is a national, the
                  member of his  family  who  is  a  third-country  national
                  wishes to gain a right of residence in that Member State?

             (3)  [If the second question is answered in the  affirmative],
                  can that requirement then also be  met  if  there  was  no
                  question of continuous residence, but rather of a  certain
                  frequency of residence, such as during weekly residence at
                  weekends or during regular visits?

             (4)  As a result of the time which elapsed between the  return
                  of the Union citizen to the Member State of which he is  a
                  national and the arrival of the family member from a third
                  country in that Member State,  in  circumstances  such  as
                  those of the ... case [concerning Mr B.], has there been a
                  lapse of possible entitlement of the  family  member  with
                  third-country nationality to a right of residence  derived
                  from Union law?'

27. The court explained in respect of the first, second and third questions
    that the Directive  2004/38  did  not  establish  a  derived  right  of
    residence for third country nationals who are family members of a Union
    citizen in a Member State of which that citizen  is  a  national.   The
    Directive establishes a derived right of residence  for  third  country
    nationals who are family members  "...  only  where  that  citizen  has
    exercised his right of free  movement  by  becoming  established  in  a
    Member State other than the Member State of which he  is  a  national".
    Having decided that third country nationals such as the applicants were
    not entitled on the basis of Directive 2004/38 to a  derived  right  of
    residence in the Member State of which their sponsors  were  nationals,
    the court examined whether a derived right of  residence  may  in  some
    circumstances be based on Article 21(1) TFEU.  The court explained  its
    decision at [48] to [50]:


         "48. It is therefore necessary to determine  whether  the  case-law
             resulting from Singh and Eind  is  capable  of  being  applied
             generally to family members  of  Union  citizens  who,  having
             availed themselves of the rights conferred on them by  Article
             21(1) TFEU, resided in a Member State other than that of which
             they are nationals, before returning to the  Member  State  of
             origin.

         49.  That is indeed the case.  The  grant,  when  a  Union  citizen
             returns to the Member State of which he is a  national,  of  a
             derived right of residence to a third-country national who  is
             a family member of that  Union  citizen  and  with  whom  that
             citizen has resided, solely by virtue of  his  being  a  Union
             citizen, pursuant to and in conformity with Union law  in  the
             host Member State, seeks to remove the same type  of  obstacle
             on leaving the Member State of origin as that referred  to  in
             paragraph 47 above, by guaranteeing that that citizen will  be
             able, in his Member State of origin, to  continue  the  family
             life which he created  or  strengthened  in  the  host  Member
             State.

         50.  So far as concerns the conditions for granting, when  a  Union
             citizen returns to the Member State of which he is a national,
             a derived right of residence, based on Article 21(1) TFEU, to
             a third-country national who is a family member of that  Union
             citizen with whom that citizen has resided, solely  by  virtue
             of his being a Union citizen, in the host Member State,  those
             conditions should not, in principle, be more strict than those
             provided for by Directive 2004/38 for  the  grant  of  such  a
             right of residence to a third-country national who is a family
             member of a Union citizen in a case  where  that  citizen  has
             exercised  his  right  of  freedom  of  movement  by  becoming
             established in a Member State other than the Member  State  of
             which he is a national.  Even though  Directive  2004/38  does
             not cover such a return, it should be applied  by  analogy  to
             the conditions for the residence  of  a  Union  citizen  in  a
             Member State other than that of which he is a national,  given
             that in both cases it is the Union citizen who is the  sponsor
             for the grant of a derived right  of  residence  to  a  third-
             country national who is a member of his family."

28. Relevant to the appeal before me the Court observed in [51] and [52]:


         "51. An obstacle such as that referred to  in  paragraph  47  above
             will arise only where the residence of the  Union  citizen  in
             the host Member State has been sufficiently genuine so  as  to
             enable that citizen to create or  strengthen  family  life  in
             that Member State.  Article  21(1)  TFEU  does  not  therefore
             require that every residence in the host  Member  State  by  a
             Union citizen accompanied by a family member who is  a  third-
             country  national  necessarily  confers  a  derived  right  of
             residence on that family member in the Member State  of  which
             that citizen is a national upon the citizen's return  to  that
             Member State.

         52.  In that regard, it should be observed that a Union citizen who
             exercises his rights under Article 6(1) of  Directive  2004/38
             does not intend to settle in the host Member State  in  a  way
             which would be such as to create or strengthen family life  in
             that Member State.  Accordingly, the refusal to  confer,  when
             that citizen returns to his Member State of origin, a  derived
             right of residence on members of his  family  who  are  third-
             country  nationals  will  not  deter  such  a   citizen   from
             exercising his rights under Article 6."

29. Specifically in relation to abuse the Court explained at [58]:

         "58. It should be added that the  scope  of  Union  law  cannot  be
             extended to cover abuses (see, to that effect,  Case  C-110/99
             Emsland-St�rke [2000] ECR I-11569, paragraph 51, and  Case  C-
             303/08 Bozkurt [2010] ECR I-13445,  paragraph  47).  Proof  of
             such an abuse requires,  first,  a  combination  of  objective
             circumstances in  which,  despite  formal  observance  of  the
             conditions laid down by the European Union rules, the  purpose
             of those  rules  has  not  been  achieved,  and,  secondly,  a
             subjective element consisting in the intention  to  obtain  an
             advantage  from  the  European  Union  rules  by  artificially
             creating the conditions laid down for obtaining  it  (Case  C-
             364/10 Hungary v Slovakia [2012] ECR, paragraph 58)."

30. Thus, in order  for  considerations  of  abuse  to  arise,  the  person
    concerned must meet the conditions for the enjoyment of  the  right  in
    question (see the analysis by Laing J in R on  the  application  Gunars
    Gureeckis v SSHD and another [2017] EWHC  3298  (Admin)  in  particular
    [75ff]).

31. In my judgment, the findings by the judge as to the nature of the  work
    undertaken by Mr [P] leads  to  only  one  answer;  his  wife  had  not
    established that her husband had demonstrated or met the conditions for
    the enjoyment of the right of free  movement  and  there  had  been  no
    genuine and effective exercise by her husband  of  such  rights  during
    their stay  in  Donegal.   The  services  that  he  had  provided  were
    principally for work undertaken  in  Northern  Ireland  where  he  also
    worked in the evenings and in any event the income generated  was  only
    marginal in the light of his commitments.  That being so, the issues of
    circumvention of the Immigration Rules and  abuse  did  not  arise  for
    consideration.  It was incumbent upon the judge to address this  aspect
    first before considering abuse and although he erred in not doing so, I
    am not satisfied based on the findings  reached  that  such  error  was
    material.  Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed on grounds under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
2016.


Signed                                  Date 21 August 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
