
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/08616/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 March 2018                              |On 21 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                          Mr sebatheepan sebaratnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S. Jegarajah, counsel instructed by Greater
London Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. Z. Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka,  born  on  7.12.87.  He
         appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated  20  June  2016
         refusing to grant him a residence card as an extended family member
         of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

      2. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shaerf  for
         hearing on 3 August 2017 and in a decision dated 6  September  2017
         the appeal was dismissed on the basis of a want of jurisdiction  in
         light of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Sala (EFMs Right  of
         Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) in which it was held that there was
         no statutory right of appeal against the decision of the  Secretary
         of State not to grant a residence card to a person claiming  to  be
         an extended family member. It was further dismissed on the basis of
         the judgment in Amirteymour [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

      3. An application for permission to appeal was  made  in  time  on  20
         September on the basis that the judge erred materially  in  law  in
         finding that he did not have jurisdiction and  should  have  stayed
         the appeal pending the outcome  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  of  the
         decision in Sala.

      4. Permission to appeal  was  granted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
         decision dated  20  December  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Frankish on the basis that, given Khan v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755  overturns  Sala,  it  follows
         that an arguable error of law may have arisen and that time  should
         be extended.

      5. At the hearing before me, Ms  Ahmad  helpfully  accepted  that  the
         judge  had  erred  materially  in  law  in  finding   a   want   of
         jurisdiction.  In light of Ms Ahmad's helpful concession it was not
         necessary for me to hear from Ms Jegarajah.

    Notice of Decision

    I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material
    errors of law in particular in refusing to hear the appeal for want  of
    jurisdiction.  That decision is therefore overturned and the appeal  is
    remitted for a hearing de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed:      Rebecca Chapman             Date: 19 March 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


