

                                                         [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: EA/08927/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2018                            |On 14 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                           Mrs RACHEL BROWN TAGOE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - GHANA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated  on  4  September  2017,
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against refusal to grant her a family
    permit under Regulation 12 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 2 January 1990.  She  made
    an application to join Riccardo Merlini as her spouse in the UK.  He is
    an Italian national living in the UK.  The respondent  found  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience and, as a  consequence,  the  appellant
    was not a family member of Mr Merlini.

3.   At the hearing before the judge, Mr Merlini gave  oral  evidence.   The
    judge noted Mr Merlini's claim that his relationship with the appellant
    began on 30 January 2014 online.  They met on 15 January 2015  when  he
    visited the appellant in Ghana.  They got married on 20  January  2016.
    After the wedding Mr Merlini remained in Ghana for eleven days.  He has
    not visited the appellant again since.

4.   The judge stated  that  the  appellant  submitted  photographs  of  the
    wedding.  The appellant claimed she maintained contact with her  spouse
    via  Viber  but  did  not  provide  any  evidence  of  this  with   the
    application.  The  judge  noted  that  in  the  light  of  these,  more
    particularly set out in the decision, the respondent  found  that  this
    was a marriage of convenience.

5.   In cross-examination Mr Merlini accepted  that  he  had  not  made  any
    visits to the appellant since the wedding.  He had  initially  said  he
    visited the appellant since the wedding but when asked to be  clear  as
    to when exactly he last saw the appellant, he said it was  eleven  days
    after the wedding, and not since.  He had planned to visit  her  on  12
    May 2017 but contracted a stomach bug and had to cancel the visit.  The
    judge found that there was no evidence of any travel booked or evidence
    of cancellation or evidence of any stomach bug which led him to  cancel
    the journey planned for 12 May 2017.

6.   The judge noted that the appellant and Mr  Merlini  first  met  online.
    In his witness statement and in the current  application  form  it  was
    stated that their  meeting  online  took  place  on  30  January  2014.
    However, in oral evidence Mr Merlini  insisted  that  the  relationship
    started on 14 February 2015 and not on 30 January 2014.  The judge said
    that in the sense of being committed to each other, it  was  reasonable
    to expect the couple to know approximately when it was.  That was so in
    a serious  and  genuine  relationship.   The  fact  that  there  was  a
    discrepancy in Mr Merlini's evidence on this point  led  the  judge  to
    find that their relationship was never a serious matter.

7.   The judge also said that in his oral evidence Mr Merlini  said  he  got
    married on 20 January 2015.  However, when this was challenged  by  the
    HOPO, Mr Merlini said he got confused.  The judge took into account the
    pressures  of  giving  evidence  and  the  fact  that  Mr  Merlini  had
    previously been married.  However, the judge found that this  confusion
    undermined the rebuttal that this was not a marriage of convenience.

8.   The judge noted that the appellant and Mr Merlini have  only  submitted
    photographs taken at the wedding ceremony.  There were none others.  Mr
    Merlini visited the appellant on 15 January 2015.  It was after meeting
    the appellant that he fell in love with her and married  the  following
    January.  The judge stated that in this modern  age  where  practically
    every mobile phone is also a camera, for there to be no photographs  of
    a couple at all at the first meeting was incredible.  It did not accord
    with everyday experiences.

9.   The judge noted that the appellant had previously made  an  application
    under the Immigration Rules.  This was refused on  5  April  2016.   He
    noted that the respondent found the  marriage  was  not  genuine.   The
    reason given by the respondent was the  lack  of  evidence  of  contact
    between the appellant and Mr Merlini.  In the light of this, and taking
    into account the contents of the current decision, it was reasonable to
    expect Mr Merlini and the appellant  to  provide  evidence  of  contact
    between them since 2014.  The failure to do so led the  judge  to  find
    that there was no evidence of contact or if there was, the contact  did
    not assist the appellant and Mr Merlini.

10.  The judge stated  that  in  his  witness  statement  and  in  his  oral
    evidence, Mr Merlini said he has been in  contact  with  the  appellant
    since 2014.  However,  the  evidence  of  electronic  contact  did  not
    predate the decision.  In cross-examination Mr Merlini accepted that he
    has known since the last refusal that relationship  was  in  issue  and
    that he ought to be able to produce evidence of contact tracing back to
    2014.  He asserted that he had them on his electronic devices  but  did
    not think to bring them with him to the Tribunal.

11.  The judge  said  that  Mr  Merlini  had  provided  vast  quantities  of
    evidence of contact in his bundle.  There was no evidence of the sender
    and recipient  in  these.   Mr  Merlini  told  him  that  due  to  data
    protection  issues  such  information  was  deleted.   There   was   no
    independent evidence on this point.  The judge said that  the  evidence
    of contact only went back to 1 April 2016 and nothing prior.

12.  In his oral evidence Mr Merlini said he is a  Catholic  and  wanted  to
    marry a Catholic and his marriage to  the  appellant  was  not  one  of
    convenience.  Ms  Jones,  his  Counsel,  submitted  that  this  was  an
    important  issue  going  to  rebut  the  assertion  of  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  The judge said in his view the fact  that  he  may  be  a
    Catholic or of any other religion was evidentially neutral.   Not  only
    Catholics marry, Jews,  Christians,  Muslims  and  Hindus  also  marry.
    Asserting the fact of a particular religious  faith  does  not  assist.
    There has to be  evidence  touching  upon  the  issue  of  marriage  of
    convenience.  Pleading religious faith does not  by  itself  amount  to
    evidence in rebuttal of the  respondent's  assertion  that  this  is  a
    marriage of convenience.

13.  On the totality of the evidence before him, the judge  found  that  the
    respondent has demonstrated that this is  a  marriage  of  convenience.
    The issue was first raised in a decision dated 5 April 2016.   In  that
    decision the respondent set out in clear terms the reasons  why  he  or
    she found the marriage was not a genuine marriage.  Lack of evidence of
    contact played a major part in that  refusal.   The  appellant  and  Mr
    Merlini have had plenty of time to print evidence of contact from  2014
    and submit it with the current  application  and  in  support  of  this
    appeal.  Their failure, without good reason,  to  do  so  fundamentally
    undermined their credibility.  The judge found that they have failed to
    rebut  the  respondent's  assertion  that  this  is   a   marriage   of
    convenience.

14.  The appellant submitted  two  grounds  of  appeal.   The  first  ground
    relied on the case of Rosa v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2016] EWCA Civ 14 to argue that the legal burden of proof  is  on  the
    respondent to adduce evidence capable of  pointing  to  the  conclusion
    that the marriage is one of convenience.  The ground  went  on  to  say
    that  evidence  of  contact  and  photos  is  an  expectation  for   an
    application  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   This  case  concerns  an
    application under EEA law where such evidence is not required  and  the
    absence of evidence of contact  and  photographs  which  they  are  not
    required to produce, cannot lead to a conclusion that the  marriage  is
    one of convenience.  Lack of evidence of contact and photos is  not  an
    indicative trigger suggesting a possible marriage  of  convenience  and
    the burden of proof requiring the respondent to adduce evidence capable
    of pointing to the conclusion that the marriage is one  of  convenience
    has not been met.

15.  The second ground asserted that marriages of  convenience  are  defined
    as marriages contracted for the sole purpose of enjoying the  right  of
    free movement and residence - Molinar (on application of)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] EWHC 1730 (Admin).  The  ground
    asserted that no consideration whatsoever has been had  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the intention of the parties at the time the  marriage
    was entered into and that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected
    himself by focusing on the question of whether the marital relationship
    was a continuing one.  No finding has been made by the First-tier Judge
    that the marriage entered into on 20 January 2016  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience at that time.

16.  Ms Jones relied on the grounds.  She said essentially  that  the  judge
    placed too much weight on deficiencies  in  communication  between  the
    appellant  and  Mr  Merlini  and  the  lack   of   evidence   of   such
    communication.  She submitted that there is no legal requirement  under
    the EEA Regulations for the appellant to produce  such  evidence.   The
    judge in her opinion has not examined the intention of the  sponsor  in
    order to assess whether the marriage was valid from the outset.

17.  She said that the sponsor corrected himself in his evidence as to  when
    they first met.  He said they first met online on 13 January  2014  and
    met in person on 4 January 2015.  Ms Jones  submitted  that  the  judge
    found a discrepancy when one did not exist.

18.  She submitted that  the  respondent  has  not  shown  that  this  is  a
    marriage of convenience.

19.  Ms Jones submitted that there was no focus by the judge on whether  the
    relationship of the appellant and Mr Merlini was genuine  at  the  time
    the couple met.  The judge has not made reference to the  intention  of
    the parties at the time of the marriage.  As the  facts  of  this  case
    have not been rejected, she questioned what evidence the  judge  needed
    in order to assess the genuineness of their intention at  the  date  of
    their marriage.

20.  Mr Jarvis submitted that at paragraph 6 of the determination the  judge
    made a clear and proper self-direction as to the approach to a marriage
    like this.  The judge said the application of the legal principals  set
    out in Rosa is that the respondent has the legal burden of proving  the
    appellant's marriage  to  Mr  Merlini  is  one  of  convenience.   Once
    discharged, the evidential burden shifts to the appellant to rebut  it.
    Whoever has the evidential burden  of  proof,  the  standard  is  on  a
    balance of probabilities.
21.  Mr Jarvis said that there  have  been  two  applications  made  by  the
    appellant.  The first was on 5 April 2016, which was rejected under the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant did not lodge an appeal against  this
    decision.  The second application is the one that she  has  made  under
    the  EEA  Regulations,  which  has  led  to  the  appeal  that  we  are
    considering today.

22.  Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge assessed the overall evidence  which
    included the decision in 2016  and  the  latest  decision.   The  judge
    considered whether the marriage was a sham marriage.  He submitted that
    the judge's finding at paragraph 9 that there was a discrepancy  in  Mr
    Merlini's evidence as to when they first met online was  not  a  public
    law error.  At paragraph 10 the judge gave the appellant the benefit of
    the doubt about his confusion as to when they got married.  He said the
    judge's findings at paragraph 11 about  lack  of  photographs  in  this
    modern era disclose no error of law.  The sponsor accepted that he  had
    not produced the evidence required to support the  application.   There
    was no challenge to the judge's finding that Mr Merlini's  evidence  of
    contact only went back to 1 April 2016 and there was nothing  prior  to
    that.

23.  Ms Jones replied  by  saying  that  lack  of  communication  is  not  a
    requirement.  A marriage of convenience cannot be based  on  assumption
    and suspicion.  The judge did not consider the evidence correctly.

24.  Having considered the submissions made by the parties, I find that  the
    judge's decision discloses no error of law.

25.  I take on board the argument that as this case concerns an  application
    under the EEA law, evidence of contact and photographs is not  required
    and the absence of such evidence should not lead to a  conclusion  that
    the marriage is one of convenience.  However, I note that in this  case
    the appellant had made a previous  application  under  the  Immigration
    Rules which was turned down.  She was given reasons why the application
    was refused.  The reasons included lack of contact and  photographs  of
    the couple together.  Having met online, and the sponsor  visiting  the
    appellant the following year in 2015 and the marriage taking place  the
    following year in Ghana in 2016, I find that the judge did not  err  in
    his  expectation  that  there  would  be  evidence   of   contact   and
    communication between the couple prior to  their  marriage  in  January
    2016.  I find that without such evidence, the judge would be  operating
    in a vacuum in trying to assess whether the  marriage  was  genuine  or
    not.

26.  The other argument was that the judge has  not  made  findings  on  the
    intention of the parties at the date the  marriage  was  entered  into,
    namely 20 January 2016.  The grounds did not identify the evidence that
    went to the intention of the marriage which the judge did not consider.
     The factual evidence of when they first met and when they married  was
    not disputed. I find  that  this  factual  evidence  without  more  was
    insufficient to show that their intention to marry was genuine and that
    their marriage entered into was genuine and  not  one  of  convenience.
    Without evidence to show how their  relationship  developed  from  when
    they first met online to their marriage in 2016,  the  judge  was  left
    with no option but to find that this was a marriage of convenience.

27.  I find that the appellant has not assisted  herself  by  not  producing
    some evidence at least  to  assist  the  judge  in  deciding  that  her
    marriage was genuine and not one of convenience.

28.  I find for these reasons that the judge's decision  does  not  disclose
    an error of law.

29.  I find that the judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 9 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun











