
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/08545/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2018                           |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MICHAL KOTLAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Hollywood, Andrew Russell Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimes, promulgated on 5 June 2018, allowing Mr Kotlar's
    appeal against decision made on 20 October 2017 to remove him from  the
    United Kingdom as a person whose right to reside under the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2016  ("the  Regulations")  had
    ceased. A decision made on the same date that removal is  justified  on
    grounds  of  an  abuse  of  rights  pursuant  to  reg.  26(3)  of   the
    Regulations.

 2. The respondent's case is that, although he was no  longer  working,  he
    had retained the status of worker as he had had to cease  work  and  is
    still temporarily unable to work owing to illness, and so is and at all
    material times was a qualified person within reg. 6 (2). On that  basis
    he had a right to reside.

 3. That had not been accepted by the appellant but, on  appeal  the  judge
    noted [15] that it was only  at  that  stage  that  evidence  had  been
    provided in a bundle.  She also noted [17] statements  of  Fitness  for
    Work for social security or sick pay. Which she found showed  that  the
    respondent is currently temporarily unable to work due to  an  illness.
    It is also of note that  the  bundle  enclosed  a  P45  from  the  last
    employment and documents from HM  Revenue  and  Customs  detailing  his
    employment and the receipt of Employment Support Allowance  during  Tax
    year 2014/15.

 4. In the light of the evidence as a whole, the judge concluded  that  the
    respondent had retained the status of worker and was thus  entitled  to
    reside as a qualified person.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  there
    was no evidence of the appellant's employment [4], and that  the  first
    document relating to sick pay was not issued until  23  November  2017,
    casting doubt on whether his temporary incapacity had (as he  submitted
    must be the case) immediately followed cessation of work.

 6. Mr Duffy submitted that, in essence, this case  was  about  a  lack  of
    evidence. I raised with him the evidence contained within the bundle as
    set out above. In light of that  and  the  acceptance  that  Employment
    Support Allowance is payable only to those not capable of work owing to
    ill-health, he conceded that there was no merit in his grounds.

 7. I make no criticism of Mr Duffy who was not  responsible  for  drafting
    the grounds and whose candour before the Tribunal was exemplary.  I can
    only assume that, as he indicated, the author did not have sight of the
    bundle on the Secretary of  State's  file.   That,  however,  does  not
    excuse the submission of grounds which were at best misleading.

 8. In the circumstances, I did not need to hear from Mr Hollywood,  and  I
    dismissed the  appeal.  The  judge  clearly  had  before  her  adequate
    evidence from an independent and  reliable  source  -  HM  Revenue  and
    Customs  -  that  the  respondent  had  been  working  and   had   been
    contemporaneously adjudged unfit to continue working as demonstrated by
    the grant of Employment Support Allowance.

 9. For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not involve the making of an error of law capable of affecting  the
    outcome and I uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and uphold it.

 2. The respondent is reminded that any application for costs must be  made
    pursuant to Rule 10 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 within one month of the issue of this notice.


Signed                                  Date 29 November 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

