
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
EA/08078/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                              Decision
and Reasons Promulgated
On 9th April 2019                                                      On
12th April 2019



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                             MR GHOUSE MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                          Appellant


                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr B Haseldine, Counsel, instructed by AKL
Solicitors
For the respondent:  Ms S Chuna, Senior Presenting Officer

Introduction

   1. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal  Judge  NMK  Lawrence  who  dismissed  his  appeal
      against the respondent's revocation of his residence card. He had been
      issued with this  on the  basis he  was  in  a  family  member  of  Ms
      Rostas, a Romanian national exercising  Treaty  rights.  The  decision
      revoking his residence card  was  dated  27  September  2017  and  was
      because  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  he  was  in  a  durable
      relationship with Ms Rostas.

   2. The appeal hearing took place at Hatton  Cross  on  14  January  2019.
      Neither party was represented and the appellant was absent. First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence referred to a Notice of Hearing being sent  to
      the appellant and his legal representatives on 5 July 2018. The  judge
      was aware that on  20  December  2018  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
      tribunal indicating they wanted to withdraw the decision. The tribunal
      staff had contacted the respondent requesting details of  the  reasons
      for the withdrawal so the matter to be considered under rule 17 of the
      procedural rules. On the basis reasons were not received,  the  matter
      remained in the list.

   3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence did not accept the withdrawal.  The
      judge was  satisfied  the  parties  had  been  properly  notified  and
      proceeded to hear the appeal in their absence. At paragraphs 9  to  13
      the judge set out the background details and referred to  the  absence
      of evidence about the relationship.

   4. There was an earlier decision refusing the appellant  confirmation  he
      was entitled to permanent residence. His claim was on the basis he had
      lived here in accordance with the  regulations  for  five  years.  The
      refusal did not accept the relationship was durable and questioned the
      employment details provided.

   5. His appeal against that decision was heard by Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Dhanji on the 16th of May 2018.  First-tier  Tribunal  Dhanji
      concluded that the sponsor's  evidence  corroborated  the  appellant's
      account  about  the  relationship  as  did  the  evidence  of  various
      witnesses  called.  There  had  been  a  temporary  breakdown  in  the
      relationship and then a reconciliation. The judge saw nothing  arising
      which called into question the credibility of  the  appellant  or  the
      witnesses  and  concluded  that  the  relationship  was  durable   and
      subsisting. Following on from this successful appeal the appellant was
      issued with a permanent residence card.

   6. It was in  light  of  this  the  respondent  sought  to  withdraw  the
      revocation decision. There is correspondence to this effect within the
      file. There is no reference by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lawrence  to
      this earlier decision and the subsequent correspondence.

   7. Permission to appeal the decision of Judge Lawrence was granted on the
      basis of  the  grounds  advanced:  primarily,  that  the  decision  is
      inconsistent with the decision of First-tier Tribunal Dhanji.

   8.  Ms S Chuna accepts that there has been a procedural irregularity  and
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence errs in law  as  it
      appears to  be  given  in  ignorance  of  the  earlier  decision.  The
      Devaseelan principle would apply as the earlier  decision  dealt  with
      the same point. The appellant's representative agreed with this.

   9. In  light  of  the  presenting  officer's  concession,  which  accords
      entirely with the background evidence in the file, I find  a  material
      error of law established and set the  decision  aside.  I  remake  the
      decision allowing the appeal against  the  revocation  decision.  This
      outcome has for practical purposes been superseded by  the  subsequent
      grant of a permanent right of residence  but  provides  the  means  to
      dispose of the appeal.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence materially  errs  in  law
and is set aside. I remake the decision allowing the appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Dated 10 April 2019


























