
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/09234/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 November 2018                     |On 27 November 2018                 |
|Extempore                               |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                   Ashraf Ibrahim Ismaeil Mohamed Elkhouly
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lam, instructed by David Tang & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie promulgated on 30 August  2018  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  him  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to residence as the  spouse
    (and so a family member) of an EEA national.  The core of that  refusal
    was that the Secretary of State concluded for a number of reasons  that
    this was a marriage of convenience and on that basis the appellant  was
    therefore not a spouse of an EEA national as defined.

 2. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  from  his  wife  ("the
    sponsor").  He also had before him a substantial amount of  documentary
    evidence.  The judge  accepted  at  paragraph  [6]  that  some  of  the
    evidence such as the proof of the sponsor's visit to  Egypt,  proof  of
    photographs taken of the family did suggest that this was a genuine, by
    which I understand to be  a  proper  marriage  which  was  not  one  of
    convenience.

 3. The judge then at paragraph [7]  in  six  sub-paragraphs  set  out  the
    evidence and why he concludes that there are  "legitimate  reasons  for
    concern in regard to the credibility of the  claimed  relationship  and
    they are as follows".  The difficulty is that what the judge has failed
    to do is to make any proper findings as  to  whether  he  accepted  the
    sponsor's evidence or not.  It is implicit in paragraph [7( 6)] that he
    did accept some of it, but he has failed to say why he has not accepted
    it in assessing whether this marriage was a marriage of convenience  or
    not.

 4. It is unhelpful for a judge to refer to the credibility  of  a  claimed
    relationship when that is not the test.  The test is whether this was a
    marriage of convenience or not.  The judge failed properly  to  address
    that test or the evidence and for these reasons his decision cannot  be
    sustained and I set it aside as it involved the making of an  error  of
    law.

 5. In the circumstances of this case I think it would be  inevitable  that
    none of the facts could be sustained and there would have to  be  fresh
    findings on all relevant issues.  Whilst the  issue  in  this  case  is
    relatively narrow, that is whether this is a marriage of convenience or
    not, it is I consider one which ought to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues and I direct accordingly.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 21 November 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
