
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: EA/09433/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At                               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 March 2019                       |On 09 April 2019                    |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                  Between:
                                Mohd. TAHIRU
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Nesa Ostadsaffar (counsel instructed by Jade Law, on 17
                    September only)
For the respondent: Mr Toby Lindsay


                           DETERMINATION & REASONS


    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cox), made  at  Bradford  without  a  hearing,  at  the
    appellant's invitation, on 16 March, to  an EEA appeal by a citizen  of
    Ghana. The only issue at this stage is whether the judge  was  entitled
    not to be satisfied that the appellant had contracted a valid customary
    marriage there with his wife, who is a citizen of France.

 2. The requirements for registration of a customary marriage in Ghana  are
    set out in the Ghanaian Customary Marriage and  Divorce  (Registration)
    Law 1985, s. 3 (1) - (2). Registration is however no longer compulsory,
    following an amendment  in  1991.  There  is  no  issue  but  that  the
    appellant had satisfied the requirements for registration  requiring  a
    statutory declaration showing the parties' names, places of  residence,
    and family support: the only issue is on s. 3 (1) (c),  which  requires
    the declaration to  show  that  the  parties  have  complied  with  the
    conditions essential to the validity of the marriage under the relevant
    customary law.

 3. On this point the Home Office  relied  on  the  opinion  of  an  expert
    witness on Ghanaian law, set out in NA (Customary marriage and divorce,
    evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009. This was Mercy Akman, a  member  of
    the Bar both in  Ghana  and  here.  At  paragraph  11  of  her  opinion
    (paragraph 12 of the decision), Miss Akman set  out  the  effect  of  a
    Ghanaian authority,  requiring  agreement  by  the  parties  and  their
    families, and cohabitation, none of which is in issue in this case.

 4. However at paragraph 5 (11) Miss Akman also  says  "A  valid  customary
    marriage can only be validly contracted between two  Ghanaian  citizens
    ...", and this is the  point  on  which  the  Home  Office  refused  to
    recognize the validity of this marriage, since the declaration did  not
    show that the appellant's wife was a citizen of Ghana, as  well  as  of
    France.  Miss  Ostadsaffar  however  proposed  to  show,  by  means  of
    unreported decisions of the Upper Tribunal, that Miss Akman  had  since
    changed her opinion on this point.

 5. Mr Lindsay objected to this point being taken, without either notice in
    the grounds of appeal, or permission to cite the  unreported  decisions
    concerned. This was  fully  justified,  for  both  reasons,  and  so  I
    adjourned the hearing  to  28  November,  with  directions  which  were
    complied with, to an extent. Following a succession of case  management
    hearings, at which  the  solicitors  failed  to  appear  themselves  or
    instruct counsel, but let the appellant appear unrepresented, I decided
    on 19 March that the appeal must be resolved, which I was able  to  do,
    thanks to the decisions cited below. Solicitors should however  realize
    that they are professionally obliged to appear at all hearings in cases
    where they are on record, unless they have  got  permission  beforehand
    not to be.

 6. Customary marriages between citizens of Ghana and  spouses  from  other
    countries are a common feature in appeals of this kind. If Miss Akman's
    opinion in NA was still being relied  on  by  the  Home  Office  on  20
    October 2017 (the date of the decision under appeal here), despite  her
    changing her mind, they, and those advising appellants,  need  to  know
    where they stand, by means of a 'reported' decision.

 7. The judge's reasons for dismissing this appeal  are  quite  clear  from
    paragraphs 24 - 25

         "... the Appellant has not provided any evidence to show  that  the
         Ghanaian law relating to customary marriage does not  require  both
         parties to be Ghanaian nationals.

         Further although the Ghanaian documents refer to the marriage being
         recognised as lawful under Ghanaian customary law, there is nothing
         to show that the authorities considered  whether  the  parties  had
         capacity to marry in Ghana by proxy."

 8. Although the refusal letter expressed general  reservations  about  the
    quality of documentary evidence coming from Ghana,  this  is  the  only
    real issue in the present case. The unreported decision  which  I  gave
    the solicitors leave to cite is Yeboah (IA 19837-14), by  deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Saini. It relies in turn  on  Amoako  (IA  23315-12)  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, where two  sources  of  Ghanaian  law  are
    dealt with.

 9. The first is an expert report by Miss Akman, already available  by  the
    date of the hearing in June 2013, where she confirms 'after  additional
    research and reflection' that customary marriages are available between
    non-Ghanaian citizens. That is half the picture: the rest is  given  in
    the Home Office's own guidance 'Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce/Proxy
    Marriage contracted in Ghana' (17 January 2012).

10. On the point in issue, that guidance  seems  to  be  identical  to  the
    response (2 November 2016) to a country  of  origin  information  (COI)
    request, put before me by Mr  Lindsay.  The  eligibility  criteria  for
    proxy marriages in Ghana are given as follows:

         ii. Ghanaian nationals resident in Ghana or abroad.

        iii.  At  least  one  of   the   parties   must   be   a   Ghanaian
             national/citizen.

         iv. If both parties are non-Ghanaian nationals, at  least  one  of
             the parents of any of the couple must be a  Ghanaian  national
             for a customary marriage to be registered.

          v. Non-Ghanaian nationals with  no  parental  links  to  Ghanaian
             citizenship   are   not   entitled   to   customary   marriage
             certificates.

11. So far as can be seen, this represents the Home  Office's  own  current
    guidance on the subject. This was also the  guidance  considered,  with
    the exception of (iv) by Mark Turner J and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Craig
    in Agyei (EA 12991-16), decided on 21 November 2018.  As  the  Tribunal
    took the guidance from Amoako, this may have been an  oversight.  Since
    the question of whether both parties had to be Ghanaian  nationals  was
    the only one before the  Tribunal  in  Agyei,  the  appellant's  appeal
    against refusal of a residence card was allowed.

12. Mr Lindsay was content to accept that decision as correct on the  issue
    and criteria set out in it. The only point he raised on the question of
    citizenship requirements for customary marriage in Ghana was  on  (iv).
    However, while in this case the  sponsor  has  'no  parental  links  to
    Ghanaian citizenship', the appellant is a Ghanaian citizen. So far as I
    can see, (iv) does no more than clarify the effect of (ii)  and  (iii):
    capacity to contract a customary marriage in Ghana requires that either
    one party must be a Ghanaian citizen, or at least one of the parents of
    either party must be one: if neither parent is,  then  of  course  (iv)
    will not be satisfied.

13. It is a pity that the Home Office did not take heed of what appears  to
    be their own current guidance, dating from 2012, until  the  presenting
    officer in Agyei was shown Amoako (see paragraph 6  of  the  decision),
    but have been content to rely on what even by the date of the  decision
    in Amoako in 2013 was the out-of-date version of Miss Akman's  opinion,
    set out in NA (Customary marriage and divorce, evidence)  Ghana  [2009]
    UKAIT 00009, at paragraph  11,  but  no  part  of  the  conclusions  or
    guidance given by the Tribunal there.

14. Until the contrary is shown, and in  line  with  Miss  Akman's  current
    opinion, that guidance should be taken to represent the law on capacity
    to contract a valid customary marriage in Ghana, so far as  citizenship
    is concerned. In other words, either  one  party  must  be  a  Ghanaian
    citizen, or at least one of the parents of either party must be one. In
    this case, that condition was satisfied, and it follows that the appeal
    is allowed.

Appeal




                               [pic]
                                                 Upper Tribunal JudgeFreeman
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                                                         Dated 04 April 2019
