

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
EA/09671/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6th December 2018                     |On 03rd January 2019              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                 SHOAIB RAZA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. The appellant applied for  a  residence  card  as  an  extended
            family member. That application  was  refused,  and  he  appeal
            under the 2016 EEA Regulations. His  appeal  was  dismissed  by
            First-tier Tribunal Judge  Miles  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
            decision promulgated on 11 January 2018.


         2. On 12th April 2018 the appellant was given permission to appeal
            on the grounds that  it  was  arguable  that  the  hearing  was
            procedurally unfair because the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had
            failed to have regard to a bundle filed by and on behalf of the
            appellant.

         3. The appellant voluntarily left the UK on 29th August 2018.

         4. For reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 26th  November
            2018 I issued a Notice of Abandonment. It has now been drawn to
            my attention that the appeal in question is an appeal under the
            EEA Regulations and is a non-suspensive appeal,  the  departure
            of the appellant not leading to abandonment.

         5. In accordance with  paragraph  43  of  the  Tribunal  procedure
            (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  I  set  aside  the  Notice  of
            Abandonment.

         6. The appellant had produced, in his application  for  permission
            to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, evidence of the filing of  his
            bundle of documents with the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  appears
            the bundle did not reach the First-tier Tribunal judge when  he
            made his decision. On that basis it appears that there has been
            a procedural irregularity such that the decision of the  First-
            tier Tribunal should be set aside to be remade.

         7. In the  absence  of  any  objection  by  the  respondent,  such
            objection to be received by the Tribunal within 7 days  of  the
            sending of  this  decision,  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
            Tribunal is set aside for procedural  error  of  law,  and  the
            appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
            afresh, no findings preserved.






                                    Date 6th December 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
