
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09152/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 November 2018                 |On 25 January 2019                    |
|                                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                      CHRISTOPHER IKECHUKWY CHUKWUEMEKA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adewoye, of Prime Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Nicholls (the  judge),  promulgated  on  16  August  2018,
        dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
        dated 13 November 2017 refusing to issue him a permanent  residence
        card under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
        2016 (the 2016 Regulations).

   Background


     2. The appellant, a national of Nigeria, was born in 1992. He  entered
        the UK on 21 January 2011 with entry clearance valid  to  30  April
        2012. He claims to have met his former  wife,  Ms  M  Teixeira,  in
        April 2011 and that they  began  to  cohabit  in  August  2011.  He
        applied for a residence card as an extended family member of an EEA
        national on 27 April 2012. This application was however rejected on
        22 May 2012. A further application was made on 12  June  2012.  The
        appellant and Ms Teixeira married on 7 July 2012 and he was  issued
        with a residence card as the family member of an EEA national on  4
        October 2012.


     3. The applicant's relationship with Ms Teixeira  broke  down  and  he
        moved out of the matrimonial home in 2014/2015. Divorce proceedings
        were commenced on 3 May 2017.  On  18  August  2017  the  appellant
        applied for a permanent residence card.


     4. In his decision refusing the application the respondent noted  that
        the appellant and Ms Teixeira were not divorced. The only  evidence
        provided to the respondent that Ms Teixeira had been exercising EEA
        Treaty rights were a letter from her employer dated 24  April  2012
        and wage slips issued by a previous employer covering the period 31
        December 2011 to 31 March 2012. The respondent  was  not  therefore
        satisfied that Ms Teixeira had been exercising  EEA  Treaty  rights
        for a period of 5 years. The application was  additionally  refused
        on the basis that the  appellant  failed  to  provide  original  ID
        documents relating to Ms Teixeira.

     5. The appellant had commenced a new  relationship  with  another  EEA
        national and  had,  in  the  meantime,  been  issued  with  an  EEA
        residence card valid until 2023.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     6.  At  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  the  judge  directed  the
        Presenting Officer to contact  HMRC  to  obtain  basic  information
        concerning Ms Teixeira income tax history. The  Presenting  Officer
        obtained some information about her income tax history for the  tax
        years 2012/2013 to 2016/2017. There was no information  in  respect
        of her tax years 2017/2018.


     7. The judge considered written and oral evidence from  the  appellant
        to the effect that Ms Teixeira had been working at Heathrow Airport
        but he had been informed around April or May 2017 that she had left
        the UK to go to Ireland. Because the  divorce  was  acrimonious  Ms
        Teixeira had been unwilling to provide any documentary evidence  to
        support the appellant's application.

     8. In his findings the judge directed himself in accordance  with  Reg
        15(1)(b) of the 2016 Regulations (the appellant had to  demonstrate
        that he was a family member of an EEA national who is  not  an  EEA
        national but who had resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
        national in accordance with the 2016 Regulations for  a  continuous
        period of five years). Although  noting  the  appellant's  evidence
        that he and Ms Teixeira had cohabited from 2 August 2011, the judge
        found that the appellant had given no real  details  to  show  that
        their relationship at the time was  akin  to  marriage.  The  judge
        found that the most probable  date  for  the  commencement  of  the
        requisite 5-year period  in  Reg  15(1)(b)  was  the  date  of  the
        marriage (7 July 2012), and that the 5-year period would  therefore
        end on 6 July 2017. The judge found that the  information  obtained
        from HMRC was consistent with the appellant's evidence that it  was
        around April 2017 that he  learnt  that  Ms  Teixeira  had  held  a
        leaving party before going to Ireland.  The  judge  found  that  Ms
        Teixeira has therefore left the UK before July 2017. The judge  was
        however satisfied  that  the  respondent  had  seen  Ms  Teixeira's
        passport and was aware of her nationality given that the  appellant
        had previously been issued with a resident card. As  the  appellant
        could not fulfil the requirements  of  Reg  15(1)(b)  of  the  2016
        Regulations the appeal was dismissed.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     9. Mr Adewoye's grounds, amplified by him at the hearing, contend that
        the judge erred in law  by  taking  the  date  of  the  appellant's
        marriage to Ms Teixeira as the start of the relevant 5-year period.
        The appellant and Ms Teixeira began cohabiting  on  2  August  2011
        and, as Ms Teixeira was exercising her free movement rights at this
        time, the judge should have calculated the  five-year  period  from
        this date. It was submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
        evidence  of  the  appellant's  cohabitation   with   Ms   Teixeira
        including, inter alia, the tenancy agreement dated 2  August  2011,
        Ms Teixeira's employer's letter dated 24  April  2012,  wage  slips
        covering  the  period  31  December  2011  to  31  March  2012,  Ms
        Teixeira's bank statement, and a direct debit  for  a  health  club
        dated 19 March 2012, all relating to  an  address  in  Willow  Tree
        Close, where the appellant also lived. It was  submitted  that  the
        judge was wrong to conclude that there  was  insufficient  evidence
        that the appellant and Ms Teixeira  lived  together  in  a  durable
        relationship akin to marriage since August 2011. The  assertion  in
        the grounds, that an application for a residence card had been made
        on 27 April 2012 and refused on 22 May 2012, was  confirmed  by  Mr
        Whitwell who  explained  that  the  application  had  been  refused
        because the documents provided were  insufficient  to  establish  a
        right of residence.


    10.  Having been made aware of the decision in Macastena v Secretary of
        State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1558,  Mr  Adewoye
        submitted that the further application for a residence card made in
        June 2012 contained more evidence of the  relationship  between  Ms
        Teixeira and the appellant and, if the respondent was not satisfied
        that the relationship was genuine, then a residence card would  not
        have been  issued  to  the  appellant  after  his  marriage  to  Ms
        Teixeira. He submitted that the application for  a  residence  card
        based on the appellant being in  a  durable  relationship  with  Ms
        Teixeira would have succeeded and  this  was  demonstrated  by  the
        actual grant of a residence card after the marriage.

Discussion

    11. There is no dispute that the appellant married  Ms  Teixeira  on  7
        July 2012. As the spouse of an EEA national  the  appellant  would,
        for the purposes of Reg 7 of the 2016  Regulations,  be  a  'family
        member' of an EEA national. Prior to his  marriage  he  was  not  a
        'family member'. The most he  could  have  been  was  an  'extended
        family member', as defined in Reg 8(5)  of  the  2016  Regulations.
        Being an extended family member of an EEA  national  does  not,  of
        itself, bestow upon a person a right of residence.


    12. A person who meets the definition of extended family member may  be
        granted an EEA residence card, after 'an extensive examination'  of
        their personal circumstances  (Regs  18(4)  and  (5)  of  the  2016
        Regulations). Reg 7(3) reads,

            A person ("B") who is an extended family member and has been
            issued with an EEA family permit, a registration certificate or
            a residence card must be treated as a family member of A,
            provided-


         a) B continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2),  (3),
            (4) or (5); and


         b) the EEA family permit, registration  certificate  or  residence
            card remains in force.





    13. Reg 7(3) therefore acts as a gateway to the acquisition  of  rights
        of residence of extended family members on the basis that, once the
        relevant document has been issued, the extended family member is to
        be treated as a family member. It is unambiguously clear  that  the
        treatment of an 'extended family member' as a  'family  member'  is
        conditional on the issuance of, inter alia, a residence  card,  and
        that the treatment is  coextensive  with  and  dependent  upon  the
        validity of that residence card.


    14. It follows that an extended family member of an EEA  national  will
        only be considered as a family  member  after  the  issuance  of  a
        residence card. Unless and until a residence card  is  issued,  the
        extended family member cannot be treated as  a  family  member  and
        does not have a right of residence. This conclusion is supported by
        the recent Court of Appeal decision in Macastena.

    15. In his introduction to the Court's decision Lord  Justice  Longmore
        stated, at [1],

             "This appeal raises the question whether time spent by  a  man
             in a durable relationship with a woman who is an EEA  national
             with a permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom  can
             be  added  to  subsequent  time  as  a  spouse  to  meet   the
             requirement of 5 years continuous lawful residence before  the
             man can himself acquire a permanent right  of  residence.  The
             answer is that time  so  spent  cannot  be  added  unless  the
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  has  (or  perhaps
             ought to have) issued the man with  a  residence  card  as  an
             "extended  family  member",  pursuant   to   the   Immigration
             (European  Economic  Area)   Regulations   2006   ("the   2006
             Regulations")."

    16. At [17] His Lordship explained,

             "An extended family member can only be issued with a residence
             card on the basis of his  durable  relationship  with  an  EEA
             national  if  the  Secretary  of  State  has  undertaken   "an
             extensive examination of the  personal  circumstances  of  the
             applicant". That has never happened and can only happen  after
             an application for a residence card is made. Merely  notifying
             the Secretary of State that one is in a  durable  relationship
             is nowhere near enough either  to  constitute  such  extensive
             examination or to require such examination to  be  undertaken.
             FTT Judge Clark was with respect  wrong  to  think  that  time
             spent in a durable relationship with Ms L could just be  added
             to time spent as her spouse,  provided  that  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal itself was satisfied that there had  been  a  durable
             relationship before the marriage."

    17. Mr Adewoye submits that  Macastena  can  be  distinguished  on  the
        facts. There was no application at all in that case for a residence
        card as an extended family member, whereas the appellant  made  not
        one but two applications (on 27 April 2012 and 12 June  2012),  and
        that the respondent ought to  have  issued  the  appellant  with  a
        residence card in respect of his first application because  he  was
        ultimately issued with a residence card after his marriage.


    18. Whilst I agree that there is  a  factual  difference  in  that  the
        appellant did make a prior application for a  residence  card,  and
        that there  must  have  been  'an  extensive  examination'  of  the
        applicant's personal circumstances, the result of  that  assessment
        was that the appellant was not entitled to a residence card. On the
        information available to me, this  is  most  likely  to  have  been
        because the respondent  was  not  satisfied  there  was  sufficient
        evidence that the appellant and  Ms  Teixeira  were  in  a  durable
        relationship.

    19. Although a second application was made for a residence card on  the
        basis that the appellant was in  a  durable  relationship  with  Ms
        Teixeira, this was ultimately varied to become an application for a
        residence card based on the appellant's marriage to Ms Teixeira and
        his new status as a 'family member'. There is  no  requirement  for
        'an   extensive   examination'   of   the   appellant's    personal
        circumstances  for  a  residence  card  to  be  issued   in   these
        circumstances. It does not however follow that the  issuance  of  a
        residence card to the appellant as a 'family member' means that  he
        would have been issued a  residence  card  as  an  extended  family
        member. The tests for the issuance of a residence  card  are  quite
        different and, while the evidence provided by the appellant in  his
        applications of April and June 2012 supported his assertion that he
        cohabited with Ms Teixeira, they did  not  necessarily  demonstrate
        that  he  was  in  a  durable  relationship  with  her.  In   these
        circumstances I find that, although  the  judge's  reasoning  is  a
        little opaque, he did not materially  err  in  law  in  taking  the
        starting point for the calculation of the relevant 5-year period as
        the date of the marriage.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.
The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 14 January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


