
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09214/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2019                         |On 19th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                sandeep singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellant,


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against  the  decision
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Panel  (Judge  Froom  and  Judge  Stedman)
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "panel")  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 17th August 2018 allowed the appeal against the decision
    of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  Mr  Singh's  application  for  a
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2016 ("hereinafter referred to as the 2016 Regulations").

 2. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant before the Tribunal, I
    will for ease of reference refer to him as the Respondent as he was the
    Respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly, I will refer  to  Mr
    Singh as the Appellant as he was the Appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The background:

 3.  The history of the application is set out in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Appellant is a national of India who entered the UK
    on the 23 May 2007 with entry clearance to visit the  UK  for  a  short
    period "to finalise business deals" but he did not leave  and  remained
    in the UK.

 4. On the 12th August 2017 he applied for a residence card as confirmation
    of the right to reside in the United Kingdom as a family member  of  an
    EEA national exercising Treaty Rights.  During the period spent in  the
    United Kingdom he had met his wife who was a national of Romania.  They
    subsequently married on the 16th June 2017.

 5. The application made by the Appellant was refused by the  Secretary  of
    State in a decision letter dated 12th November 2017.  In the notice  of
    immigration decision, it is stated that  the  application  was  refused
    under Regulation 7.  The reasons given in the decision were  stated  as
    follows; that the applicant had failed to provide evidence that he  met
    the requirements of Regulation 7 because he had not  provided  adequate
    evidence that he was the direct family member of an EEA  national.  The
    decision letter made reference to Home Office records  indicating  that
    he was granted entry clearance on 23 May 2007 and that he had  declared
    in that form that he was married to an Indian national. In  support  of
    the current application he had provided a marriage  certificate  issued
    in United Kingdom dated 16 June 2017 showing his  marriage  to  an  EEA
    family member. It was stated that as he had not  provided  any  divorce
    certificate to show that is marriage was dissolved and he was  free  to
    enter into that second  marriage  the  marriage  was  therefore  deemed
    invalid. As the Respondent did not believe that he was legally free  to
    marry, the application was refused with reference to  Regulation  7  of
    the 2016 regulations on the basis that  he  is  not  provided  adequate
    evidence to show that he  was  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising Treaty Rights in the UK.

 6. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal against that decision and  as  a
    result the appeal came before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  3rd  August
    2018 before the panel.

The decision of the FtT panel:

 7.  In a decision promulgated on 17th August 2018 the  panel  allowed  the
    appeal.

 8. At paragraph 5 of the determination, the panel set out that it had been
    agreed  between  the  parties  that  the  sole  issue   that   required
    consideration was whether the Appellant's marriage to the  sponsor  was
    valid. The Appellant's case as set out in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  was
    that he had never been married in India and that his  marriage  to  his
    wife and sponsor was valid. It was also recorded at paragraph 6 of  the
    determination that the presenting officer confirmed that the  Secretary
    of State accepted  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    sponsor was genuine and that this was not a "marriage  of  convenience"
    case. There was also no issue as to whether the sponsor  was  genuinely
    exercising Treaty Rights. Indeed, as the panel observed,  the  contents
    of the Appellant's bundle demonstrated that point.

 9. The panel had the advantage of hearing oral evidence from the Appellant
    and although his wife was present, the panel recorded that it  was  not
    necessary for her to give evidence (see paragraph 7).  The  panel  also
    made reference to the Appellant adopting his statement and the evidence
    that the Appellant  maintained  he  was  never  married  in  India  and
    suspected that the agent who helped him to apply  for  entry  clearance
    had made a mistake. He stated that he had not had  any  opportunity  to
    check the form before it was submitted and that he and the sponsor were
    interviewed at Becket House in February 2017 and they  had  been  shown
    the application form on that occasion. His marriage had  been  approved
    by the Home Office after a 70-day  investigation.  He  confirmed  that,
    apart from the reference to Ms Kaur, the information in the application
    had been accurate.

10. At paragraph 11 the panel set out Regulations 7 and 18 and at paragraph
    14 - 19 set out its conclusions on the evidence. They can be summarised
    as follows: -

               1) A key piece of evidence  was  missing  in  the  case.  The
                  presenting officer  accepted  that  the  couple  had  been
                  interviewed in February 2017  and  whilst  it  was  not  a
                  formal marriage interview the fact that it took place  was
                  significant.  Those   transcripts   not   been   provided.
                  Furthermore,  it  was  also  accepted  that  the  proposed
                  marriage had been subjected  to  a  70-day  investigation;
                  similarly, the result of that investigation had  not  been
                  provided either (at [14]).

               2) The investigation would have taken place under Section  50
                  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014;   following   information
                  received  from   the   registrar,   the   Respondent   can
                  investigate whether the proposed marriage is a "sham". The
                  panel made reference to  having  been  informed  that  the
                  Respondent had issued a "certificate of approval" although
                  that  has  been  abolished.  Thus,  they  understood   the
                  evidence to indicate that the compliance  issue  would  be
                  met in this case enabling  the  couple  to  go  ahead  and
                  marry. They observed that neither  party  had  provided  a
                  copy of the notice but that it  is  likely  that  one  was
                  issued given couple were able to marry on 16 June 2017.

               3) At paragraph 15, the panel reached the conclusion that  if
                  the Respondent had concluded that the Appellant could  not
                  marry, it is likely that the panel would have been shown a
                  document to this effect.

               4) At paragraph 16 the panel recognised the  purpose  of  the
                  investigation was to consider whether the marriage  was  a
                  sham, as opposed to the issue of whether the parties  were
                  free to marry. However, as the Appellant had  stated  that
                  the visa application details were shown to him in February
                  and that this was not in dispute,  the  panel  found  that
                  they could not conceive that the issue would not have been
                  considered by the Respondent i.e. whether the parties  are
                  free to marry. The panel considered that if  the  view  of
                  the Respondent at that stage was that  the  Appellant  was
                  not free to marry, that they could not conceive  that  the
                  information  would  not  have  been  passed  on   to   the
                  registrar. Thus, the panel considered that the  Respondent
                  changed mind on this issue but that they were not told why
                  that was the case.

               5) The panel made reference to the marriage certificate which
                  records the Appellant was single  and  drew  an  inference
                  from that document that the registrar who  signed  it  was
                  satisfied as to that fact, not only as a result  of  their
                  own  enquiry  but  reinforced  by  the  decision  of   the
                  Respondent following the 70-day investigation (at [17]).

               6) The panel reached the conclusion that this was  a  validly
                  issued certificate of marriage (at [18]).

               7) The panel viewed the Appellant's claim  that  he  did  not
                  have time to check the contents of  the  application  with
                  "considerable circumspection" but that did not  mean  that
                  he was married to Ms Kaur.

               8) The panel did not find that the Appellant was ever married
                  to Ms Kaur (at [18]).

The grounds of challenge:

11. The Respondent sought permission to appeal the decision of  the  panel.
    The grounds can be summarised as follows:

               1) The panel erred in law by finding that the  Appellant  was
                  free to marry his wife. The reasons  given  by  the  panel
                  were  speculative  and  assume  as  to  what  happened  in
                  relation  to  the  "70-day  investigation"  and  what  the
                  Secretary of State would have told the registrar.

               2) The evidence given by the Appellant to the  registrar  was
                  inconsistent with what the Secretary  of  State  had  been
                  told in the Visa application in 2007 but the panel made no
                  findings on this. This was a material error of law.

               3) The panel was side-tracked by  the  issue  of  the  70-day
                  investigation and assumed  what  the  Secretary  of  State
                  would or would not  have  told  the  registrar.  This  was
                  irrelevant and, in any event, it was such critical  factor
                  Secretary of State should have been given the  opportunity
                  to respond. The grounds make reference to a letter written
                  on 3 May 2017 informing  him  that  the  secretary  stated
                  chosen not to investigate  the  marriage  and  the  letter
                  noted it was for the Appellant to show the registrar  that
                  he was lawfully able to marry.

               4) It is therefore submitted that the panel erred in  law  by
                  failing to come to a material conclusion  on  the  central
                  issue in the case.




12. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  20
    December 2018.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

13. Miss Everett relied upon the written grounds which  are  summarised  in
    the preceding paragraphs. She submitted  that  the  panel  had  reached
    findings based  on  speculation  as  to  why  the  Appellant  may  have
    originally lied at paragraph 18 and was not  entitled  to  do  so.  She
    submitted that the panel gave considerable weight to  the  Respondents'
    in action or inactivity at paragraph 15 but that it was incumbent  upon
    the Appellant to show that he was lawfully married.




14. She directed the Tribunal to paragraphs 14 - 17  of  the  determination
    and submitted that the panel had been "side-tracked" by  the  issue  of
    the investigation and whether the marriage was  a  sham  but  that  was
    irrelevant as that was not the reason for the Respondent  refusing  the
    application and thus giving weight to that issue was an error of law.




15. As to the new document provided by Mr Ahmed, is she submitted that  the
    document on the face of it was not easy to understand.  In  particular,
    it was not known what evidence the document was based upon;  it  refers
    to him being unmarried, but the document does not say  whether  he  was
    married in India. Thus, she submitted the provenance  of  the  document
    did not assist in establishing any particular  fact.  She  invited  the
    Tribunal to find that there was a material error of law and  set  aside
    the decision.




16. Mr Ahmed on behalf of  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  panel  had
    reached a conclusion upon the evidence  which  they  were  entitled  to
    make. He directed the Tribunal to paragraph 18 where the panel  reached
    the overall finding that the Appellant had not been married to Ms Kaur.
    He submitted that the finding was based on the evidence referred to  by
    the Tribunal panel at paragraph  8  which  had  been  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement. The evidence given by the Appellant  was
    that he had never been married to Ms Kaur but suspected the  agent  who
    had helped him to apply for entry clearance had made a mistake had been
    accepted. Furthermore, the panel placed weight and  reliance  upon  the
    evidence of the Appellant, which was not in  dispute  at  the  hearing,
    that when he and the sponsor were interviewed  in  February  2017,  the
    Appellant had been shown the Visa application details on that occasion.
    Thereafter the marriage had been approved by the Home Office after  the
    investigation had taken place. He submitted that  the  crucial  finding
    was that the Appellant and sponsor had  been  interviewed  in  February
    2017 and thus had been shown the  Visa  application.  It  was  in  this
    context that the panel found at  paragraphs  15  and  16  that  it  was
    inconceivable that the issue would not have  been  considered  at  that
    stage and that if the  Appellant  was  not  free  to  marry,  that  the
    information  would  not  have  been  passed  on   to   the   registrar.
    Consequently, the panel arrived at a conclusion that he  had  not  been
    married previously.




17. As to the document that he had provided, he conceded that  it  had  not
    been served in accordance with Rule 15 (2A)  of  the  procedure  Rules.
    However, he submitted that it was a document issued by  the  Government
    of India and stamped by the Ministry of Affairs which demonstrated that
    upon enquiries conducted in India the authorities  had  certified  that
    the Appellant was "unmarried in India" as at the date  of  4  September
    2018. The document would only be relevant if the  Tribunal  found  that
    the decision of the panel involves the making of an error on a point of
    law and thus may be relevant to the issue of materiality.

Discussion:

18. At the conclusion of the submissions I informed the parties that I  had
    reached the conclusion that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel did not involve the making of an error on a point of law and gave
    brief reasons as to why I had reached that conclusion.




19. I now set out those reasons.


20. It was accepted by the Respondent that  the  relationship  between  the
    parties was genuine and subsisting and that they had married on 16 June
    2017. Thus, as the panel  set  out  the  sole  issue  was  whether  the
    marriage of the Appellant to the sponsor was valid. Whilst the  grounds
    assert that the panel either failed to  make  findings  on  a  material
    issue or in the alternative, had made findings that are speculative, it
    is plain from reading the decision as a whole  that  they  did  resolve
    that issue.


21. The panel properly analysed the background circumstances and reached  a
    conclusion on the issue as to whether he had been  previously  married.
    At paragraph 8, the panel recorded the evidence of the Appellant  which
    was in accordance with his witness statement, that  he  had  maintained
    (and always had maintained since it was brought  to  his  attention  in
    February 2017) that he had never been married in India  and  that  this
    was a mistake on the form completed by the agent.


22. There was no challenge to the Appellant's evidence that both he and his
    partner when interviewed in February 2007 had  been  shown  this  form.
    Therefore, the Respondent was aware of  this  information  in  February
    2017. The panel was told by the presenting officer that following  this
    a 70-day investigation took place (see paragraph 14).  Whether  or  not
    this had taken place, it was open  to  the  panel  to  infer  from  the
    chronology and the information known to the Secretary of State that  in
    their view it was inconceivable that the issue  (that  is,  whether  he
    could  marry  in  the  UK)  would  not  have  been  considered  by  the
    Respondent. As the panel found at [16) if the  Respondent  knew  at  an
    early stage that the Appellant was not free to marry,  they  could  not
    "conceive that this information would not have been passed  on  to  the
    registrar." This is not speculation, but a proper inference drawn  from
    the factual background.


23. Contrary to the submission made by Miss Everett, at paragraph [16]  the
    panel expressly recognised that the purpose of any investigation was to
    consider whether the marriage was a sham as opposed  to  the  issue  of
    whether the parties were free to marry. Therefore, the panel were aware
    of that distinction, but  it  was  open  to  the  panel  to  reach  the
    conclusion from the factual background that the Respondent had  changed
    his mind and at [17] the panel accepted that the marriage was valid.


24. Whilst the grounds refer to there being no  finding  on  the  issue  of
    whether the Appellant was free to marry or specifically in the  context
    of the Appellant's  explanation,  at  paragraph  [18]  the  panel  drew
    together the evidence and gave further consideration to the Appellant's
    account of why he did not notice the mistake on the form.  Whilst  they
    viewed that with circumspection,  they  nonetheless  concluded  overall
    that they "did not find the Appellant was ever married to Ms Kaur."  It
    is therefore plain from the concluding paragraph that having weighed in
    the  balance  the  Appellant's  explanation  when  viewed  against  the
    evidence as a whole they reached the overall finding that he  had  been
    free to marry in June 2017 and this was a valid marriage.


25. As Miss  Everett  accepted,  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  the
    Appellant to prove a negative, that is, that he was  not  married  when
    his account was that he had never been married and this was  a  mistake
    on a form. At best, the Appellant could only give an explanation as  to
    why that information had been on the form, which is what he did  before
    the FtT panel. They were entitled to believe that account  when  viewed
    against the particular factual background, including  the  Respondent's
    conduct.


26. At the start of the hearing, Mr Ahmed provided further  evidence.  This
    had not been served in accordance with the Tribunal Rules under Rule 15
    (2A) and therefore had  not  been  served  upon  the  Tribunal  or  the
    Respondent with any explanation as to its provenance and its relevance.
    The document reported to show that the Appellant had not  been  married
    in India. On the face of the document,  it  emanated  from  the  Indian
    authorities and therefore gave some support to his claim. Miss  Everett
    properly identified some evidential issues arising  from  the  document
    and  given  its  late  disclosure  the  Respondent  had  not  had   the
    opportunity to consider it further. However, given my conclusions it is
    not necessary to consider that document any further as I  have  reached
    the conclusion that the panel did not err  in  law  when  reaching  its
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law; the decision of the FtT panel to allow  the  appeal
stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 14/2/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
