
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09969/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2018                          |On 15th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                Fahrije Braha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Obhi promulgated on 31 August 2017, in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision to refuse her application  for  an  EEA  Residence
    Card as a dependent family member dated 2 August 2016 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Kosovo, born on 2 July 1954,  who  first
    came to the United Kingdom on 11 February 2015 as a family visitor.  In
    January 2016, she applied to the Respondent for an EEA  Residence  Card
    on the basis that she was financially and emotionally dependent on  her
    son, Arsim (the "Sponsor"), a Dutch national who has been  residing  in
    the United Kingdom since 2015 and with whom she lived.

 3. The Respondent refused the application  on  2  August  2016  for  three
    reasons.  First, the Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    was financially  dependent  on  the  Sponsor;  secondly,  she  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant was living with her Sponsor; and  finally,
    she did not accept that  the  Sponsor  was  a  qualified  person  under
    Regulation 6 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the "EEA Regulations").

 4. Judge Obhi dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 31  August
    2017 under the EEA Regulations.  In the findings of fact section in the
    decision, Judge Obhi refers  to  it  being  easier  to  obtain  an  EEA
    Residence Card as the dependent of a relative exercising treaty  rights
    in the United Kingdom than it is to  apply  as  the  elderly  dependent
    relative of  a  British  national  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   In
    paragraph 20 the Judge goes on to state that on an objective view,  she
    found the Appellant's motivation for moving in with  her  younger  son,
    the Sponsor, rather than remaining living with her elder son, a British
    national, was that difference between  the  application  routes  for  a
    lawful basis to remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. The Judge went on to consider the wider family circumstances, the  need
    for care and assistance and motivation behind which of the  Appellant's
    sons purchased or lived in what property.  The key conclusions are  set
    out in paragraphs 23 and 24 which it is necessary to set out in full as
    follows:

         "23. I have considered  all  the  evidence  and  I  find  that  the
         appellant is supported by both of her sons and not by  the  younger
         son alone.  I find that she has been primarily supported  by  Afrim
         Braha who appears to have an established business in  the  UK,  and
         what appears to be a successful business as he's been able to offer
         employment to his brother to enable his brother to relocate to  the
         UK as an EEA national working in the UK.  Afrim lives  in  a  small
         house in which his mother was also living, but he, with his brother
         has purchased a bigger house.  It  is  not  clear  to  me  why  the
         younger brother has moved into the bigger house - as the  needs  of
         the older brother would appear to be  greater  with  his  wife  and
         three children, than the younger brother who only has one child.  I
         find that the family are trying to present a picture in  which  the
         younger son is the one who is providing  for  their  mother  in  an
         attempt to bypass the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  which
         are more stringent than the test under the EEA Regulations.   I  am
         not satisfied that the appellant is wholly or mainly  dependent  on
         her younger son.  I accept that at the present time he provides her
         with a roof over her head, in-house  which  is  jointly  owned  and
         partly subsidised by his older brother and that his wife assists by
         taking her mother-in-law to her hospital appointments, but in  turn
         the appellant  provides  childcare  for  the  couple,  which  would
         otherwise have to be paid for to enable the younger son's  wife  to
         work.

         24.  It is impossible for me to make any findings  in  relation  to
         who is the major contributory to the support given to the appellant
         without seeing bank statements and business accounts for  both  the
         brothers over a significantly longer period of time.  Based on  the
         information that I have, and on a balance of probabilities, I  find
         that the appellant is not mainly or wholly  dependent  on  the  EEA
         national.  Betty contributes to her care but  is  in  situation  is
         supported by his British national brother."

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  correct  test  in  respect  of
    dependency, as set out in Lim v Entry Clearance Officer, Manila  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1383 and erred  in  failing  to  accept  that  this  had  been
    established despite finding that the  Appellant  was  living  with  the
    Sponsor.  It is not necessary for a  person  to  be  mainly  or  wholly
    dependent on an EEA national, the question is whether a person is being
    supported in their  essential  needs.   Secondly,  the  Judge  has,  in
    paragraph 23 of the decision, essentially found an abuse of  rights  in
    this application, but one which was not raised by the Respondent in the
    reasons for refusal letter and in any event, in such circumstances, the
    burden of proof would fall on the Respondent to  establish  it,  rather
    than on the Appellant as set out in paragraph 9 of the decision.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Simpson on 20  November  2017
    on all grounds.

 8. In  her  rule  24  response,  the  Respondent  stated  that  the  judge
    appropriately directed herself as to the issue of dependency  and  made
    findings that were open to her that the Appellant was  in  fact  mainly
    dependent on her British Citizen son  and  not  on  the  Sponsor.   The
    Respondent also accepted that the abuse of rights point was  raised  by
    the Judge but that she provided cogent reasons for  her  findings  that
    point.

 9. At the oral hearing, Ms Jones on behalf of the  Appellant  referred  to
    what she said was a clear  finding  of  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    dependent on the Sponsor due to the fact that she was  accommodated  by
    him, which stands regardless of whether  she  was  in  receipt  of  any
    contribution, directly or indirectly, from her other son.  The question
    to be answered in accordance with Lim is whether a  person's  essential
    needs are met by an EEA national and there is no requirement for an EEA
    national to mainly or wholly meet such needs.

10. Further, Ms Jones expanded upon the ground of  appeal  in  relation  to
    abuse of rights to recast this as more of a procedural  fairness  point
    which had not been raised by the Respondent in the reasons for refusal.
     In any event, it was submitted that if the  Appellant  did  choose  to
    live with the Sponsor rather than her British Citizen son, it would not
    be an abuse of rights and further for this to have been established the
    burden of proof was on the Respondent.

11. Ms Jones also sought permission to amend the  grounds  of  appeal,  for
    permission to be granted and an error of law to be  found  on  a  third
    ground of appeal.  The ground was that even if the First-tier  Tribunal
    was not satisfied that the Appellant met the requirements of Regulation
    7 of the EEA  Regulations,  it  should  have  been  considered  in  the
    alternative as to whether she satisfied the conditions as  an  extended
    family member who had been dependent on  the  Sponsor  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom and accommodated and/or financially supported by him  in
    the United Kingdom.  It was suggested that this was a Robinson  obvious
    point in all of the circumstances and in particular because  there  was
    evidence of prior money transfers.

12. In response, Ms  Aboni  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  appropriately
    directed herself and made findings  which  were  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence, also that adequate reasons were given for those findings.  It
    was stated that there had been no clear finding that there was an abuse
    of rights in this case  and  the  appeal  was  in  any  event  properly
    dismissed on the facts because there was no finding that the  Appellant
    was mainly or wholly dependent on the Sponsor.  As such  there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision.

13. The application to amend the grounds of  appeal  was  resisted  on  the
    basis that there  was  no  such  argument  put  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and it could not be an error of law not to consider it in such
    circumstances.

Findings and reasons

14. In the decision, Judge Obhi sets out the main  provisions  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, "so that  the  appeal  can  be  seen  in  context".   This
    includes a reference to the definition of family members in  Regulation
    7 but not any reference to the requirement of dependency or  what  that
    means.  The Judge does not therefore specifically direct herself as  to
    the applicable legal framework on the  specific  issue  of  dependency,
    which  is  the  only  issue  that  she  goes  on  to  determine.    The
    Respondent's submission that the Judge properly  directed  herself  can
    not be accepted when there was no such direction at all.

15. A person can fall within Regulation 7  of  the  EEA  Regulations  as  a
    family member if, under (1)(c) they are a dependent direct relative  in
    the ascending line of the EEA national, his spouse  or  civil  partner.
    There is no  further  definition  of  'dependent'  in  the  Regulations
    themselves, the meaning of  which  has  been  explained  in  case  law.
    Dependency is a factual question to be answered and has been  described
    as whether a person is provided  with  'material  support'  by  an  EEA
    national (see the  European  Court  of  Justice's  decision  in  Centre
    Publique d'Aide Social de Courcelles  v  Lebon  [1987]  ECR  2811)  and
    whether such material support is to meet their 'essential  needs'  (see
    the Court of Appeal's decision in Pedro v Secretary of State  for  Work
    and Pensions [2009] EWCA Civ 1358).  There is no need for dependence to
    be due to necessity, subject to there being  no  abuse  of  rights,  it
    could be by choice that a person does not, for example,  take  up  paid
    employment, sell property or use savings and the reason for  dependency
    does not matter (see Pedro and the analysis of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Lim).

16. The Respondent's guidance "Free Movement Rights: direct family  members
    of European Economic Area (EEA) nationals" summarises these  points  in
    relation to essential needs and proof of dependency as follows:

         Essential needs

         You must consider the following:

          .  does  the  applicant  need  financial  support  to  meet  their
            essential needs from the EEA national,  their  spouse  or  civil
            partner

          . if the  applicant  cannot  meet  their  essential  living  needs
            without the financial support of the EEA national, they must  be
            considered dependent even if they also receive financial support
            or income somewhere else.

         You do not need to consider the reasons why the applicant needs the
         financial support or whether they are able to support themselves by
         working.

         Essential  needs  include  accommodation,   utilities   and   food.
         Dependency will normally be shown by financial documents that  show
         money being sent by the sponsor to the applicant.

         If the applicant  is  receiving  financial  support  from  the  EEA
         national as well as others, they must show that  the  support  from
         the EEA national is supporting their essential needs.

         The applicant does not need to be dependent  on  the  relevant  EEA
         national to meet all or most of their essential needs.  For example
         an applicant can still be considered dependent if  they  receive  a
         pension to cover half of their essential needs and money  from  the
         relevant EEA national to cover the other half.

         Proof of dependency

         The applicant must provide proof of  their  dependency.   This  can
         include:

          . bank or building society statements

          . evidence of money transfers

          . evidence of living in the same household if applicable

          . other evidence to show their EEA  national  sponsor  has  enough
            money to support them and the applicant is reliant on  them  for
            this

         These are illustrative examples and the other documentation may  be
         provided which satisfies this requirement.

17. There is no requirement that a person is 'mainly or wholly dependent on
    the EEA national' as required by Judge Obhi  in  paragraph  24  of  the
    decision.  The application of such a requirement was an error  of  law.
    As above, an applicant only needs  to  establish  that  he  or  she  is
    receiving material support for  their  essential  needs  from  the  EEA
    national for a finding of dependency to be made.

18. Further, I find that Judge Obhi  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
    applicant was seeking to bypass the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules by presenting a picture that the Sponsor was providing  for  her,
    rather than her elder son who was a British Citizen  as  that  was  the
    easier route by which to remain in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  That
    essentially amounts to a finding that  there  is  an  abuse  of  rights
    without that point having been raised or relied upon by the Respondent,
    without any direction as to the legal test or  the  correct  burden  of
    proof (which is on the Respondent, not on the Appellant  as  it  is  to
    establish entitlement to an EEA Residence Card).  Although  the  appeal
    appears to have been dismissed on the issue of  dependency  (albeit  on
    the wrong legal test for the reasons  set  out  above),  the  abuse  of
    rights point runs through the findings of  fact  and  appears  to  have
    significantly influenced the decision, which in the circumstances is an
    error of law.  The findings of fact (paragraph 20) begin  by  reference
    to  the  different  tests  for  a  dependent  relative  under  the  EEA
    Regulations compared to the Immigration Rules and  motivation  for  the
    Appellant's  claimed  family   situation   is   questioned   repeatedly
    throughout the findings despite not being relevant to the  question  of
    dependency.

19. For these reasons,  the  making  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of a material error of law and as  such
    it is necessary to set aside the decision.

20. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to  dependency  are
    not entirely clear in the decision  under  appeal  (and  there  are  no
    findings at all on whether the EEA national is a qualified person under
    Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations which was also not accepted by  the
    Respondent).  Although it is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  being
    accommodated by the Sponsor, the logic  and  motivation  for  that  was
    questioned.  Further, there is a finding, contrary to  the  Appellant's
    case, that the accommodation is  partly  subsidised  by  the  Sponsor's
    brother, albeit no reasons are given as to why the  Sponsor's  evidence
    on this was rejected, other than  indirectly  on  the  basis  that  the
    Sponsor was previously employed by his  brother.   Further,  the  Judge
    also states that it was impossible for her to make findings as to which
    of the Appellant's sons provided the majority of  support  to  her  but
    then concludes, without further reasons,  that  the  Appellant  is  not
    mainly or wholly dependent on an EEA national.  For these reasons, this
    is not a suitable case in which the decision can be remade by the Upper
    Tribunal on the existing findings and  the  appeal  must  therefore  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal
for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]             Date     11th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
