
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09026/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                            |Promulgated                  |
|On 31st August 2018                         |On 28th September 2018       |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                tanveer ahmAd
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tinsley, instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fujiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  1  January  1972.   His
    appeal against the refusal of a  permanent  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016 was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge G C Solly on 9 April 2018.

2.   The Appellant appealed on three grounds:

    (i)  The refusal of an adjournment was unfair;


    (ii) The judge's conclusion dismissing  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
         irrational;


    (iii)    Insufficient reasons were given in respect of the  submissions
         made.



3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Jude Rintoul  on  26
    June 2018 for the following reasons: "It is just arguable  that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Solly erred in  drawing  inferences  [29]  from  an
    absence of evidence in a witness statement, as is averred. Ground II is
    therefore  arguable.  It  is  also  arguable  that  she  erred  in  not
    considering whether the sponsor had retained the status of worker,  see
    Regulation 6(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations. Whilst  there  is
    less merit in ground 1, I do not refuse permission on that ground.  The
    Appellant is strongly advised that he should be prepared  in  terms  of
    accumulating all the necessary documentation to proceed to  the  appeal
    being remade immediately if an error of law is found."


The Judge's Findings

4.   The judge made the following findings:

         "26.  On  the  basis  of  these  records  there  are  2  gaps   [in
             employment], first from 24 August 2015 to 10 February 2016 and
             second from 8 August 2016 to 5 October 2016. I am told by  the
             appellant that in the first period  Miss  Lima  Ramos  was  in
             Portugal looking after her unwell father. The  appellant  said
             she was in Lisbon looking after her father for approximately 4
             months.  She left for Portugal a few days after  finishing  at
             Phase 8.  He said that on return she had  asked  for  her  job
             back at Phase 8 and she was told that as  she  had  overstayed
             her annual leave they would see if there was  a  new  position
             available.  He could not recall when she approached Phase 8 on
             her return.  He said that she [sic] after starting work  again
             with the company she then didn't have enough working hours  at
             Phase 8. He said that before leaving Phase 8  she  got  a  job
             with Pure Collection who were linked to  Phase  8  having  the
             same parent company. He said she now  remained  in  employment
             with Pure Collection Limited. There is no documentary evidence
             to support this whether in the form  of  witness  evidence  or
             documents. Mr Tinsley  urges  me  to  accept  the  appellant's
             evidence and, in that respect then submits that the  sponsor's
             continuity of residence is  not  affected  by  application  of
             regulation 3 of the 2016 Regulations.


         27.  The Appellant's oral evidence was that his partner in  periods
             of not working was self-sufficient and he said that  no  claim
             has been made for state benefits.


         28.  I remind myself that the standard of proof is on  the  balance
             of probabilities.


         29.  I note that the oral evidence is inconsistent with the  letter
             from HMRC which shows a gap that I have identified as the  2nd
             gap before employment commenced with Pure  Collection  Limited
             and after it ended with Phase 8.  The appellant said  in  oral
             evidence that his partner had an offer  of  employment  during
             this period and elsewhere in his oral evidence that she worked
             for Pure Collection Limited whilst working  for  Phase  8.  He
             explains the 1st period by saying that she was in Portugal for
             4 months however the employment gap is nearly 6 months.  Given
             the inconsistencies I have identified between the  appellant's
             evidence in his oral evidence, between his  witness  statement
             in which he failed to mention  the  first  gap  and  his  oral
             evidence, and the record of employment provided by HMRC  I  do
             not consider on the basis of all of  the  evidence  before  me
             that I can accept the appellant's oral evidence because  there
             is no documentary evidence to support it or  evidence  in  the
             form  of  [sic]  witness  statement  from  his  partner.   The
             appellant has been aware since the date of the  RFRL  [Reasons
             for Refusal Letter] that his partners [sic] employment  record
             was a key issue and it is to be expected that  this  would  be
             dealt with.


         30.  Turning to the oral evidence before me that  the  sponsor  was
             self-sufficient during the gaps due to the  inconsistencies  I
             have identified I am not prepared to accept his oral  evidence
             in this respect.


         31.  On the balance of probabilities and on the evidence before  me
             I am not satisfied that the EEA citizen  has  been  exercising
             her treaty rights whilst residing in the UK in accordance with
             the regulations for a continuous  period  of  5  years  as  is
             required by regulation 15 (1) of the 2016 regulations."


Submissions

5.   Mr Tinsley submitted the issues were straightforward in this  case  and
    he agreed that there were two gaps in the EEA Sponsor's  employment  as
    identified by the judge at [26]. He submitted that in relation  to  the
    first gap the EEA Sponsor was in Portugal for four months looking after
    her sick father. She was out of work for six months. The judge did  not
    accept the Appellant's evidence on these points and the  reasons  given
    at [29] were not sufficient. The failure to mention the  first  gap  in
    the  Appellant's  witness  statement  was  not  an  inconsistency.  The
    Appellant's solicitors had not addressed the Appellant's  mind  to  the
    gaps in employment. He was therefore required at the hearing,  when  he
    was unaided by any records, to give oral evidence  on  the  point.  The
    judge at [29] relied on matters which were not  sufficient  to  dismiss
    the Appellant's oral evidence explaining the  nature  of  the  gaps  in
    employment. This issue arose on the day of  the  hearing  and  was  the
    reason why an adjournment was requested. Had the  significance  of  the
    gaps in employment been appreciated there would have been  more  effort
    to provide evidence  to  explain  this  gap.  The  failure  to  provide
    evidence did not affect the Appellant's credibility and the judge erred
    in making an adverse inference at [29].

6.   The judge had taken an approach which was not available to her and  her
    findings on credibility were perverse given that the Appellant was  not
    given the opportunity to  address  his  mind  to  the  gaps  in  issue.
    Further, the  judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  his  explanations  were
    inadequate. The judge should have granted an adjournment to enable  the
    Appellant's wife, the EEA Sponsor to attend.  She could have  addressed
    the  points  in  issues.  Mr  Tinsley  believed  that  the  Appellant's
    solicitors had not appreciated that the Appellant's wife should  attend
    the hearing and therefore it was unfair for the Appellant  to  have  to
    find details of matters to which he was not a party. On top of that the
    Appellant's evidence was examined  in  a  very  exacting  manner  which
    resulted in unfairness. The Appellant had supplemented his evidence-in-
    chief and had been working from a blank  canvas.   He  was  not  cross-
    examined on these points.

7.   Mr Tinsley submitted that the first gap of six months  was  covered  by
    Regulation 3.  The second gap was for a very short period of less  than
    two months and  the  EEA  citizen  would  have  completed  five  years'
    employment shortly after she left  Phase  8.   There  was  an  internal
    arrangement with Phase 8 and Pure  Collection  Limited.  This  internal
    arrangement with the EEA Sponsor's employer, when she returned from her
    trip to Portugal, was not  working  out  and  she  was  transferred  to
    another area. The evidence was led in chief and required a  finding  on
    whether she retained worker status. She  had  made  an  internal  shift
    between two companies. It was not reasonable  for  her  to  sign  as  a
    jobseeker because she had another job waiting and was able  to  support
    herself. If she had an offer of employment then she was still a worker.
    The Appellant's evidence was not genuinely inconsistent.

8.   Ms Fujiwala submitted that the judge's findings were  not  perverse  as
    submitted by the Appellant. It was clear from the reasons  for  refusal
    letter what was in issue. The Appellant had failed to provide  evidence
    to show that his EEA Sponsor was working continuously for  five  years.
    Documents were sent  to  the  Home  Office  on  26  July  2017.   These
    documents did not include letters from HMRC which were submitted in the
    Appellant's bundle dated 9 February 2018. The gaps in  employment  were
    identified in the HMRC document and therefore  the  Appellant  and  his
    representative were well-aware of the issues they had to deal with. The
    gaps in employment were apparent from the HMRC documents so could  have
    been dealt with in the Appellant's witness statement of 22 March  2018.
    The burden was on the Appellant to show that his  wife  was  exercising
    Treaty rights.

9.   The second gap was not dealt with in the Appellant's statement  or  his
    wife's statement, which was submitted for this appeal hearing  and  was
    dated 29 August 2018. The judge adequately  dealt  with  the  documents
    before her. The gaps in employment and the issue to be resolved at  the
    hearing were apparent to the Appellant and his representatives. It  was
    clear that evidence was required from the EEA  Sponsor  and  the  judge
    properly dealt with the request for an adjournment.

10.  Ms Fujiwala submitted that the EEA Sponsor had  gone  to  Portugal  six
    days before the hearing. It was unclear why it was  not  apparent  that
    she should supply evidence in support of the  appeal.  The  judge  took
    into account  the  explanation  given  but  when  contrasted  with  the
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle, which did not address  the  issues,
    it was open to the judge to find that there was  insufficient  evidence
    provided to deal with the gaps in employment.

11.   In  relation  to  the  first  gap  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's wife went to Portugal and in relation  to  the  second  gap
    there was no documentary evidence of an offer of employment before  her
    previous employment ended.  It was unclear how  the  judge  could  have
    concluded that she had retained worker status.  Regulation  3  was  not
    relevant, this concerned residence not worker status. On  the  evidence
    before the judge the Appellant's wife had not  retained  worker  status
    and she could not show that she had retained worker status even if  the
    Appellant's  account  was  accepted  in   its   entirety.   There   was
    insufficient evidence to show that the Appellant and his wife were self-
    sufficient during the gaps in employment. In order to show that she was
    self-sufficient there should have been comprehensive sickness insurance
    and there was no evidence that was in  place.  There  was  no  material
    error of law in the judge's decision and her findings were open to  her
    on the evidence before her.

12.  Mr Tinsley submitted there was unfairness at  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in the way in which the  Appellant's  evidence  was
    heard. He accepted that there was no documentary evidence  provided  to
    date  but  that  the  witness  statement  of   the   Appellant's   wife
    corroborated the account given by the Appellant before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Discussion and Conclusion

13.  Ground (i): I find that the refusal of an adjournment  has  not  caused
    unfairness in this case. The notice of hearing was sent on  4  December
    2017 stating that the appeal would be heard on 26 March 2018.  The  EEA
    Sponsor, the Appellant's wife, left  the  UK  on  20  March  2018.  The
    Appellant has had ample opportunity to submit evidence from  his  wife.
    Having been given a further opportunity  to  submit  evidence,  in  the
    grant  of  permission,  the  Appellant  has  still  failed  to   submit
    documentary evidence to show that his wife went to  Portugal  to  visit
    her sick father or  to  show  that  she  had  a  job  offer  with  Pure
    Collection Ltd prior to leaving her employment with Phase 8.

14.  Grounds (ii): The judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the  unsupported
    assertions of the Appellant given in oral evidence were insufficient to
    show that the Appellant's wife had been  exercising  Treaty  rights  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations 2016 for  a  continuous  period  of
    five years for the following reasons.

15.  Regulation 3 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2016  deals  with
    continuity of residence and states that continuity of residence is  not
    affected by periods of absence from the UK  which  do  not  exceed  six
    months in total in any year. Whilst  this  may  cover  the  Appellant's
    wife's trip to Portugal it does not deal with the fact that she was not
    employed during that period.

16.  The relevant Regulation is Regulation 6.  Regulation  6(2)  states:  "A
    person who is no longer working must continue to be treated as a worker
    provided that the person-

             (a)  is temporarily unable to work as the result of an illness
                  or accident;


             (b)  is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having
                  been employed in the United Kingdom for at least one year,
                  provided the person-


                  (i)  has registered  as  a  jobseeker  with  the  relevant
                      employment office; and


                  (ii) satisfies conditions A and B;


             (c)  is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having
                  been employed in the United  Kingdom  for  less  than  one
                  year...  [This does not apply in this case].


         (5)  Condition A is that the person-


             (a)  entered the United Kingdom in order to  seek  employment;
                  or


             (b)  is present in  the  United  Kingdom  seeking  employment,
                  immediately after enjoying a right to  reside  under  sub-
                  paragraphs (b) to  (e)  of  the  definition  of  qualified
                  person in paragraph (1) (disregarding  any  period  during
                  which worker status was retained pursuant to (b) or (c)).


         (6)  Condition B is that the person provides  evidence  of  seeking
             employment and having a genuine chance of being engaged.


         (7)  A person may not retain the status of-


             (a)  a worker under paragraph (2)(b);


             (b)  a jobseeker;


             for  longer  than  the  relevant  period   without   providing
             compelling evidence  of  continuing  to  seek  employment  and
             having a genuine chance of being engaged."

17.  The evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  that  the  EEA
    Sponsor retained worker status, was the evidence of  the  Appellant  in
    his witness statement and given orally at the hearing. It was  accepted
    that there were two gaps of employment from  August  2015  to  February
    2016, of just under six months, and from August 2016 to October 2016 of
    about two months. The explanation for the first gap  is  that  the  EEA
    Sponsor was in Portugal looking after her sick father. Whilst this does
    not affect her continuity of residence under Regulation 3, it is  quite
    clear that she ceased employment on 23 August 2015 and did not take  up
    employment again until 11 February 2016. She was  however  employed  by
    the same company. The Appellant's evidence  was  that  on  return  from
    Portugal the EEA Sponsor asked for her job back. It was  not  the  case
    that she had an offer of a job while she was in Portugal looking  after
    her sick father.  Therefore, even on the Appellant's own evidence,  her
    employment had ended prior to her departure to Portugal.

18.  The EEA Sponsor could not satisfy Regulation 6(2)  because  she  failed
    to show that she was actively seeking employment and failed to  provide
    any cogent evidence of it. It is  apparent  from  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence that she was not actively seeking employment because  she  was
    away visiting her sick father. She  does  not  come  within  Regulation
    6(2)(b) because she was not registered  as  a  jobseeker  and  she  was
    unable to satisfy conditions A or B. There was no  compelling  evidence
    of continuing to seek employment and having a genuine chance  of  being
    engaged. There was no documentary evidence  of  when  she  visited  her
    father, the date when she left the UK and returned, no  flight  tickets
    or evidence that he was in fact ill.  This was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and has not been supplied to the Upper Tribunal.

19.  In her witness statement of 29 August 2018 at  [7],  the  EEA  national
    states: "I request that my short absences from the UK for  the  purpose
    of holidays and for the attendance of my sick father, may kindly not be
    taken an issue with, as that was out of  compulsion  and  despite  that
    period of absence that was less than 6 month period". This evidence was
    insufficient to show that the  EEA  Sponsor  had  retained  the  worker
    status pursuant to Regulation 6(2). It is therefore irrelevant that the
    judge found the Appellant's evidence to  be  inconsistent  rather  than
    appreciating that the  Appellant  failed  to  mention  matters  in  his
    witness statement because, even accepting the Appellant's account given
    in oral evidence, there was insufficient evidence to show that his wife
    had retained worker status under Regulation 6(2).

20.  In relation to the second gap there was  no  evidence  whatsoever  from
    the Appellant's wife. She failed to address this in her statement of 29
    August 2018 submitted for this hearing. It was suggested that she had a
    job offer before leaving Phase 8  and  starting  employment  with  Pure
    Collection Limited. There was no documentary evidence to show that this
    was in fact  the  case.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Appellant's oral evidence was insufficient on this point  because  this
    was a matter about which there ought to have been documentary evidence,
    or at least evidence from the EEA Sponsor, and which the Appellant  has
    failed to supply to date.

21.  The judge's conclusions at [29] were not arguably perverse.  She  found
    that she could not accept the Appellant's oral evidence  because  there
    was no documentary evidence to support it and no evidence from the  EEA
    Sponsor. The judge therefore found that there was insufficient evidence
    before her to discharge the burden of proof. The relevant and necessary
    evidence was not submitted. That remains the case today. There is still
    insufficient evidence to explain the two gaps in employment. It is open
    to the Appellant to make a further application submitting the necessary
    evidence.

22.  Accordingly, there were two gaps in the  EEA  Sponsor's  employment  of
    six months and two months and the Appellant has failed to show that the
    EEA Sponsor was employed for a continuous period of five years.

23.  Ground (iii): The Appellant's skeleton  argument  was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, although  submissions  were  made  on  the  points
    referred to therein. Regulation 3  did  not  assist  the  Appellant  in
    establishing that the EEA Sponsor had retained worker  status  for  the
    reasons given above. Further, the Appellant could  not  show  that  his
    wife was self-sufficient during the gaps in  employment  because  there
    was no evidence of comprehensive sickness  insurance.  The  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for why  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  EEA
    Regulations 2016. There was no argument in relation to  Article  8  and
    permission was not granted on that basis.

24.  On the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  Appellant  failed
    to show that his wife retained worker  status  pursuant  to  Regulation
    6(2) and therefore he was  not  entitled  to  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 15.  I find that there was no error of law  in  the  judge's
    decision promulgated on 9 April 2018  and  I  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 24 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


         J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 24 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


