
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09927/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 October 2017                            |                              |
|Determination prepared 23 and 30 October 2017 |01 November 2017              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                              Mr Elhani Amrous
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Algeria born on 7 May 1980.   He  appeals
    against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Austin, who in a
    determination promulgated on  27  January  2017  dismissed  his  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant  him  a
    permanent right of residence  in  Britain  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national exercising Treaty rights.

2.   The appellant is married to a  Polish  woman,  Mrs  Krystyna  Radoslawa
    Nikodym-Amrous. He first entered Britain in 2011 with an EEA FP visa to
    join his wife and first child who was born on 27 February 2009.   On  9
    August 2011 he was issued with a residence card valid for  five  years.
    On 2 February 2016 he sought permanent residence.

3.   The appellant stated that although they  were  both  granted  residence
    permits as an EEA worker and her spouse his wife had not  worked  since
    that  permit  was  granted  in  2011  because  of   the   psychological
    difficulties that  she  had  had  due  to  a  series  of  miscarriages.
    However, he informed me that they had had two further children born  on
    9 December 2013 and 5 April 2015.  However, his wife had  not  returned
    to work because of depression and because she  was  looking  after  the
    children.  He had been the sole breadwinner.   I  was  informed  by  Mr
    Tufan that the appellant has now been granted another residence  permit
    for another period of five years.

4.   The issue before me was whether or not the judge was correct to  refuse
    his appeal against the refusal to grant him permanent  residence.   The
    judge in the determination noted  the  appellant's  arguments  and  the
    documentary evidence but considered that the documentary  evidence  was
    insufficient to show that the sponsor had been exercising Treaty rights
    during the relevant period.  Indeed, she commented that there were only
    two pieces of paper which indicated that the sponsor had given invoices
    for work as a self-employment cleaner. The judge stated that these were
    "short signed statements from  two  people"  who  had  interviewed  the
    sponsor for a cleaning job in January and February 2012 in one case and
    April and May 2012 in another.  The judge stated that there appeared to
    be an email indicating that the appellant's spouse had also sought work
    as a cleaner or an au pair in 2012 and 2013.  The judge found that  the
    evidence before her was not sufficient to indicate that the appellant's
    spouse was exercising  Treaty  rights.   Given  the  statement  of  the
    appellant before me that his wife had not worked since 2011 I  consider
    that that conclusion was fully open to the judge.

5.   The grounds of appeal referred to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    previously been granted a residence card for five years and that he had
    difficulties in obtaining  work  now  that  he  had  been  refused  the
    residence permit.  They stated that there should be no  limit  to  time
    off work for family and dependants and indeed his son's  condition  was
    such that his wife had had to stay at home to look after him.

6.   Although the application was refused in the First-tier it was  repeated
    in the Upper-tier and Judge of the Upper Tribunal Plimmer  stated  that
    she would grant permission on the basis that:-

         "Given the medical evidence available and the appellant's  spouse's
         pregnancies in 2013 and 2014/15, it is arguable that the First-tier
         Tribunal  failed  to  take  into  account  the  reasons   why   the
         appellant's spouse was unable to work from 2012 onwards and whether
         or not Regulation 6(2)(a) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
         applies."


7.   However, as I have said, I consider that the judge was fully  justified
    in finding that  the  appellant's  spouse  was  not  exercising  treaty
    rights.   Mr  Tufan  in  his  submissions  to  me   referred   to   the
    determination of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Shabani  (EEA  -  jobseekers;
    nursery education) [2013] UKUT 315 (IAC), in which reference  was  made
    to the Supreme Court's decision in Saint Prix v Secretary of State  for
    Work and Pensions [2012] UKSC 49, which indicated that a woman who  had
    left the labour market in order to look after children did  not  retain
    her status as a worker in EU  law  -  that  followed  the  decision  in
    Secretary of State for Work and Pensions v Dias [2009] EWCA Civ 807.

8.    Following  the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  I  have
    considered the       provisions of  Regulation  6  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations. I have annexed these hereto but the reality is  that
    as the  appellant's partner has not worked   since  being  granted  the
    original permit and has correctly been found not to  have  sought  work
    she  does  not qualify as either a worker or a  job  seeker.  The  fact
    that  Regulation  6(4)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations   2006
    indicates that a second-time  jobseeker  can  potentially  fall  within
    Regulation 6(4) does not, I consider,  assist  this  appellant  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case.

9.   I consider that on the facts of this case the Secretary  of  State  was
    correct to refuse the permanent residence  card  and  indeed  that  the
    decision of the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  correct.   The
    reality is that the sponsor was not working.  While I fully respect the
    decision of the appellant that it was his  responsibility  to  work  to
    look after his family the reality is that his right to work flows  from
    the fact that his wife was exercising Treaty rights.

9.   I am aware that the appellant is now able to seek  work  again,  having
    received another five year permit.

10.  It is to be hoped that at the end of the ten year period his wife  will
    also be exercising Treaty rights here.  However, in  the  circumstances
    of this case I find that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and  the  decision  to
    dismiss this appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                          Date 30 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
    Annex

Regulation 6 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006

6.-(1)   In these Regulations-
   "jobseeker" means an EEA national who satisfies  conditions  A,  B  and,
   where relevant, C;
   "qualified person" means a person who is an  EEA  national  and  in  the
   United Kingdom as-
       (a)    a jobseeker;
       (b)    a worker;
       (c)    a self-employed person;
       (d)    a self-sufficient person; or
       (e)    a student;
   "relevant period" means-
       (a)    in  the  case  of  a  person  retaining  worker  status  under
       paragraph (2)(b), a continuous period of six months;
       (b)    in the case of a jobseeker,  91  days,  minus  the  cumulative
       total of any  days  during  which  the  person  concerned  previously
       enjoyed a right to reside as a  jobseeker,  not  including  any  days
       prior to a continuous absence from the United Kingdom of at least  12
       months.
   (2)   A person who is no longer working must continue to be treated as a
   worker provided that the person-
       (a)    is temporarily unable to work as the result of an  illness  or
       accident;
       (b)    is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having been
       employed in the United Kingdom for at least one  year,  provided  the
       person-
          (i) has registered as a jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment
          office; and
          (ii)    satisfies conditions A and B;
       (c)    is in duly recorded involuntary unemployment after having been
       employed in the United Kingdom for less than one year,  provided  the
       person-
          (i) has registered as a jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment
          office; and
          (ii)    satisfies conditions A and B;
       (d)    is involuntarily unemployed and  has  embarked  on  vocational
       training; or
       (e)    has voluntarily ceased working and has embarked on  vocational
       training that is related to the person's previous employment.
   (3)   A person to whom paragraph (2)(c) applies may only  retain  worker
   status for a maximum of six months.
   (4)   A person who is no  longer  in  self-employment  continues  to  be
   treated as a self-employed person if that person is  temporarily  unable
   to engage in activities as a self-employed person as the  result  of  an
   illness or accident.
   (5)   Condition A is that the person-
       (a)    entered the United Kingdom in order to seek employment; or
       (b)     is  present  in  the  United  Kingdom   seeking   employment,
       immediately after enjoying a right to reside under sub-paragraphs (b)
       to (e) of  the  definition  of  qualified  person  in  paragraph  (1)
       (disregarding any period during  which  worker  status  was  retained
       pursuant to paragraph (2)(b) or (c)).
   (6)   Condition B is  that  the  person  provides  evidence  of  seeking
   employment and having a genuine chance of being engaged.
   (7)   A person may not retain the status of-
       (a)    a worker under paragraph (2)(b); or
       (b)    a jobseeker;
   for  longer  than  the  relevant  period  without  providing  compelling
   evidence of continuing to seek employment and having a genuine chance of
   being engaged.
   (8)   Condition C applies where the person  concerned  has,  previously,
   enjoyed a  right  to  reside  under  this  regulation  as  a  result  of
   satisfying conditions A and B-
       (a)    in the case of a  person  to  whom  paragraph  (2)(b)  or  (c)
       applied, for at least six months; or
       (b)    in the case of a jobseeker, for at least 91 days in total,
   unless the person concerned has,  since  enjoying  the  above  right  to
   reside, been continuously absent from the United Kingdom for at least 12
   months.
   (9)   Condition C is that the person has had a period  of  absence  from
   the United Kingdom.
   (10)  Where condition C applies-
       (a)    paragraph (7) does not apply; and
       (b)    condition B has effect as if "compelling" were inserted before
       "evidence".

