
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09306/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 23 January 2018                    |On 27 February 2018                  |


                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                ABENA MANSAH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         AN ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr K Siaw, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        O'Malley, promulgated  on  17  August  2017,  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's  refusal
        to grant a residence card as a dependent family member  of  an  EEA
        national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.



Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Ghana, was born on 30  September  1963.
        The appellant's son Mr Owusu resides in the United Kingdom  and  is
        in a relationship with an EEA  national  Ms  Twene,  a  citizen  of
        Austria, whom he married in a traditional ceremony in Ghana  on  24
        October  2015.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  EEA  national  is
        exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom. The appellant's son
        is now a naturalised British citizen.


     3. Having reviewed the evidence, the Judge sets out findings  of  fact
        from [37] of the decision under  challenge.  The  Judge  found  the
        witnesses credible. In relation to the marriage  between  Mr  Owusu
        and Ms Twene, upon whom the appellant is dependent, the Judge makes
        the following findings:

             "51.     Ms Twene and Mr Owusu were married in  a  traditional
                  ceremony in Ghana on 24 December  2005.  They  have  three
                  children, born on 12  October  2006,  4  October  2009  28
                  November 2014.


             52.  Whilst they refer to each other as  spouse  I  find  that
                  their marriage is a customary marriage. There is no  civil
                  marriage in Ghana or in any EU state. The  evidence  given
                  by Ms Twene is that the  marriage  is  not  recognised  in
                  Austria as she has not completed the  steps  necessary  to
                  achieve that recognition. The decision refers to Ms  Twene
                  as "your purported daughter-in-law" but does  not  clarify
                  why that prefix is used. The remainder of the decision  is
                  infected with the  error  that  the  appellant's  son  (or
                  father as he is  referred  to  in  the  decision)  is  the
                  sponsor.


             53.  There were no documents before me  to  confirm  that  the
                  respondent, or the Austrian  government,  accept  that  Mr
                  Owusu is the spouse of Ms Twene.  There were no  documents
                  included in the bundle to show that  Mr  Owusu's  previous
                  leave in the UK was as the spouse of a  qualified  person,
                  under Regulation  7,  as  opposed  to  being  someone  who
                  satisfies  Regulation   8,   having   proven   a   durable
                  relationship. This is a significant point in  this  appeal
                  and the burden is on the appellant.


             54.  Mr Owusu was not present to give evidence.  There  was  a
                  witness statement from him, which refers to  Ms  Twene  as
                  his wife but gives no clarification of the  basis  of  his
                  stay in the UK or of the decision made after his appeal.


             55.  I accept that there has been a hearing in the  First-tier
                  Tribunal relating to  Mr  Owusu's  entitlement  to  remain
                  under the  EEA  Regulations  which  was  successful.  That
                  decision was not before me. I understand  that  there  has
                  also been a previous application for this appellant  which
                  was not successful. Again, I do not have that  information
                  before me.


             56.  On the  basis  of  the  evidence  before  me,  I  am  not
                  satisfied that Mr Owusau is recognised in  Austria  or  in
                  the UK as the spouse of Ms Twene.   I  am  satisfied  that
                  they  would  be  recognised  as   being   in   a   durable
                  relationship.  They  are  not  in  a   civil   partnership
                  therefore the appellant is not a relative in the ascending
                  line of the spouse of the qualifying person.


             57.  On the basis of that finding her appeal must fail."

     4. The Judge considered, in the alternative, whether the appellant  is
        a dependent relative within regulation 7 and found such  dependency
        to be proved although repeated the conclusion that, as a result  of
        the  findings  in  relation  to  the   relationship   between   the
        appellant's son and the EEA national sponsor, the appellant did not
        satisfy regulation 7 (1)(c).


     5. In relation to arguments  advance  before  the  Judge  pursuant  to
        regulation 8, the Judge relied  upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC)
        and the finding there was no statutory right of  appeal  against  a
        decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a residence  permit
        to a person claiming to be an extended family member. Whilst it  is
        acknowledged this finding is  itself  infected  by  arguable  legal
        error following the decision of the Court of Appeal in Khan  [2017]
        EWCA Civ 1755 there is no need to comment further upon this  aspect
        of the decision in light of our primary finding below.


     6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable the Judge's  approach  as  to  whether  the  EEA  national
        sponsor had entered into a marriage with the appellant's  son  that
        was valid under Ghanaian law, and thus one that was  recognised  as
        valid under English law, was flawed and, arguably, that the judge's
        approach to the question of whether  the  appellant  was  a  family
        member of the EEA national was therefore flawed.


     7. The respondent filed a rule 24 response dated  26  September  2017,
        paragraph 4 of which is in the following terms:

             "... The Respondent does  accept  that  on  the  face  of  the
             evidence the Appellant's  grounds  are  arguable  but  without
             further documents the error cannot be conceded."


Discussion



     8. Mr Wilding was asked  to  confirm  exactly  what  the  respondent's
        position was in light of the potential ambiguity in [4] of the rule
        24 response.


     9.  Mr  Wilding  confirmed  that  the  only  issue  was  whether   the
        appellant's son was validly married to an EEA  national  exercising
        treaty rights. The son had,  following  earlier  proceedings,  been
        granted a permanent residence card on the basis of his relationship
        with the EEA national. In light of  the  findings  in  relation  to
        other issues, all of which fall in the appellant's favour,  it  was
        submitted the proceedings were now academic.


    10. Whilst accepting the Judge may have determined this  issue  on  the
        basis of the law as it was understood at the date  of  the  hearing
        before the First-tier Tribunal, we find the Judge erred in law in a
        manner material to the decision to dismiss the appeal. The  correct
        approach when assessing a marriage issue is that set  down  by  the
        Court of Appeal in Awuku [2017] EWCA Civ 178.   In  that  case  the
        Court of Appeal held that Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law)  [2014]
        UKUT 24 had been wrongly decided and that the law  of  England  and
        Wales recognised proxy marriage if valid by the law of the place of
        celebration and so the spouse of an EU national who  has  concluded
        such a marriage will qualify as a family member within Article 2 of
        the Directive.


    11. In light of Mr Wilding not raising any issue  with  regard  to  the
        validity of the Ghanaian  marriage,  and  in  light  of  the  other
        positive findings made by the Judge, we set  the  decision  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal  aside  with  all  findings  other  than  those
        relating to the validity of the marriage, based upon  it  not  been
        recognised in Austria, being preserved findings.


    12. We  substitute  a  decision  allowing  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
        Regulations.


Decision

    13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
        the judge's decision. We  re-make  the  decision  as  follows.  The
        appeal is allowed.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        We make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24 January 2018

