
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09205/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 08 February 2019                |On: 05 March 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               tetteh agbleze
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Lanlehin, instructed by JF Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a national of Ghana born on 10 December 1981,  appeals,  with
permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  his
appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  to  issue  him  with  a
permanent residence card under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations"), on the basis of having retained  a
right of residence as the former spouse of an EEA national.

The respondent, in his decision of 20 August 2017 refusing the  application,
accepted that the appellant's marriage had lasted over three years and  that
he and his ex-spouse had lived together whilst married for over  a  year  in
the UK, accepted  that  the  appellant's  ex-spouse  was  exercising  treaty
rights at the time of the divorce and accepted that the appellant  had  been
in employment since before the date of the divorce. However  the  respondent
noted that the appellant had not provided evidence of his EEA sponsor's  EEA
ID as required and therefore did not accept that he had a retained right  of
residence following his divorce.

The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal was heard in the  First-
tier Tribunal by Judge Courtney  on  17  August  2018  and  dismissed  in  a
decision promulgated on 23 August 2018. Judge  Courtney  accepted  that  the
identification requirements were met and that the appellant had  retained  a
right of residence on divorce. However the judge did  not  accept  that  the
appellant had shown that he had acquired a  permanent  right  of  residence.
She noted that there had been a breach in the continuity  of  the  sponsor's
employment prior to 2 April 2012  and  therefore  considered  the  five-year
period from 2 April 2012 until 17 August 2018, the date of the hearing.  The
judge noted that the documentation referred to in  the  covering  letter  to
the appellant's application  had  not  been  included  in  the  respondent's
bundle and that there was a significant gap in the  evidence.  There  was  a
gap in the evidence for the appellant's  ex-spouse  from  April  2010  until
April 2013. The evidence for  the  appellant's  employment  related  to  the
period up until 7 April 2017.  On  that  basis  the  judge  found  that  the
appellant did not meet the requirements of regulation 15(1)(f)  of  the  EEA
Regulations and dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought, and  granted,  on  the  basis
that the judge ought to have considered whether the appellant  was  entitled
to a residence card on the accepted basis that he had a  retained  right  of
residence.

At the appeal hearing before me, Mr  Jarvis  accepted  that  the  judge  had
failed to consider relevant matters  including  whether  the  appellant  was
entitled to a residence card on the basis of retained rights  after  divorce
proceedings. In light of his concession I accepted that the judge had  erred
in law and set aside her decision. It was accepted that I was  able  to  re-
make the decision on the evidence available.

The appellant had produced further  evidence  consisting  of  copy  payslips
from ISS UK Ltd from  15  May  2017  until  9  February  2018  and  original
payslips from ABM (the same company with a change of name) from 16  February
2018 to 10 August 2018.  Mr Jarvis  said  that  he  did  not  challenge  the
reliability of the evidence. He accepted  that,  in  light  of  the  judge's
findings  at  [19]  about  the  evidence  available  in  relation   to   the
appellant's ex-spouse's employment and the  evidence  before  the  judge  as
listed at [19] relating to the appellant's  employment,  together  with  the
payslips currently produced, there was sufficient evidence to show that  the
appellant had achieved a permanent right of residence and the  appeal  could
be allowed.

In light of Mr  Jarvis's  helpful  concession,  I  allowed  the  appellant's
appeal. The appellant had produced sufficient evidence to show that  he  had
acquired a right of permanent residence card on  the  basis  of  a  retained
right of residence. He is entitled to a permanent resident card.


DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations on  the  basis  of
his entitlement to a permanent residence card.

Signed:[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 12
February 2019
