
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09440/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 1st November 2018                 |On 13th November 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                              MR AKHTAR HUSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, of Counsel, instructed by M & K
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Pakistani national.   On 4th May 2007 he applied  as
    a non-EEA national for  a  permanent  residence  card  under  the  2016
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations.

2.   The application was refused by a decision on 13th November 2017 on  the
    basis that the appellant had failed to  provide  a  valid  passport  or
    national identity document as evidence of his sponsor's identity and as
    such did not meet the requirements of Regulation 21(5).

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against the decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow for hearing on 5th June 2018.

4.   The issue for the appeal was whether the appellant  could  produce  the
    valid national identity card or passport of the sponsor or could  prove
    to the civil standard that he could not comply with the requirement  to
    produce her  valid  national  identity  card  or  passport  because  of
    circumstances beyond his control.

5.   The appeal was dismissed.

6.   The appellant sought to appeal against the decision, permission  to  do
    so to the Upper Tribunal was granted.

7.   Thus the matter comes before me to determine the issues as to error  of
    law.

8.   The appeal is twofold, firstly it is said  that  the  Judge  applied  a
    strict  interpretation  beyond  that  which  the  Regulations  require.
    Secondly that the Judge failed properly to look at  the  evidence  that
    was adduced on behalf of the appellant to discharge the burden.

9.   In terms  of  the  narrow  approach  taken  to  the  2016  Regulations,
    reliance is placed upon paragraph 14 of the determination.  It is  said
    that the Judge failed to read Regulations 21(5) and (6) in the light of
    Regulation 42 of the same Regulations.  Such provides as follows:-

         "(1)  Subject  to  paragraph  (2)  where  the  provision  of  these
             Regulations requires a person  to  hold  or  produce  a  valid
             national identity card issued by  an  EEA  State  or  a  valid
             passport,  the  Secretary  of  State  may  accept  alternative
             evidence of identity  and  nationality  where  the  person  is
             unable to obtain or produce the required documentation due  to
             circumstances beyond the person's control".

10.  In fairness to the Judge, however, the appeal proceeded  on  the  basis
    that the appellant had adduced sufficient  evidence  to  discharge  his
    burden of showing that he was unable in the  circumstances  beyond  his
    control to provide the documentation which was required.

11.  It was the case on behalf of the appellant that he  had  contacted  his
    former spouse by email in May of 2018 and had received a reply from her
    on 2nd June  2018  categorically  refusing  to  provide  him  with  her
    identity documents.

12.  Although reference is made in paragraph 17  to  that  email  chain,  no
    regard is thereafter had to it in  the  assessment  of  evidence.   The
    Judge noted that the appellant had  not  adduced  evidence  from  Ahmed
    Rashid which  could  have  corroborated  his  attempts  to  obtain  the
    documents.  It is said that a statement from Imran Choudhury could have
    corroborated the email address.

13.  It is difficult to understand why such  evidence  was  required,  given
    the emails that were presented, indeed which I have  seen.   Criticisms
    were made of the appellant that he had failed to apply pursuant to Rule
    15(1)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 for Renata Chudacikova  to  produce  her
    passport or valid identity card.

14.  The Judge therefore concluded that there was insufficient  evidence  to
    support the appellant's contention.

15.  It was contended that it was unreasonable for the Judge to  apply  such
    a strict interpretation to matters and  to  expect  corroboration  from
    evidence that had been presented by the appellant  when  the  issue  of
    credibility had not been specifically challenged.  It is said  that  no
    balanced approach had been made or  any  assessment  given  as  to  the
    emails that had been presented.

16.  Both parties were in agreement that such matters  as  were  raised  did
    amount to an error of law, particularly  as  to  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings.

17.  In the circumstances I invited to set aside the decision  and  to  send
    it back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  in  accordance  with
    the Senior President's Practice Directions.  This I do.

18.  It is of course for the appellant to adduce cogent evidence as  to  his
    attempts to obtain the document at the next hearing.  I note  in  terms
    of the email chain that notwithstanding that the decision was  November
    2017, little would seem to be done by him to contact his former partner
    until very shortly before  the  hearing.   It  was  said  that  he  was
    unrepresented.  He was now represented and it may be that attempts  can
    be made to contact his ex-wife in order  to  seek  her  cooperation  to
    produce her identity card or indeed to present it to the solicitors  in
    such a way that a copy can be made certified as  a  true  copy  of  the
    original.

Notice of Decision

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  should  be  set  aside  to  be
    remade by the First-tier Tribunal upon a  re-hearing  on  all  relevant
    issues.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed            [pic]                      Date 7th Nov 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
