
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/09012/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 March 2018                           |  On 29 March 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MRS TETIANA NAUMOVA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hawkin, Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State and the respondent
    is Ms Naumova.  However for the purposes of this decision and reasons I
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, where
    Ms Naumova was the appellant.

 2. Ms Naumova is a citizen of the Ukraine born on 18 September 1976.   She
    was previously granted an EEA family permit on  29  July  2015  as  the
    family member of an EEA national.  However the appellant's spouse  died
    on 3 December 2015 (and no further application had  been  submitted  by
    that stage).  The appellant submitted an  application  for  a  retained
    right of residence under Regulation 10  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (EEA  Regulations).   The  respondent
    refused that application on the  basis  that  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had resided in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations for at least one year prior to the death of her EEA spouse.
     In a decision and reasons promulgated on 1 August 2017, Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal S Meah allowed the appellant's appeal.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  appeals  with  permission  on  the  following
    grounds:

      1)  The  judge  arguably  made  a  material  error  of  law   in   his
         interpretation of Regulation 10(2)(b) as the appellant was  married
         to her EEA spouse for less than eight months  from  25  April  2015
         until his death on 3 December 2015.

      2) Although this falls short of the one  year  requirement  the  judge
         went on to find that the appellant had resided in  accordance  with
         the EEA Regulations.  It was submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in
         accepting  that  the  appellant  resided  in  accordance  with  the
         Regulations prior to her marriage and in further finding  that  the
         appellant was in a durable relationship prior to her  marriage  and
         therefore would have been "deemed to be an extended family member".



Error of law discussion

 4. Ms Everett relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that, contrary
    to the appellant's Rule 24 response, the  Presenting  Officer  had  not
    made a concession that the appellant and her spouse were in  a  durable
    relationship where the appellant was residing in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations and was an extended family member  prior  to  the  couple's
    marriage.   In  any  event  she  submitted  that  if  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had made such a concession it was wrong in  law  and
    the Presenting Officer was unable to concede that the  EEA  Regulations
    said something when they clearly did not.  She further  submitted  that
    it is clear from the case law in this area that extended family members
    are different from family members, not least given recent jurisprudence
    (Sala (EFMs: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) and Khan  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755). It  was  her  submission  that  extended  family
    members do not have the same declaratory  rights  that  family  members
    have under the EEA Regulations; a discretion is given to the respondent
    in relation to extended family members.  It was her further  submission
    that there was nothing in either the Directive or the  EEA  Regulations
    to suggest that the provisions on  extended  family  members  had  been
    wrongly implemented by the respondent.  Although Ms Everett  considered
    there were no credibility issues in this case  it  was  her  submission
    that the law was clear.

 5. Mr Hawkin relied on his Rule 24 response.  The facts of this  case  are
    not disputed.  Ms Naumova is a citizen  of  the  Ukraine  who  met  her
    future husband, Mr Horst Friedrich Kiessling, a citizen of Germany,  on
    21 September 2013.  They  commenced  a  relationship  and  subsequently
    began cohabiting on 2 February 2014.  The couple married  on  25  April
    2015 and the appellant was issued with an EEA family permit valid until
    29 January 2016, on 29 July 2015.  On 3 December 2015  the  appellant's
    husband died, suddenly.  The appellant made her application for an  EEA
    residence card on the basis of having a retained right of residence, on
    26 January 2016.

 6. It was Mr Hawkin's submission  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not contain any  material  errors  of  law  and  that  the
    Secretary of State's grounds were no more than a disagreement with  the
    findings  and  conclusions.   It  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  respondent  had
    retained her right of residence for the reasons given at  [21]-[26]  in
    light of the submissions the judge had heard and Mr Hawkin relied on Ms
    Naumova's witness statement and her 496-page bundle  and  the  skeleton
    argument produced for the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Mr Hawkin relied on the fact that the Secretary of  State  accepted  Ms
    Naumova's credibility and the evidence regarding her  relationship  and
    that the judge noted that the Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the
    respondent had resided in accordance with the  EEA  Regulations  having
    been in a "durable relationship with her late  spouse  since  September
    2013".  The judge went on to note at [23] that the Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the respondent was an extended family member prior to her
    marriage.  It was argued that the Secretary  of  State  should  not  be
    allowed to rely on Regulation 7(3) and Regulation  17(4)  as  this  was
    contrary to the  way  the  appeal  was  argued  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision on error of law

 8. The relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations are as follows:

    Family member, Regulation 7

         ....

         "7(3)     Subject to paragraph (4), a person  who  is  an  extended
         family member and has been issued with  an  EEA  family  permit,  a
         registration certificate or a residence card shall  be  treated  as
         the family member of the relevant EEA national for as  long  as  he
         continues to satisfy the conditions in regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or
         (5) in relation to that EEA national and the permit, certificate or
         card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked. "

    Extended Family Member, Regulation 8:

         "8-(1)   In these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
               person who is not a family member of an EEA  national  under
               regulation  7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  the
               conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         ...

             (5)  A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if  the
               person is the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil
               partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is in a
               durable relationship with the EEA national."

    "A family member who has retained the right of residence"

         10-(1)   In these Regulations, 'family member who has retained  the
               right of residence' means, subject to paragraph (8) a person
               who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3),  (4)  or
               (5).

              (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if -

                (a)  He was a family member of a qualified person or  of  an
                    EEA national with a permanent right  of  residence  when
                    that person died;

                (b)    he resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance  with
                    these Regulations for  at  least  the  year  immediately
                    before the death of the  qualified  person  or  the  EEA
                    national with a permanent right of residence; and

                (c)    he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).

           (3)    A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -

                (a)    he is a direct descendant of -

                    (i)    a qualified person who has died;

                    (ii)   a person who ceased to be a qualified  person  on
                        ceasing to reside in the United Kingdom; or

                    (iii)  the person who was the spouse or civil partner of
                        the qualified person mentioned in subparagraph  (i)
                        when he died or is the spouse or civil  partner  of
                        the person mentioned in subparagraph (ii); and

                (b)    he was attending an educational course in the  United
                    Kingdom immediately before the qualified person died  or
                    ceased to be a qualified person and continues to  attend
                    such a course.

           (4)    A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the
                person is the parent with actual  custody  of  a  child  who
                satisfies the conditions in paragraph (3).

           ....

           (6)    The condition in this paragraph is that the person

                (a)    is not an EEA national but would, if he were  an  EEA
                    national be a worker, a self-employed person or a  self-
                    sufficient person under Regulation (6); or

                (b)    is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                    paragraph (a).

           ...".

         "Regulation 17 - Issue of residence card:

         17-(4)   The Secretary of State may issue a residence  card  to  an
                extended family member a person who is not an  EEA  national
                and is the family member not falling within regulation  7(3)
                who is not an EEA national on application if -

                (a)    the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended
                    family member is a qualified person or an  EEA  national
                    with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15;
                    and

                (b)    in all the circumstances it appears to the  Secretary
                    of State appropriate to issue the residence card."

 9. Although there was some discussion as to whether a concession had  been
    made before the First-tier Tribunal I am not persuaded that this is the
    case, particularly as the judge records, at [17] of  the  decision  and
    reasons, that the Presenting Officer argued that  the  appellant  could
    not show at the time  of  her  application  that  she  had  resided  in
    accordance with the EEA Regulations for at  least  a  year  immediately
    prior to the death of the qualified person, namely her spouse.  This is
    reflected in the Record of Proceedings where the judge notes  that  the
    Presenting Officer relied  on  the  refusal  and  reiterated  that  the
    appellant had become a family member when she had married and "extended
    family member was not included".  Even if that were not  the  case  the
    Presenting Officer had no power to concede this matter, given  that  it
    was founded on an error of law.

10. I am satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  his
    interpretation of the EEA Regulations.  In order for the  appellant  to
    have resided in accordance  with  the  EEA  Regulations  prior  to  her
    marriage (and thus be entitled to a derivative right of residence)  she
    needed to establish that she was an extended family member prior to her
    marriage.  As noted above, an extended family member is someone who  is
    not a family member, which she was not at that point, and who satisfied
    the conditions in Regulations 8(2), (3), (4) or (5), the  latter  being
    the relevant provision for the appellant.  To satisfy the condition  in
    that paragraph the person must be the partner of an EEA national, which
    I accept that she was, and "can prove to the decision maker that she is
    in a durable relationship with the EEA national."

11. I take into account that in extended family member cases it is  settled
    law that the Regulations include a discretion to  the  respondent  with
    regards to whether or not a residence card is issued  under  Regulation
    17(4). (see YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper  approach)  Ivory  Coast  [2008]
    UKAIT 00062).  Unlike therefore, the position of a family member, which
    the appellant subsequently became  upon  her  marriage,  the  appellant
    could not be said to be residing in  accordance  with  the  Regulations
    unless and until the respondent issued a residence  card  and  such  an
    application was not made.

12. I accept that although the judge might have been in a position to  find
    that the appellant and her partner  were  in  a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage at the relevant time that does not assist the appellant as she
    had not taken the further  step  of  having  asked  the  respondent  to
    exercise her discretion and issue her with a residence card which would
    have meant that she was  then  residing  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    Regulations.

13. I do therefore find an error of law and I set the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal aside.  Although Mr Hawkin submitted that if  I  was  not
    with the appellant further submissions and/or a reference  to  the  ECJ
    would be required on remaking,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  either  is
    required.

Remaking the decision

14. Although I accept  that  the  appellant  and  her  partner  were  in  a
    relationship prior to their marriage (although  she  appeared  to  have
    only entered the UK as a visitor prior to their  marriage)  it  is  not
    disputed that the couple did not marry until 25 April 2015 (in the UK).
     The appellant then returned to the Ukraine and was issued with an  EEA
    family permit on 29 July 2015, re-entering the UK  on  4  August  2015.
    Her husband passed away on 3 December 2015.  The  earliest  point  when
    the appellant could have been said to have been residing in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations was 25  April  2015  (there  was  no  argument
    before me that the date may in effect have been  4  August  2015  given
    that the appellant left the UK after her marriage before  returning  on
    an EEA family permit; I  need  not  resolve  this  question  as  it  is
    ultimately immaterial given the facts in this case).

15. I rely on my reasoning above,  that  prior  to  her  marriage,  in  the
    absence of any application to the respondent, the appellant was not  an
    extended family member for the purposes of the EEA Regulations prior to
    her marriage and therefore  could  not  be  said  to  have  resided  in
    accordance with those Regulations prior to 25 April 2015.

16. The appellant cannot therefore  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    10(2)(b) of the EEA Regulations as she did  not  reside  in  accordance
    with the Regulations for at least the year  before  the  death  of  the
    qualified person (in December 2015), for the reasons I have given.

17. Ms Everett relied on the EEA Regulations and submitted that  there  was
    nothing to suggest that the Directive had not been properly transposed.
    The  EEA  Regulations  transposed  the  provisions  of   the   Citizens
    Directive, Directive 2004/38/EC.  Article 3, beneficiaries provides  as
    follows:

         "1.  This Directive shall apply to all union citizens who  move  to
             or reside in a Member State other than that of which they  are
             a national, and to their family members as defined in point  2
             of Article 2 who accompany or join them.

         2.   Without prejudice to any right to free movement and  residence
             the persons concerned may have in their own  right,  the  host
             Member  State  shall,  in   accordance   with   its   national
             legislation, facilitate entry and residence for the  following
             persons:

             (a)   any  other  family  members,   irrespective   of   their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the  country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants of family members of the household of
                  the union citizen having the primary right  of  residence,
                  or where  serious  health  grounds  strictly  require  the
                  personal care of the family member by the Union citizen;

             (b)  the partner with whom the Union  citizen  has  a  durable
                  relationship, duly attested;

             The host Member State shall undertake extensive examination of
             the personal circumstances and shall  justify  any  denial  of
             entry or residence to these people."

18. Article 12 contains the provisions in  relation  to  retention  of  the
    right of residence by family members in the event of death or departure
    of the Union citizens.

19. I accept Ms Everett's submission that  it  has  not  been  demonstrated
    there is any error identified in the transposing of the relevant  parts
    of the Directive  in  relation  extended  family  members  and  to  the
    retained right of residence.

20. In addition to the Rule 24 response, at the hearing Mr Hawkin relied on
    the judgment of the ECJ in Netherlands v Reid Case  59/85  [1986].   Mr
    Hawkin further relied on Appendix FM, bereaved partner, section  BPILR.
    He submitted that the only requirements in cases of partners of British
    citizens, where  a  bereavement  was  suffered,  were  eligibility  and
    suitability, the suitability requirements relating to conduct  such  as
    criminal offences etc. which did not apply in this case and eligibility
    required only that the applicant must have had  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain as a partner of a British citizen or a person settled in the  UK
    or a bereaved partner and that their partner must have  died  and  that
    the relationship was genuine and subsisting with the intention to  live
    permanently in the UK.  He submitted that this was  much  less  onerous
    than the requirements of the EEA Regulations.  He relied on the  answer
    to the questions referred to the ECJ in Reid as follows:

         "Article 7 of the Treaty, in conjunction with  Article  48  of  the
         Treaty  and  Article  7(2)  of  Regulation  No.  1612/68  must   be
         interpreted as meaning  that  a  Member  State  which  permits  the
         unmarried companions of  its  nationals,  who  are  not  themselves
         nations of that Member State, to reside  in  its  territory  cannot
         refuse to grant the same  advantage  to  migrant  workers  who  are
         nationals of other Member States."

21. I am not persuaded that Reid is authority for Mr  Hawkin's  proposition
    in the appellant's case.  The respondent does indeed make provision for
    the unmarried partners of EEA nationals in the form of the relevant EEA
    Regulations.  Although Mr Hawkin's relied on BPILR under  Appendix  FM,
    as indicated that requires the partner of a British or  settled  person
    to already have a grant of leave to remain in the UK as a partner (or a
    bereaved partner).

22. To obtain leave to remain as a partner of a British or  settled  person
    an applicant must meet criteria which in themselves have arguably  much
    more onerous requirements (rather than less) than those which  must  be
    met by the partner of an EEA national seeking  to  remain  in  the  UK.
    Given that threshhold, of existing leave under the Immigration Rules in
    one of the specified categories, which a  bereaved  partner  must  meet
    under the Immigration Rules, Mr Hawkin's submission that the  appellant
    is not being given the same  advantage  as  a  bereaved  partner  of  a
    British  citizen,  is  misconceived.  It  has  not  been   demonstrated
    therefore that the Secretary of State is refusing  to  grant  the  same
    advantage to migrant workers as to British citizens,  with  respect  to
    bereaved partners.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it is set aside.  I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's
    appeal.

No anonymity direction was sought or is appropriate in this  case  and  none
is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal of the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed  and
no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

