
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ea/09316/2017
                                                               ea/09317/2017
                                                               ea/09318/2017
                                                             & ea/09319/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2018                             |On 7 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

     Muhammad [h] First Appellant
     zahra [h]    Second Appellant
     [M Z k]  Third Appellant
     [M A k]  Fourth Appellant
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by ATM Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing, for want of jurisdiction, an appeal against the decision of
    the Secretary of State to refuse the  appellants'  Residence  Cards  as
    extended family members of an EEA national.

 2. The appellants are all citizens of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  was
    born in 1973.  The second appellant is his wife.  She was born in 1986.
     The third and fourth appellants are their minor children.   They  were
    born in 2008 and 2013 respectively.

 3. I begin by considering carefully the Secretary of State's decision.  It
    acknowledges that the Secretary of State was dealing with the  decision
    refusing the applicants' Residence Cards as extended family members  of
    an EAA national.

 4. Essentially it is the appellants' case that the first appellant is  the
    paternal first cousin of one Wagar Ali Syed  who  is  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom and the appellants lived
    together with Mr Syed in his household in  Germany  between  the  years
    2000 and 2003 and were dependent upon him financially while he  was  in
    Germany.  They continue to be a member of his household in  the  United
    Kingdom and continue to be dependent on him.

 5. According to the refusal letter dated 17 February 2017  the  respondent
    did not accept that the appellants were members of the extended  family
    of the  EEA  national.   In  particular  the  birth  certificates  were
    unsatisfactory because they did not purport to identify  the  sponsor's
    mother who was said to be the cousin of the appellants.   Further,  the
    respondent was dissatisfied with the evidence of financial  dependency.
    The respondent  said  the  evidence  did  not  go  beyond  evidence  of
    financial support which is rather less than dependency and it  did  not
    show that the appellants were indeed  the  tenants  of  the  home  they
    claimed to share with their sponsor.  As I understand the  respondent's
    letter it criticises the  adequacy  rather  than  the  honesty  of  the
    evidence relied upon.  However, it asserts emphatically that "you  have
    no right of appeal against this decision" and states in the penultimate
    paragraph that the application has been "assessed on the basis  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that there was a  right
    of appeal and asked for representations.  The judge considered not  the
    2006 Regulations on which the Secretary of State purported to make  the
    decision but the 2016 Regulations.   It  is  clear  from  Regulation  2
    (general interpretation) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016 that an EEA decision does not include the "issue of an
    EEA family permit to an extended family member".

 7. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal (not  drawn  by  Ms  Iqbal)
    rather missed the point.  They say, wrongly, that the judge applied the
    2006 Regulations but that is based on a misreading of paragraphs 27 and
    28 of the judge's decision where the judge was analysing the  Secretary
    of State's reasons.  The important thing is not  when  the  application
    was made but when it was decided and it was decided on  17  March  2017
    when the 2016 Regulations were clearly in force.  The grounds  then  go
    on to say that there has to be an appealable decision because  that  it
    is the effect of the decision of the Court of Justice of European Union
    in SSHD v Banger [2017] UKUT 125.  In fact the decision in  Banger,  as
    the grounds recognise,  had  not  then  been  given  but  the  Advocate
    General's opinion was available.

 8. It is quite clear that this in  fact  is  a  decision  under  the  2016
    Regulations and there is no right of appeal.  It follows therefore that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  right  to  say  there   was   no
    jurisdiction, even if the reasoning might have got a little  warped  at
    some point.  Any error is wholly immaterial.

 9. In fact, the Immigration (European Economic Area Nationals)  (EU  Exit)
    Regulations  2019  do  provide  for  a  right  of   appeal   in   these
    circumstances and I think  that  the  appellants  could  make  a  fresh
    application better prepared and have a right of appeal in the event  of
    it being refused, but that is only a view  and  my  decision  does  not
    depend on it.  However, it is something about which they  want  to  get
    proper advice.

Notice of Decision

In the circumstances the judge's findings on the merits of  the  claim  are
irrelevant and I dismiss these appeals against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 May 2019                     |



