
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
EA/09242/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 26 March 2018                        |On 10 April 2018              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 TOUFIK RAIB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
            and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells (counsel) instructed by M & K Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Lodge promulgated on 15  August  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal against the respondent's refuse to issue confirmation  of
a  permanent  right  to  reside  in  the  UK  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
Regulations 2006.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 18 April 1979 and is a national of Algeria.  On
18 July 2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's application  for
confirmation of a permanent right to reside in the UK under the  Immigration
(EEA) Regulations 2006.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Lodge ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 31 January 2018  Judge  Keane
gave permission to appeal stating

      The appellant applied, in time, for permission to appeal  against  the
      decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lodge promulgated  on  15
      August 2017  in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.  The  grounds  disclose  arguable
      errors of law but for which the outcome of the appeal might have  been
      different. First, on a fair construction of the  respondent's  reasons
      for refusal letter dated 20 July 2016 (page 1  of  4)  the  respondent
      made an unequivocal  concession  that  the  appellant's  EEA  national
      sponsor was employed for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years,  the
      respondent did not withdraw the concession at the hearing,  the  Judge
      found at paragraph 17 of his decision that he was not  satisfied  that
      the sponsor was continuously exercising treaty rights in  the  UK  for
      the period of five years and the Judge, by not alerting the  appellant
      to his finding that he was to resile from the respondent's unequivocal
      concession, arguably acted unfairly. The arguable unfairness  arguably
      made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal. Secondly,  in
      relying upon the sponsor's arguably low earnings for the period of  12
      months ending in April 2012 in support of a finding that the sponsor's
      work should be regarded "as purely marginal and ancillary"  (paragraph
      21 of the Judge's decision) the Judge arguably  applied  an  incorrect
      test. By reason of propositions established in  authorities  to  which
      reference was made in the grounds the correct test,  which  the  Judge
      arguably did not apply, was whether the work  which  the  sponsor  was
      doing was "genuine and effective". The Judge's arguable error  of  law
      was made more profound by the Judge's finding at paragraph 21  of  his
      decision that the sponsor's employer, "... Must have had some economic
      value from her [the sponsor's]  employment...".  The  application  for
      permission is granted.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Mr Wells moved the grounds of appeal. He  told  me
that the respondent's decision contains a concession that the  EEA  national
sponsor worked continuously for five years, but at [17] and [18]  the  Judge
goes behind that concession to make his own findings that for  the  17-month
period between 2011 and 2012 the EEA sponsor was not working. Mr Wells  told
me that that finding creates procedural  unfairness  because  the  appellant
was deprived of the opportunity of addressing that matter. He told  me  that
the finding is material because it forms  the  foundation  for  the  Judge's
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

(b) Mr Wells reminded me that at [18] the Judge acknowledges  that  he  goes
behind a clear concession form which the  appellant  benefits.  He  told  me
that at [21] the Judge  makes  contradictory  findings,  because  the  Judge
finds that the sponsor's earnings were so low that her  employment  must  be
regarded as marginal and ancillary, but in the  same  paragraph  he  accepts
that the sponsor's employment has economic value. He relied on the  case  of
Levin v the Secretary  of  State  for  Justice  [1982]  ECR  1035;  Kempf  v
Stasteertaribn Van Justitie [1986] ECR  1741  and  Begum  (EEA  -  worker  -
Jobseeker) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00275 (IAC).

(c) Mr Wells urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision,  promulgated
on 15 August 2017, aside. He asked me to remit this case to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be decided of new.

6. (a) For the appellant, Mr  Bramble  accepted  that  the  Judge  has  gone
behind a concession which the Secretary of State made and did not  withdraw,
but told me that the  focus  of  the  decision  was  on  the  EEA  sponsor's
earnings. He told me that the EEA sponsor's earnings  fell  below  the  HMRC
national  insurance  primary  earnings  threshold  (PET)   for   the   years
2011/2012; 2012/2013; 2013/2014 and 2014/2015.

(b) Mr Bramble drew my attention to Regulation 6 of  the  2006  regulations.
He told me that the Judge was entitled to take  a  gap  in  employment  into
account and that the Judge was correct to consider  whether  the  employment
was effective & genuine. He told me that although the decision  contains  an
error, on the whole  the  Judge  dealt  with  the  appeal  sufficiently.  Mr
Bramble conceded that there may be a requirement  for  further  fact-finding
in this case.

Analysis

7. In the reasons for  refusal  letter  the  respondent  sets  out  the  EEA
national's earnings between 2008 and 2015, and then says

      Whilst you have demonstrated  that  your  sponsor  has  been  employed
      within the United Kingdom for a continuous period, her income fails to
      meet the HMRC national insurance primary earnings threshold (PET)  for
      the majority of years.

8. That is a clear concession that the  EEA  sponsor  was  employed  between
2008 and 2015. The respondent draws a  clear  focus  on  the  level  of  the
sponsor's income  and  argues  that  the  EEA  national's  activity  is  not
effective and genuine and is on such a small scale that it  is  regarded  as
purely marginal and ancillary.

9. The Judge starts [17] of the decision by saying

      Although neither party made this point....

The Judge then finds that the EEA national sponsor was not employed  between
June 2011 and November 2012. That finding is an entirely new  matter,  about
which the appellant has had no notice. It is a matter which was  not  raised
during the hearing so that it was not addressed by either party. It  is  the
matter which the Judge finds  to  be  determinative  of  the  appeal  -  yet
neither party to the appeal had any notice  of  it.  Neither  party  to  the
appeal had any opportunity to address the deciding factor in the appeal.

10. Is not surprising that the Judge  starts  [18]  by  confessing  to  some
hesitancy in making the finding, but that  hesitancy  did  not  prevent  the
Judge from resting his decision on that finding

11.  In SS v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] CSIH  72  the
Secretary of State considered that it was credible  that  the  Claimant  had
been involved in film  production.   The  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
Claimant was a filmmaker.  The Court of Session noted  that  the  Judge  had
before him, as a starting  point  as  to  the  veracity  of  the  Claimant's
version of events,  an  acceptance  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
Claimant was a filmmaker. Although the Judge was not bound  to  accept  that
conclusion, any departure from  a  position  established  as  true  by  both
parties  would  require  explanation.   In  its  absence,   the   reasonable
inference was that the Judge had misunderstood or  left  the  evidence  out.
The error was therefore properly categorised as one of law.

12. The Judge's findings of fact at [17] and [18] are clear departures  from
the reasoning behind the respondent's decision.  The  Judge's  findings  are
that the concession made by the respondent should not have  been  made,  yet
neither of the parties to the appeal were made aware of that  finding  until
the decision was promulgated. Neither the appellant nor the  respondent  has
had the opportunity to address the Judge's finding that the sponsor  stopped
work  between  June  2011  and  November  2012.  The  result  is  that   the
proceedings are tainted by unfairness. That unfairness leads to  a  material
error of law. I must set the Judge's decision aside.

13.  I consider whether or not I can substitute my  own  decision  but  find
that I cannot do so because of  the  extent  of  the  fact-finding  exercise
necessary. Both parties agree that further  fact  finding  is  necessary  on
this case.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

16. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Lodge.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18.  The Judge's decision, promulgated on 15 August 2017, is set aside.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date  3 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


