
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09546/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2018                         |On 26 September 2018          |
|Prepared: 19 September 2018                  |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                               Bilquees Ahmed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora, instructed by M A Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

                              MADE PURSUANT TO
        RULE 39 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 12 April 2018 I set aside the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.  I  further
    directed that the re-making of the decision be undertaken by the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The matter came back before me on 24 September,  the  appellant  having
    lodged extensive documentation in support of  the  assertion  that  the
    appeal should be allowed.

 3. At the outset of the hearing I invited Mr  Toora  to  compile  a  table
    detailing the appellant's income, expenditure and savings on a  monthly
    basis -  to  be  cross  referenced  to  the  documentation  before  the
    Tribunal. Having examined the completed table and undertaken checks  as
    to its accuracy  Mr  Mills,  quite  properly,  conceded  the  appeal  -
    accepting that the appellant had demonstrated to the required  standard
    that  the  requirements  of  regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 had been met.

 4. It was agreed by the parties that in such circumstances I  need  do  no
    more than record this concession, and that the  appeal  be  allowed  by
    consent.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

The appellant's appeal is allowed.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 18 September 2018
