
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
EA/09930/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On April 11, 2018                         | On April 16, 2018               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                              MR FAROUK SELMANE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Burrett, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is a national of Algeria. He entered the  United  Kingdom
    in the or around February 2000 and on August 5, 2010 he applied  for  a
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national. He was issued  with  a
    residence card which was valid until December 2, 2015.

 3. On February 15, 2016 he applied for  a  document  certifying  permanent
    residence under Regulation 10(5) of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

 4. The respondent refused his application on August 10, 2016 on the  basis
    (a) he had not provided evidence  that  he  and  his  former  wife  had
    demonstrated they had resided in accordance with the Regulations for  a
    continuous period of  five  years  (Regulation  15(1)(f)  of  the  2006
    Regulations) and (b) he had failed to  provide  evidence  that  he  had
    continue to reside in accordance with the Regulations since the  decree
    absolute (October 22, 2014).

 5. The appellant lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  August  15,  2016  under
    Regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 and Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 6. Their appeals came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hussain
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on December 21, 2017 and in a decision
    promulgated on January 10, 2018  the  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    appeal finding that the appellant had failed to  demonstrate  that  his
    former spouse had been exercising treaty rights throughout  the  period
    leading up to the decree absolute.

 7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on January 22, 2018  and
    on February 9, 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler  granted
    permission to appeal because he found it arguable the Judge  had  erred
    by requiring the appellant to prove the exercising treaty  rights  five
    years by his former spouse.

 8. When the matter came before on the above-date the  two  representatives
    agreed that when the First-tier Tribunal heard  the  appeal  the  Judge
    made two significant findings of fact:

      a) The former spouse had been exercising treaty rights at the date  of
         the decree absolute; and

      b) The appellant had  been  working  since  the  date  of  the  decree
         absolute.

 9. Mr Deller agreed  that  the  appellant  was,  in  those  circumstances,
    entitled to a retained right of residence. By failing  to  confirm  the
    appellant's right of residence  Mr  Burrett  submitted  the  Judge  had
    erred. The Judge had not specifically been asked to make such a finding
    and on his application form the appellant had  stated  he  was  seeking
    permanent  residence.  However,  in  order  to  be  granted   permanent
    residence based on a retained right  of  residence  the  Judge  had  to
    satisfy himself that the appellant was so entitled and bearing in  mind
    the two findings above it is  clear  that  the  appellant  did  satisfy
    Regulation 10 of the 2006 Regulations.

10. The only issue was whether the  appellant  was  entitled  to  permanent
    residence based on that retained right.

11. The representatives agreed with me that the Tribunal was concerned with
    the period December 21, 2012 to October 22, 2014 with the  latter  date
    being the date of the decree absolute.

12. If the appellant could demonstrate that his former spouse had exercised
    treaty rights during those dates then he would be entitled to permanent
    residence under Regulation 15(1)(f) of the 2006 Regulations.

13. I referred the parties to pages 106 and 107 of the appellant's  bundle.
    This bundle had been before the First-tier Tribunal.

14. The Judge made reference to a record from the authorities  setting  out
    the appellant's former wife's income up to  and  including  July  2015.
    Those records showed that the appellant's former wife was  not  working
    in late 2012 but  commenced  employment  in  early  January  2013.  She
    continued in her job until April 28, 2013 whereupon there was  a  short
    gap until August 8, 2013. Her employment was continuous after August 8,
    2013 until the date of the letter.

15. Mr Burrett submitted the Tribunal should have looked  at  the  evidence
    holistically and against the background  that  the  appellant  and  his
    former wife were no longer together.  He submitted the Judge  not  only
    applied the wrong test  when  considering  which  period  of  time  the
    appellant's wife had been exercising treaty rights but had then applied
    too high a standard of evidential requirements.

16. He submitted that the former spouse did not have  to  demonstrate  that
    she had been working but merely that she  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights and that included, if necessary, looking for work.  It  did  not
    prevent from going away or taking a short period out from employment.

17. Mr Deller, for his part, agreed with this approach  and  conceded  that
    the evidence contained within the bundle, taken as a  whole,  supported
    Mr Burrett's submission that the former wife had complied with the 2006
    Regulations and the appellant was entitled to  permanent  residence  as
    claimed.

18. Having considered the evidence and  whilst  noting  some  gaps  in  the
    appellant's former wife's employment I agree that the evidence  had  to
    be considered  against  a  background  that  she  had  demonstrated  an
    exercise of treaty rights.

19. In an ideal world there would be no gaps in employment or if there were
    an explanation would be provided but taking into account the  documents
    that had been adduced I agreed the appellant had demonstrated  both  he
    and his former wife aggregately  had  exercised  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of at five years from December 21, 2012.

20. Whilst the Judge was entitled to make  observations  about  a  lack  of
    funds at certain times I am satisfied that he materially erred  because
    at paragraph 9 of his decision he wrongly stated the  appellant's  wife
    had to show she had exercised treaty rights for five years.

21. As the appellant had demonstrated he had been exercising treaty  rights
    as a former family member since the date of the decree  absolute  until
    the date of the Tribunal hearing, a period of 38 months, he merely  had
    to show that  his  former  wife  had  exercised  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of 22 months immediately predating the  date  of  the
    decree absolute. Mr Deller conceded that she had.

22. I therefore find that the Regulations were met and  not  only  was  the
    appellant entitled to a retained right of residence under Regulation 10
    but he was also entitled to permanent residence under Regulation 15  of
    the 2006 Regulations.

    DECISION

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

24. I have set aside the original decision and I  remake  the  decision  by
    finding the appellant has a retained right of residence and is entitled
    to permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

Signed                              Date 11/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award because  the  appeal  was  allowed  based  on  the
evidence placed before the Tribunal.


Signed                              Date     11/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


