
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09255/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2019                   |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                            adjo georgette kouao
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Ogunbusola, Counsel, instructed by Chancery CS
                    Solicitors (Citygate House)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of the Cote d'Ivoire.  She  appealed  to  a
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 25 July 2016 to revoke her permanent residence  card  which
    was issued under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The appellant had previously been issued with a residence card  as  the
    spouse of Mr [M], a French national, and  was  subsequently  granted  a
    permanent residence card on 3 December 2015 for a ten year period.   It
    was that card which was the subject of the decision under challenge.

3.   The basis of the revocation was that there had  been  an  investigation
    into French nationals being brought into the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    purpose of bogus proxy marriages and benefit  fraud.   There  had  been
    several criminal prosecutions and there had been found to be  links  to
    sham marriages and in particular customary marriages in Ghana  and  the
    Ivory  Coast.   There  was  evidence  of  a  generic  nature  from  the
    respondent.  The appellant's ex-husband and sponsor had been identified
    as a person involved in the fraud and the appellant's name and date  of
    birth were marked as being involved, on  a  spreadsheet  annexed  to  a
    witness statement which the judge had before her.  On the basis of this
    evidence the respondent was not satisfied that this was a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage and found that it was a marriage of convenience and
    as a consequence revoked the appellant's residence card.  In  addition,
    the judge had witness statements from Philip  Gibson  who  is  a  fraud
    investigator employed by the Department for Work and Pensions.

4.   The judge noted the guidance in Agho [2015] EWCA  Civ  1198,  where  it
    was confirmed  that  the  burden  of  proving  whether  a  marriage  of
    convenience exists rests on the respondent.  It  was  also  said  there
    that the burden  was  not  discharged  merely  by  showing  "reasonable
    suspicion" but that in the usual way the evidential burden might  shift
    to the applicant by proof of facts which justified the  inference  that
    the marriage was not genuine and the facts giving rise to the inference
    might include a failure to answer a request for  documentary  proof  of
    the genuineness of the marriage where grounds  of  suspicion  had  been
    raised.  That decision  approved  what  had  been  said  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Papajorgji [2012] UKUT 00038, and that decision was further
    approved by the Supreme Court in Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54.

5.   The judge commented on the generic nature of the evidence  produced  by
    the respondent though she noted  that  it  did  specifically  name  the
    appellant's ex-wife as a person connected to a fraud or sham  marriage.
    She correctly concluded that she first had  to  consider  whether  this
    evidence was sufficient to discharge the burden onto the  appellant  to
    show that this was not a sham marriage.

6.   She derived support from the approach in TOEIC cases where  the  burden
    moves from the respondent to discharge the  evidential  burden  to  the
    appellant if the burden on the respondent  has  been  discharged.   The
    judge concluded that the witness statements and  spreadsheets  produced
    by the respondent were sufficient to discharge the initial  burden  and
    it  was  then  for  the  appellant  to  establish  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that she is in a genuine marriage.

7.   The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  guidance  in  respect  of
    marriages of convenience in  Papajorgji  which  involved  the  need  to
    consider the totality of the evidence and decide whether  it  was  more
    probable than not that it was a marriage of convenience.

8.   The judge did not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness.   She
    noted vagueness in her answers as to how and whether she had  tried  to
    contact her ex-husband after she found out about the allegations  being
    made against him in 2016.  She found inconsistencies  in  her  evidence
    and also found vague the evidence of a Mr Sarbah,  a  friend  who  gave
    evidence.  The judge found it surprising that  there  were  only  three
    photographs provided of two occasions involving her and her husband and
    noted inconsistency in her reasons given as to why she did  not  return
    at the end of her visit visa expiring.

9.   The judge considered that as noted above the initial  burden  of  proof
    had shifted, but commented that even if she was wrong about  that,  the
    credibility findings she had made were of sufficient gravity  that  she
    would have found it had  been  established  that  the  marriage  was  a
    marriage of convenience.  She accepted that the appellant's  ex-husband
    had not been charged but considered that that was because  he  had  not
    been traced and the authorities had therefore  had  not  been  able  to
    charge him.  The fact that some of the perpetrators were brought to the
    United Kingdom for the purpose of obtaining  fraudulent  documents  and
    marrying meant that they would have had  a  physical  presence  in  the
    United  Kingdom  and  therefore  the  fact  that  the  appellant  could
    establish that her ex-husband was in the United Kingdom did not  go  to
    undermine the case against her as was argued on her behalf.  As regards
    the documents put in to show that her ex-husband was  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom,  the  judge  scrutinised  these  at  paragraph  20  and
    concluded that they did not make that out.  The judge  found  that  the
    appellant had failed to establish  this  was  a  genuine  marriage  and
    looking at the evidence in the round as  she  was  directed  to  do  by
    Papajorgji was satisfied that it was a marriage of convenience.

10.  She went on to say that if the burden had not shifted and  remained  on
    the appellant she found the burden had  been  satisfied  based  on  her
    findings  that  there  was  no  credible  supporting  evidence  of  the
    relationship, very  limited  photographic  evidence  and  no  originals
    available,  and  inconsistent  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her
    witness.  Taking this together with the evidence of Miss Price  and  Mr
    Gibson the judge found the respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof on the balance of probabilities.

11.  The appellant sought permission to appeal this decision  on  the  basis
    that the judge had erred as to the burden of proof, basing her decision
    on generic evidence and arguing among other things that the appellant's
    ex-husband had not been one of the people who had been prosecuted as he
    could have been despite not being located.  The judge, it  was  argued,
    had failed to take proper account of the  documentary  evidence  before
    her and, it was argued, had made an error of law.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    the basis that it  was  arguable  in  particular  that  the  judge  had
    reversed the burden of proof.

13.  I am grateful  to  Mr  Ogunbusola  and  Mr  Melvin  for  their  helpful
    submissions.  It is clear from the guidance set out in  Papajorgji  and
    as approved in Agho, again in Rosa [2016] EWCA Civ 14 and in  Sadovska,
    that there is an evidential burden on the respondent  in  circumstances
    where there are factors which  support  suspicions  for  believing  the
    marriage to be one of convenience.  As was said in Papajorgji, if there
    is no evidence that could support a conclusion that the marriage is one
    of convenience, the appellant does not have to  deal  with  the  issue.
    But once the issue is raised by  evidence  capable  of  pointing  to  a
    conclusion that the marriage is one  of  convenience,  it  is  for  the
    appellant to show that his marriage is not one of convenience.

14.  In my view it was fully and properly open  to  the  judge  to  conclude
    that in light of the generic evidence, and some of it going beyond  the
    generic, the evidential burden was discharged by the respondent and the
    burden then switched to the appellant.  It is clear, for example,  from
    Mr Gibson's report, that evidence  gathered  during  the  investigation
    indicated that Mr [M] was brought to the United Kingdom for the purpose
    of immigration fraud and was never resident in the United  Kingdom  and
    could not therefore exercise treaty rights.   It  was  noted  that  the
    address recorded for Mr [M] was used significantly during the period of
    the fraud and could be linked directly to being controlled by  a  named
    person.  On 24 occasions that address  was  provided  in  circumstances
    where 22 of the French nationals subsequently  entered  into  marriages
    with non-EEA nationals  and  sponsored  immigration  applications.   He
    concluded that as  lead  officer  in  the  investigation  the  marriage
    between the appellant and Mr [M] was a sham  and  that  any  subsequent
    immigration  applications   were   fraudulent   and   contained   false
    information to deceive the UK authorities and obtain immigration status
    by deception.

15.  The judge then properly went on, as she noted at paragraph  10  of  her
    decision, to conclude that  the  witness  statements  and  spreadsheets
    produced by the respondent were sufficient  to  discharge  the  initial
    burden and it was then for the appellant to establish on the balance of
    probabilities that she was in a genuine marriage.

16.  The judge considered a list of indicative criteria suggesting  possible
    intention to abuse the rights conferred by the Directive for  the  sole
    purpose  of  contravening  national  immigration  laws,  as  listed  in
    Papajorgji.  It was necessary to consider the totality of the evidence.
     The judge found the appellant to lack credibility, noting considerable
    vagueness in  her  answers  and  inconsistencies,  for  example  having
    initially when asked if she had tried to contact her  ex-husband  asked
    why she should contact him they were divorced and then saying  she  had
    tried to get in touch with  him  shortly  before  the  divorce.   Also,
    although she claimed not to know where he was and not to have  been  in
    touch with him since the start of 2014 and unable to locate him  before
    the divorce in May 2014, she was nevertheless able to produce  his  P60
    for the year ending April 2014.  The judge found it to lack credibility
    that she would have not invited her siblings to the wedding as they did
    not live in the United Kingdom and it was expensive to come and yet she
    invited her husband's siblings who also did  not  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom but they did not want to come  as  they  did  not  support  the
    marriage.  The witness  Mr  Sarbah  had  attended  the  proxy  marriage
    celebration but said he  did  not  know  whether  the  building  was  a
    restaurant or a hall and his evidence was vague.  He could not remember
    when in 2009 he met the appellant and could not remember  when  he  met
    her husband and had only visited her at her home twice.  The judge also
    was concerned as to the small number of  photographs  produced  of  the
    appellant and her ex-husband.  She was also inconsistent when asked why
    she did not return at the end of her  visit  visa  expiring.   She  had
    arrived in October 2004 on a valid visit  visa  for  six  months  which
    would have expired in around April 2005 and when asked why she did  not
    return then she said she was going to marry her (now) ex-husband and so
    there did not seem any point.  However, when asked when they  made  the
    decision to marry she said it was a year after meeting and therefore in
    about December 2005, about seven months after her visa expired.

17.  The judge did consider the documentary evidence.   She  properly  noted
    that even if it were shown that the ex-husband had been in  the  United
    Kingdom that would not show he was not involved in criminal matters  as
    perpetrators were brought to the United  Kingdom  for  the  purpose  of
    obtaining fraudulent documents and therefore he would have had to  have
    been in the United Kingdom at some point.  It was argued that  payslips
    were paid into the husband's bank account as evidence of  authenticity,
    it appeared to the judge that not one appeared to have  been  paid  in.
    One was identified by Counsel, in 2011, but later payments in 2014  did
    not appear on the corresponding bank statement and the  same  was  true
    with regard to a payslip at page 110 of the bundle.  It appeared to the
    judge, having cross-checked many of the documents, that  some  payments
    did cross-refer but not all of them and she was therefore not satisfied
    she could attach any weight to the documents as evidence that  the  ex-
    husband was resident in the United Kingdom.

18.  The judge brought all these matters together  and  concluded  that  the
    burden of proof on the appellant had not been discharged.

19.  In my view this was  a  finding  that  was  fully  open  to  her.   She
    correctly applied the guidance on the burden as set out  in  Papajorgji
    and  approved  in  subsequent   decisions,   and   she   gave   careful
    consideration to the evidence and it was fully open to her to find that
    the burden on the appellant had not been discharged  and  therefore  to
    dismiss the  appeal.   No  error  of  law  in  her  decision  has  been
    identified and as a consequence her decision dismissing the  appeal  is
    maintained.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 21 February 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
