
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/09045/2017
                                                               EA/09342/2017
                                                               EA/09343/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 23 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                        MARZIA [A] (FIRST appellant)
                          [H A] (SECOND appellant)
                           [M A] (THIRD appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Slatter instructed by Sohaib Fatimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal comes before us following the decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Finch on 31 January 2019 finding errors of  law  in  and  setting
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in this case.

2.   The essential facts are as follows.  The appellants  are  nationals  of
    Afghanistan, a mother and two children, and the  first  appellant,  the
    mother of the children is married to a British citizen, initially  from
    Afghanistan.  Her husband, the sponsor, arrived in the  United  Kingdom
    from Afghanistan on 8 May 2002 and married the first appellant on 6 May
    2007.  The second and third appellants, who were born  respectively  in
    2008 and 2011, were both born in Afghanistan, and the  first  appellant
    and the sponsor have a third child who was born in the  United  Kingdom
    in February 2018 and who is a British citizen.

3.   The sponsor went to Ireland to seek accommodation  and  employment  and
    then travelled to Afghanistan to visit the  appellants  in  June  2015.
    They were granted EEA residence cards  as  the  dependants  of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in another EEA state and  arrived  in
    Ireland on 28 June 2015.

4.   The sponsor worked for a firm  of  building  contractors  between  July
    2015 and October 2016 and also had part-time work with another  company
    between January 2016 and January 2017,  as  a  translator  for  foreign
    exports.  The family lived in the same area, albeit in three  different
    rented houses, until April  2017.   The  second  and  third  appellants
    enrolled in the local school and remained there until April 2017.   The
    sponsor felt that he was unable to obtain a further job and decided the
    family needed to move to the United Kingdom so he  could  work,  making
    use of the licence he had to drive a taxi in the United Kingdom.

5.   The current applications for residence cards as  direct  dependants  of
    the sponsor were made on 22 June 2017, and this is the  appeal  against
    the refusal of those applications, that being dated 2 November 2017.

6.   The first appellant gave evidence.  She was referred to her  statements
    of 11 February 2019 and July 2018 and confirmed her signature  on  both
    of those and that they had been translated to her and everything  there
    was true and accurate and she was happy to allow for them to form  part
    of her evidence.

7.   When cross-examined by Mr  Kotas  she  said  that  she  had  known  her
    husband before she married him.  He was a cousin.  He had first come to
    the United Kingdom in 2002, she thought, and  then  corrected  this  to
    2000.  He had come back to marry her when he got his status.   She  had
    never left Afghanistan before they  left  to  go  to  Ireland.   As  to
    whether she spoke any English before she left for Ireland she said  she
    had been attending an English language course for two months  in  Kabul
    and that was a year to a year and a half before she came to the  United
    Kingdom.  Her English was therefore not that good when she first  moved
    to Ireland but she had enrolled into a further  language  programme  to
    improve her English and that  had  been  at  the  school  her  children
    attended, where there were language classes.  The  first  address  they
    had lived at in Ireland was at [~], then corrected to [#]  Inver  Geal.
    They had lived there for less than a year.  The tenancy  agreement  had
    been for a year but there was flooding so they had to move  before  the
    end of the tenancy.  The flooding was very bad  and  many  people  left
    their properties.

8.   They had then moved to [~] Oaklands Manor for up to a year.

9.   She was asked how they could then have lived thereafter  at  [~]  Inver
    Geal, Boyle Road when they had only been in Ireland for two years.   It
    was put to her that she had said that in December 2016 they  had  moved
    to number [~] so how could they have been in Oaklands Manor for a year.
     She said that that property was very  run  down  and  in  a  state  of
    disrepair and it was leaking water from the roof so they had had to  be
    moved to another property.

10.  She had not worked when in Ireland.  She  was  asked  whether  she  had
    made friends there and said she made friends  with  some  Bengalis  but
    nobody from the Afghan community.  She  was  asked  where  the  Bengali
    people were living and she said that the property at Oaklands Manor was
    found for them by one of her Bengali friends, and they  lived  in  that
    area.  She had met them  at  the  school  where  she  attended  English
    courses.  She  had  attended  the  English  courses  once  a  week  for
    approximately two years.  She had become ill towards  the  end  of  the
    programme.  She was asked what the school's name was and  said  it  was
    Mary's school and it was difficult to spell and she did  not  have  the
    exact address.  It was a twenty minutes' walk to the school from  their
    first address.

11.  The second appellant, her older son, had started school when  the  next
    term began after they arrived in Ireland as they had arrived during the
    school holidays.  She could not recall what month  it  was.   They  had
    arrived in Ireland on 22 June 2015.

12.  She was asked how many months after they arrived had he started  school
    and she said the school was off for three months and they had  enrolled
    the children and did all the paperwork to start the next term.  He  had
    been in school for two years.  While they were there  he  had  attended
    school.  His first year teacher was Ms [K].  She could not name all his
    second year teachers.  She had gone to parents' evenings for  her  son,
    with her husband.  She was asked who spoke to the teachers if  she  had
    problems with English.  At the start she had said her husband  did  and
    if he could not as he was working then her Bengali friend helped.  This
    friend's children were at the same school.  Her son  was  in  the  same
    class as the appellant's daughter.

13.  She was asked how they chose the school and said her husband  had  made
    enquiries with his friends and they recommended this as being the  best
    in the area.  It was put to her  that  her  husband  had  not  been  to
    Ireland before he decided to move there and she said yes he had  before
    they moved there, with his friends.  She did  not  know,  and  did  not
    remember when he first went to Ireland.

14.  She was asked who her daughter's first year teacher was  and  said  she
    thought it was Mrs Kepi or something and was not  sure.   Her  daughter
    had enrolled in the school at the same time as her son had, she being 4
    at that time.

15.  She was asked how she had spent her time in Ireland for two  years  and
    said that she had done the school run and when her husband was at  work
    she took the children out with her friends when school  was  out.   She
    and her close Bengali friend visited each other's homes.  She  had  had
    three friends, the Bengali lady and  two  Punjabi  ladies.   She  could
    recall their names.

16.  She was asked whether they had visited anywhere else apart  from  where
    they were living and she said her husband would take  the  children  on
    visits to different places, parks and out with their  Bengali  friends.
    She was asked whether she had ever left the town while in  Ireland  and
    said she had not gone outside the city.  It was two hours'  drive  from
    Dublin and they went there  occasionally  for  main  shopping.   As  to
    whether they had had any friends or  family  in  Ireland  before  going
    there she said her father-in-law's friends still lived in Dublin.   She
    was asked whether she had never thought to  join  her  husband  in  the
    United Kingdom before they went to Ireland and she  said  that  it  had
    never been their decision to leave Afghanistan.  She was asked why  her
    husband had not got a job in Dublin when he lost his job  and  said  it
    was because of the distance involved as it was a two hours' drive.  She
    was asked why the family had not  moved  to  Dublin  and  said  it  was
    because of the cost of properties and of living and it was cheaper  and
    better where they were.

17.  When they came to the United Kingdom they had moved  into  the  address
    where they were still living.  She was asked whether  they  had  always
    lived in London since coming to the United Kingdom and said they  tried
    to move but because of her visa issues they were overcrowded where they
    were.

18.  She was asked whether it was  true  that  from  when  she  married  her
    husband until they decided to go to  Ireland  they  had  not  discussed
    living together and said no, when the children were grown up enough her
    husband had decided and also there was the security risk and he decided
    it was better for them to leave Afghanistan.  It was put to her that it
    was surprising they would not discuss how they would live together  and
    she said they were living in a close-knit family network.  His  friends
    had told him about things that could happen and it  was  done  for  the
    sake of the family and the children.

19.  She was asked whether when  her  husband  was  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom before they decided to go to Ireland  they  had  discussed  how
    they could live in the United Kingdom, and she said no.   The  decision
    was made very quickly and it was not planned or not long  planned.   In
    Afghanistan women got married and lived with their husband's families.

20.  She was asked why the decision was made quickly and said that  in  2014
    her husband told her he was thinking of  leaving  Afghanistan  and  his
    friends told him about the possibility of a move to Ireland.

21.  It was put to her that they had only gone to Ireland as they knew  they
    could not meet the Immigration Rules to come to the United Kingdom  and
    she said no, that was not true.

22.  There was no re-examination.

23.  The sponsor, Mr [NA], gave evidence.  He confirmed  that  the  contents
    of his witness statements of 11 February 2019 and  23  July  2018  were
    true and he was happy to rely on them as part of his evidence.

24.  He was asked when he came back to the United Kingdom from  Ireland  and
    said he came first in 2017 in February, and his wife and  the  children
    in April.  He agreed that he had said in the first statement that  they
    arrived in Ireland on 28 June 2015 as a family and that  they  had  all
    arrived together.  He had gone to Afghanistan and brought them with him
    to Ireland.  He had been to Ireland previously, in 2015.  He wanted  to
    find out where the school was from where they would  live  and  he  had
    been there for nearly a week.  He did not remember  in  what  month  in
    2015 he had gone to Ireland.

25.  When cross-examined by Mr Kotas the  witness  said  the  first  address
    they stayed at in Ireland was at Inver Geal, number [~].  There was  an
    issue with flooding so they had moved.  They had moved to [~]  Oaklands
    Manor.  They were at Inver Geal for six to  nine  months.   He  thought
    they had moved after Christmas 2015.  They were at Oaklands  Manor  for
    about six months.  There was a problem with water from the  ceiling  so
    they had moved to the last address but he did not remember when.

26.  It was put to him that the dates given in  the  witness  statement  did
    not tally with one year in each of the first two addresses.

27.  He was asked about the  school's  name  and  said  it  was  Kilmore  or
    something like that.  It was the same school for both and it was  Scoil
    Mair or something like that.

28.  He had gone to parents'  meetings.   He  referred  to  Ms  [K]  as  the
    teacher.  His wife had looked after the children.

29.  He was asked whether they  had  made  any  friends  and  he  said  some
    Bengali people and they were neighbours and it was not like their home,
    the society there.  He had not engaged in any sport or  any  charitable
    work or clubs.

30.  He was asked if his wife had done any vocational courses and  said  no,
    she had done a once a week course in English and that was not far  from
    the house, where the school was, opposite there.  She had  done  it  on
    and off.  As regards family visits to other  towns  they  had  been  to
    Sligo and a couple of other places whose names he did not  recall,  and
    also Dublin.  He was asked whether it was true to say that there was no
    intention to bring his wife and family to the United  Kingdom  in  2007
    when they married and that they were going to Ireland and he  said  no.
    When asked why not, he  said  because  of  his  circumstances  and  his
    illness he was not ready for that and then after a while.  He had had a
    back problem.  He was asked what circumstances had meant  that  he  did
    not want to bring them to the United Kingdom and he said he had a  back
    problem and financial issues as well.   It  was  the  illness  and  the
    financial issues.  He was asked whether he was not  able  to  work  and
    said yes, part-time but not full-time.  He had  worked  in  the  United
    Kingdom at a car rental company doing general  work,  sorting  out  the
    paperwork, doing desk work.  He had lost that job for a period of time.
     He had been living in London.

31.  He was asked whether he had decided to go to Ireland  as  it  would  be
    easier to find work and said he had heard the education was really good
    and it was also to get a job.  The children had not  been  to  Ireland.
    He had spoken to friends about this and researched about the school and
    the distance from work and someone told him it was a nice area and  the
    school.  He was asked why he had thought it was important to  look  for
    schools in Ireland and said he had gone there for a few  days  and  had
    looked only at that town.  He was asked whether he had looked  up  work
    before he went to look at schools and said of course.  The  school  had
    been closed but he saw the site and spoke to someone.  Refurbishing was
    going on.  He thought it was a teacher he  had  spoken  to,  about  the
    school.  The children started school in the September.

32.  He was asked whether when he lost  his  job  in  January  2017  he  had
    looked for other work and said yes, he had found a job in Dublin but it
    was too far from home.  It was put to him that he could have moved  the
    family and he said rents there were really  expensive.   He  was  asked
    whether London was cheaper than Dublin and he said he was working full-
    time, there were not enough jobs in Dublin.  He was  asked  whether  he
    could not find a job in Ireland and said people were  sitting  at  home
    doing nothing.

33.  He was not still  in  contact  with  anyone  in  Ireland.   He  had  no
    relatives there and nor did his wife.  They had  a  friend  in  Dublin.
    They had not been back to Ireland since coming to the  United  Kingdom.
    His wife and the children were not allowed to go.

34.  It was put to him that the real reason for going to  Ireland  was  that
    they could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  he
    said how could you prove that that was his aim.  It was not his aim.

35.  On re-examination he was asked how long they had intended  to  stay  in
    Ireland when they went there and he said as long as  he  could.   There
    was no plan to go back and it was for the rest of  their  lives.   They
    had come back to the United Kingdom as he could not find  a  job.   The
    city was far away and he needed transportation and it was expensive  to
    live in Dublin.

36.  He said that his children were in school, there were problems with  the
    landlord and because of his wife's visa no-one did anything and that it
    was a problem for the children, they had nowhere to  go  and  his  wife
    wanted to study in the United Kingdom.

37.  In his submissions Mr Kotas relied on and developed the points made  in
    his skeleton argument.  The  evidence  was  that  the  sponsor  had  no
    intention of bringing his family to the United Kingdom after he married
    his wife in 2007.  The court had been told there had been no discussion
    about this.  There was  reference  to  his  circumstances,  health  and
    financial, but he had been working.  It was rather opaque, in that even
    if that were the case, the expectation would be to  unite  the  family.
    It would be credible if there had been a discussion  but  he  had  said
    there had been none and it  should  be  questioned  why  they  had  not
    considered how they could live together as a  family  and  this  was  a
    serious point of credibility.  The sponsor's evidence was that  it  was
    quite a quick decision and that lacked credibility.   His  reasons  for
    moving to Ireland were that there were better work  prospects,  but  he
    had been London, and it was fanciful to consider that he would be in  a
    better position  in  rural  Ireland.   The  appellant  had  never  left
    Afghanistan and had little English and there was no previous connection
    to Ireland and no family there and they had never visited.  The sponsor
    expressed a concern to get the best education for the children but  his
    evidence was vague.  He had visited the school when it was  closed  and
    spoke to a person about enrolment.   There  was  no  credible  evidence
    about efforts to find out about the school or any research.   A  friend
    of a friend had spoken to him and there  had  been  a  brief  visit  to
    Ireland.  There was nothing organic  about  the  decision  to  move  to
    Ireland.

38.  As regards Regulation 9(4), motive was relevant  to  whether  residence
    was genuine.  It was necessary to consider that rather than looking  at
    the Regulation disjunctively.  AA [2017] ScotCS CSIH  38  was  helpful.
    Also, his wife  had  done  English  courses  but  they  had  joined  no
    societies or clubs and had made a few friends and the sponsor  had  not
    been back to Ireland and that all suggested  a  move  solely  to  avoid
    immigration control, and the minimum income Regulations in  particular.
    There was a lack of credibility in the lack of discussion as  to  where
    they could be together and as regards the quality of life  in  Ireland.
    The sponsor had to work and the children had to go  to  school  but  it
    should be questioned whether it was genuine in the sense of wanting  to
    establish themselves there.

39.  Reference was also made to the decision in O  &  B  [2014]  C  C-456/12
    which was more recent than Akrich [2003]  ECR  I-9607.   It  should  be
    questioned whether  family  life  had  been  created  or  strengthened.
    Certainly, the former was not the case and  nor  was  the  latter.   It
    could not be assumed.  There was no more than mere presence.  That  was
    a relevant factor.

40.  Further or in the alternative, if as a matter of  fact  the  motivation
    was to circumvent the Immigration Rules it should be questioned whether
    that was an abuse of treaty  rights.   What  was  said  in  Sexton  was
    inconsistent with paragraph 37 in Akrich.  Akrich was  not  considering
    marriages of convenience and did not explore in great  depth  abuse  of
    treaty rights.  It could not be read into paragraph 57 that it was only
    marriages of  convenience  that  could  be  abuses  of  treaty  rights.
    Paragraphs 9 and 10 of the skeleton were of  relevance  to  this.   The
    correct jurisprudence was to be found in Emsland-Starke [2000]  ECR  I-
    11569 setting out the test for a finding of abuse of rights.  The facts
    of this case met that test.  The real motive was circumvention  of  the
    minimum income requirements.  The decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in
    Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54 was not particularly relied on, but  it  was  a
    marriage of convenience case and it was  status  that  was  sought  not
    pecuniary advantage.  There were similarities here as  status  was  the
    issue.  The test was satisfied and abuse of rights was made out.

41.  If the Tribunal agreed, effectively the family  had  moved  to  Ireland
    purely to avoid the Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  third  country
    nationals and that must be an abuse of treaty rights as  that  was  the
    only motivation.  If it was not the sole motivation, then as was argued
    in paragraph 12 of the skeleton, it was met on the facts of  the  case,
    as being the predominant purpose.  There was no evidence of  any  other
    motive, for example family members in Ireland or  job  prospects  being
    better there.  It did not stand up to scrutiny.  The sponsor could  not
    get a job elsewhere in Ireland so he had returned to expensive  London.
    It went to the heart of the case.  There was  a  strong  public  policy
    argument.  If Regulation 9(4) was incompatible with  the  jurisprudence
    there was a significant problem for the Secretary of State  to  control
    the entry of third country nationals.  If motive were irrelevant,  then
    any family could take residence  in  another  state  with  no  temporal
    minimum, and they could say it was a genuine exercise of treaty  rights
    and the purpose was irrelevant as long as it was genuine residence.  In
    effect, UK law could not be gazumped by EU law.  It should be said that
    motivation was relevant to the question of genuineness and as a  matter
    of principle when motivation was to evade immigration  control  it  was
    capable of being an abuse of treaty rights.

42.  In his submissions Mr Slatter argued that it was wrong to construe  the
    case as one concerning credibility.  There had not been  an  interview,
    yet abuse was invoked by the Secretary of State.  Regulation 9 was  not
    a faithful transition of EU law and was inconsistent  with  Akrich  and
    Levin [1982] ECR 1035.  It was unclear where the "centre of life"  test
    had come from.  The word "genuine" was included in Regulation  9(2)(c).
    Reference was made to part 3 of Mr Slatter's skeleton argument  and  it
    was a question of derivative rather than autonomous  rights  as  family
    members, and they were available when the citizen exercised his rights.
     The skeleton at paragraph 16 made  the  point  that  the  purpose  and
    justification of any such derived right of residence was based  on  the
    fact that refusal to allow such a right would interfere with the  Union
    citizen's freedom of movement by discouraging him from  exercising  his
    rights of entry into and residence in the host Member State, as set out
    in O and B  (C-456/12).   Genuine  residence  of  the  EU  citizen  was
    required as set out at paragraph 51 of O and B, to enable and create or
    strengthen family life.  Paragraphs 52 and  53  of  O  and  B  were  of
    relevance.  Where Article 7(1)(a) was satisfied and it was not disputed
    that the sponsor was a worker and it was effective  and  genuine  work,
    and also part of the exercise of his rights,  that  was  all  that  was
    required as a matter of EU law and the  family  was  then  entitled  to
    reside with him in the Member State.  More strict conditions could  not
    be imposed.  Article 9(4) contrasted with what had been said in  Akrich
    and also Levin.  It was clear from Akrich at paragraph 55 that  motives
    were of no account.  Using EU law to obtain a benefit was not an  abuse
    as set out  at  paragraph  61.   Article  35  had  been  transposed  by
    Regulation 26.  The only example of abuse of rights cited at  paragraph
    57 of Akrich was with regard to marriages of convenience.   The  burden
    of proof was on the Secretary of State.  There was no  fair  procedural
    process to inform the appellant pre-decision.

43.  An analogy was drawn with Papajorgji, but there  was  no  evidence  and
    the burden had been put by the Secretary of State on the  appellant  to
    give an explanation for why  he  had  moved  to  Ireland.   There  were
    safeguards in Article 35 and it  was  inconsistent  to  impose  further
    conditions on the appellants to do more than  require  EU  citizens  to
    show they were a worker in their  home  state  and  it  was  a  genuine
    marriage.  There was therefore no marriage of  convenience  issue.   As
    regards intention to obtain advantage, deceit as set out in Sadovska by
    both would have to be shown.  It was necessary to ascertain the  actual
    state of an individual's knowledge and a question of whether they had a
    genuinely held belief.  There was nothing in the  evidence  to  suggest
    dishonesty or deceit even if  the  motive  of  going  to  Ireland  were
    relevant.  Akrich was not consistent with the issue  of  abuse  outside
    the context of marriages of convenience.  It was a genuine exercise  of
    EU rights.  The appeal should be allowed.

44.  We reserved our decision.

The Law

45.  Paragraph 9 of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 states as follows:-

         "9.  Family members of British citizens

             (1)  If the conditions in paragraph (2) are  satisfied,  these
                  Regulations apply to a person who  is  the  family  member
                  ('F') of a British citizen ('BC') as though the BC were an
                  EEA national.

             (2)  The conditions are that-

                  (a)  BC-

                      (i)  is residing in an EEA State as a  worker,  self-
                           employed  person,  self-sufficient  person  or  a
                           student,  or  so   resided   immediately   before
                           returning to the United Kingdom; or

                      (ii) has acquired the right of permanent residence in
                           an EEA State;

                  (b)  F and BC resided together in the EEA State; and

                  (c)  F and BC's residence in the EEA State was genuine;

                  (d)  F was a family member of BC during  all  or  part  of
                      their joint residence in the EEA State; and

                  (e)  genuine  family  life  was  created  or  strengthened
                      during their joint residence in the EEA State.

             (3)  Factors relevant to whether residence in the EEA State is
                  or was genuine include-

                  (a)  whether the centre of BC's life  transferred  to  the
                      EEA State;

                  (b)  the length of F and BC's joint residence in  the  EEA
                      State;

                  (c)   the  nature  and  quality  of   the   F   and   BC's
                      accommodation in the EEA State, and whether it is  or
                      was BC's principal residence;

                  (d)  the degree of F  and  BC's  integration  in  the  EEA
                      State;

                  (e)  whether F's first lawful residence in the EU with  BC
                      was in the EEA State.

             (4)  This regulation does not apply-

                  (a)  where the purpose of the residence in the  EEA  State
                      was as a means for circumventing any immigration laws
                      applying  to  non-EEA  nationals  to  which  F  would
                      otherwise  be  subject  (such   as   any   applicable
                      requirement under the 1971 Act to have leave to enter
                      or remain in the United Kingdom); or

                  (b)  to a person who is only eligible to be treated  as  a
                      family  member  as  a  result  of   regulation   7(3)
                      (extended family members treated as family members).

             (5)  Where these Regulations apply to F, BC is to  be  treated
                  as holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the
                  purposes of the application of these Regulations to F.

             (6)  In paragraph (2)(a)(ii), BC is  only  to  be  treated  as
                  having acquired the right of permanent  residence  in  the
                  EEA  State  if  such  residence  would  have  led  to  the
                  acquisition of that right  under  regulation  15,  had  it
                  taken place in the United Kingdom.

             (7)  For the purposes of determining  whether,  when  treating
                  the BC as an  EEA  national  under  these  Regulations  in
                  accordance with paragraph (1), BC  would  be  a  qualified
                  person-

                  (a)   any  requirement  to  have  comprehensive   sickness
                      insurance cover in the United Kingdom still  applies,
                      save that it does not require the cover to extend  to
                      BC;

                  (b)  in assessing whether BC can continue to be treated as
                      a worker under regulation 6(2)(b) or (c), BC  is  not
                      required to satisfy condition A;

                  (c)  in assessing whether BC can be treated as a jobseeker
                      as defined in regulation 6(1), BC is not required  to
                      satisfy conditions A and, where it would otherwise be
                      relevant, condition C."

Discussion

46.  In his skeleton  Mr  Slatter  helpfully  set  out  relevant  provisions
    demonstrating the legal basis for a derived right of residence.   As  a
    consequence of what is set out in Article  21  of  the  Treaty  on  the
    Function of the European Union (TFEU), citizenship of the Union confers
    a primary and individual right to move and  reside  freely  within  the
    Member States subject to the limitations and restrictions laid down  in
    the Treaties and measures adopted for their implementation.   Directive
    2004/38 aims to facilitate the exercise of the primary  and  individual
    right to move and freely  reside  within  the  Member  State  which  is
    conferred  directly  on  Union  citizens  by  the  Treaty.    This   is
    established by authorities such as Surinder Singh and Eind.  That means
    that if the national of a Member State has availed himself of the right
    to freedom of movement and returns to his state of  origin  his  spouse
    must enjoy at least the same rights of entry and residence as had  been
    granted to him under Union law if he  chose  to  enter  and  reside  in
    another Member State.  The rights conferred by  Directive  2004/38  are
    not autonomous rights of third country nationals of family members, but
    are derived rights acquired through their  status  as  family  members.
    The purpose and justification of such a derived right of  residence  is
    based on the fact that refusal to allow such a  right  would  interfere
    with the Union citizen's freedom of movement by discouraging  him  from
    exercising his rights of entry into and residence in  the  host  Member
    State (O and B [2014] EUECJ C-456/12).  A derived  right  of  residence
    seeks  to  remove  the  obstacle  to  leaving  the  Member   State   by
    guaranteeing that the citizen will be able to continue the family  life
    created or strengthened in the host Member State.

47.  It is established, for example in Carpenter [2002] EUECJ C-60/00,  that
    the Member State may invoke reasons of public  interest  to  justify  a
    national measure  which  is  likely  to  obstruct  the  exercise  of  a
    fundamental freedom  only  if  that  measure  is  compatible  with  the
    fundamental rights whose observance the court ensures.  Exercise of the
    fundamental freedom of movement could not be  fully  effective  if  the
    citizen were deterred from exercising it by obstacles raised  in  their
    country of origin to the entry and residence of their spouse.

48.  Mr Kotas placed emphasis on the  wording  of  the  Regulations  and  in
    particular Regulation 9(4),  but  he  emphasised  that  the  Regulation
    needed to be read as a whole.  He argued that the question of motive or
    intention with which Regulation 9(4) was concerned was required  to  be
    interpreted as relevant to the question of whether the move was in fact
    genuine.  In this regard he placed emphasis on what had  been  said  by
    the Inner House in AA [2017] ScotCS CSIH  38  where  it  is  said,  for
    example at paragraph 54, that in  determining  whether  the  conditions
    which must be set aside to obtain the benefit in question did genuinely
    exist, the intention of the individual would be one of several  factors
    to be taken into account.  He  argued  that  the  sole  motivation  for
    moving to Ireland in this case was to circumvent  immigration  control,
    and in particular the minimum income requirement.

49.  Mr Kotas also referred to what was said by the Court of  Justice  in  O
    and  B  [2014]  EUECJ  C-456/12  which  emphasises  the   creation   or
    strengthening of family life of a third  country  national  and  argued
    that neither had family life been created nor was there evidence of  it
    having been strengthened in Ireland.

50.  It is helpful to consider as a starting point the case of Levin  [1982]
    ECR 1035 where the court said at paragraph 23:

         "The motives which may have prompted a worker of a Member State  to
         seek employment in another  Member  State  are  of  no  account  as
         regards his right to enter and  reside  in  the  territory  of  the
         latter state provided that he there pursues or wishes to pursue  an
         effective and genuine activity".

51.  Subsequently in Akrich [2003] ECR I-9607, the court said  at  paragraph
    61:

         "Where the marriage between a national of  a  Member  State  and  a
         national of a non-member  state  is  genuine,  the  fact  that  the
         spouses installed themselves in another member state in  order,  on
         their return to the member state of which the former is a national,
         to obtain the benefit of rights conferred by Community law  is  not
         relevant to an assessment of their legal situation by the competent
         authorities of the latter state".

It is clear, from paragraphs 46, 47 and 51 in particular in O & B that an
obstacle to leaving the Member State of which the worker is a national is
created by the refusal to confer, when that worker returns to his Member
State of origin, a derived right of residence on his family members who are
third-country nationals and who resided with him in the host Member State
from which he is returning.  Such an obstacle will arise only where the
residence of the Union citizen in the host Member State has been
sufficiently genuine so as to enable him to create or strengthen family
life in that Member State.  If (paragraph 54) no such derived right were
granted, that Union citizen could be discouraged from leaving the Member
State of which he is a national in order to exercise his right of residence
under Article 21(1), TFEU.

52.  The references to residence being "genuine" in the decisions of the
Court of Justice do not appear to carry with them a consideration of the
motives behind that residence in the sense of being an abuse of rights.  It
seems rather to be a qualitative evaluation of the residence which is
required to be carried out.  Intentions are of relevance in the sense, for
example, of addressing whether the parties were properly exercising Treaty
rights or having a temporary period of residence where the main home was
elsewhere or it was simply an extended holiday.  The notion of genuineness
is in our view to be interpreted as meaning real, substantive or effective.
 It does not carry with it a consideration of the motives of the persons
involved.  Regulation 9(4) has to be seen in the context of the guidance in
the Court of Justice, in particular in cases such as Levin and Akrich.
Motives are irrelevant, but residence may not be genuine in circumstances
where there is no effective exercise of Community rights.

53.  As regards the alternative  argument  put  forward  by  Mr  Kotas  that
    Regulation 9(4) must be interpreted as going to the issue of  abuse  of
    treaty rights, we have noted what was said in Akrich  at  paragraph  57
    that there would be an abuse if the facilities  afforded  by  Community
    law in favour of migrant workers and their spouses were invoked in  the
    context of marriages of convenience entered into in order to circumvent
    the provisions relating to entry and residence  of  nationals  of  non-
    Member States.  It is also relevant to note paragraph  58  of  O  &  B,
    where it was said that the scope of Union law  cannot  be  extended  to
    cover abuses. Proof of such an abuse requires, first, a combination  of
    objective circumstances in which,  despite  formal  observance  of  the
    conditions laid down by the European Union Rules, the purpose of  those
    Rules has  not  been  achieved,  and  secondly,  a  subjective  element
    consisting in the intention to obtain an advantage  from  the  European
    Union Rules by artificially  creating  the  conditions  laid  down  for
    obtaining it.

54.  Mr Kotas quotes further from the decision in Hans Markus Kofoed  [2007]
    ECR 1-5795 where it was said:

         "The application of Community legislation  cannot  be  extended  to
         cover abusive practices, that is to say, transactions  carried  out
         not in the context of normal commercial operations, but solely  for
         the purpose of wrongfully  obtaining  advantages  provided  for  by
         Community law ...".

55.  Mr Kotas makes the further point that with regard to what was  said  by
    the Supreme Court in Sadovska [2017] UKSC 54, it was required to be the
    predominant purpose rather than the sole purpose.

56.  If one applies this guidance to the facts in the instant appeal, it  is
    in our view sufficiently clear that the period of residence  of  nearly
    two years in Ireland cannot be described as one which involved an abuse
    of treaty rights.  It is in our view difficult if not impossible to see
    how a period of residence of that duration cannot be said to have  been
    genuine and effective.  Nor do we consider that it cannot  be  said  on
    the facts of the case to have been shown to be the case that the centre
    of the parties' lives moved to Ireland (noting  that  it  is  far  from
    clear what is the origin in EU law of this concept),  and  that  family
    life,  albeit  not  created  in  Ireland,  must  inevitably  have  been
    strengthened there.  It is difficult to see how a period of  two  years
    during  which  the  children  went  to  school,  the  husband   pursued
    employment, and the wife looked after the home  and  the  children  and
    developed friendships can fail to be  regarded  as  a  situation  where
    family life was strengthened.

57.  Bringing these matters together, we do not consider that  it  has  been
    shown that Regulation 9(4) operates so as to preclude the  grant  of  a
    residence card in this case.  Nor has it been shown that there has been
    an abuse of treaty rights. It has not been shown that  the  predominant
    purpose of the move to Ireland  was  to  obtain  wrongfully  advantages
    provided for by Community law. Accordingly, we allow the appeal of  the
    appellants against the decision of the Secretary of State.

58.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date     20 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
