
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09591/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 24 April 2018                       |On 26 April 2018              |
|Prepared on 24 April 2018                    |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                            MR ZAFAR IQBAL JANJUA
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING A MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW


The Appeal

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  5  November  1969.  He
      appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Walters
      sitting at Hatton  Cross  on  6  December  2017  in  which  the  Judge
      dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  two  decisions  of   the
      Respondent dated 22nd and 25 July 2016 respectively.  Those  decisions
      were: (i) to refuse to issue the Appellant with a permanent  residence
      card under Regulation 15 of the  EEA  Regulations  2006  and  (ii)  to
      revoke a residence card (which had been issued  on  the  23  September
      2014).


   2. The Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant's EEA  spouse  had
      resided in the United Kingdom with  the  Appellant  for  a  continuous
      period of 5 years and could not demonstrate that  she  was  exercising
      treaty  rights  by  working.  The  Respondent  considered   that   the
      Appellant's profits from his business were  insufficient  for  him  to
      employ his spouse and there was insufficient evidence  to  prove  that
      the spouse was genuinely self-employed as a cleaner.


The Proceedings at First Instance


   3. In a very brief decision the Judge dismissed  the  appeal  because  he
      found that the Appellant's representatives had  failed  to  provide  a
      bundle of evidence. That meant that there was no evidential basis  for
      challenging  the  assertions,  analyses   and   conclusions   in   the
      Respondent's refusal letter.


   4. The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing that a directions
      order made by the Tribunal on 27 November 2017 directed the  Appellant
      to send any written evidence and submissions to the Tribunal  and  the
      Respondent by 15 December 2017 with documentation from the  Respondent
      to be sent by 25 December 2017. The Judge had considered the matter on
      the papers on 6 December 2017 (as appears from the first page  of  the
      determination) before that deadline had expired. The Appellant had not
      had the opportunity to comply with the direction.


   5. I pause to note here that the  original  direction  sent  out  by  the
      Tribunal on form IA 37 on 13 July 2017 had indicated that  the  appeal
      would be heard on Friday 15 December 2017. The Appellant's  solicitors
      had then written to the Tribunal on 17 November 2017  indicating  that
      they no longer wished the matter to proceed to an oral hearing  on  15
      December 2017 but that their  client  would  like  the  appeal  to  be
      decided on the papers as he was unable to attend the court in  person.
      That gave rise to the further order of 27 November 2017  which  set  a
      new timetable for the filing of evidence.


   6. The Appellant's solicitors sent a bundle of evidence to  the  Tribunal
      on 14 December 2017 arguing that the direction was  that  they  should
      send their evidence by 15 December 2017 not that it should be received
      by the Tribunal by that date. The bundle which they sent  amounted  to
      some 342 pages although a substantial portion  of  that  documentation
      consisted of invoices rendered by the EEA national  for  her  cleaning
      services and could more conveniently have been put in  schedule  form.
      There were also a number of wage slips for the EEA sponsor.


   7. The Tribunal had heard the Appellant's appeal before  the  time  limit
      for filing evidence had expired and he had been  unable  to  file  any
      documentation in response to the Respondent's  criticisms  leading  to
      the Judge's conclusion that there was no answer to them.


   8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Boyes on 6 February 2018. He found it  arguable  that  the  Judge  had
      fallen into error when deciding the  case  without  reference  to  the
      bundle sent by the Appellant to the Tribunal. There  was  no  rule  24
      response from the Respondent. Subsequently the Appellant  applied  for
      his onward appeal to the Upper Tribunal to  also  be  decided  on  the
      papers but this request was refused by the Principal Resident Judge.


The Hearing Before Me


   9. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me to
      determine whether there was a material error of law in the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal. It was acknowledged by the Presenting Officer
      that there had been no proper hearing  of  the  appeal  in  this  case
      because the matter  had  been  determined  by  the  Judge  before  the
      deadline for filing evidence had expired.


  10. There was one further point of significance. Although  the  Judge  had
      considered the matter on 6 December 2017 the determination itself  was
      not promulgated until 9 January 2018 by which time  the  Tribunal  did
      have the Appellant's very  large  bundle.  Whilst  it  may  have  been
      correct for the determination to state at [6] that  the  Tribunal  did
      not receive a bundle from the Appellant by 15 December 2017 given that
      the case  was  apparently  heard  on  6  December  2017  that  comment
      indicated that the Judge had considered the case after 6  December.  A
      further check to see if evidence had been received could possibly have
      been carried out


Findings


  11. I indicated to the parties that I considered there had been no  proper
      hearing of the Appellant's appeal at first instance because of the mix
      up over the dates for filing evidence. I  further  indicated  that  in
      those circumstances I was going to remit the appeal back to the First-
      tier Tribunal to be decided  again  by  any  Judge  other  than  Judge
      Walters.


  12. I make four specific directions:


        i) Before the next hearing the Appellant's representatives must  go
           through the unwieldy Appellant's bundle and reduce it to a  more
           manageable number of documents for  example  by  scheduling  the
           invoices.
       ii) The appeal will be heard as an oral appeal. The Appellant should
           consider carefully whether he wishes to attend to give  evidence
           and be cross-examined on the next occasion (unless there is some
           good medical reason why he cannot attend).  The  Appellant  paid
           for an oral hearing and he lives in London E6 which  is  not  an
           undue distance from Hatton Cross. The appeal raises issues as to
           credibility which should be properly explored.
      iii) The Appellant must inform the Tribunal at least 14  days  before
           the next hearing whether he or any witness requires the services
           of the court interpreter and which language.
       iv) Any further evidence from the Appellant must be filed and served
           at least 14 days before the next hearing.


  13. The Appellant's appeal is allowed to  the  limited  extent  indicated,
      that is to be remitted to the First-tier to be heard de novo  with  no
      findings preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I direct that the appeal be remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard by any Judge other than  Judge
    Walters.

Appellant's appeal allowed to that limited extent.


I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 24 April 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have set aside the decision at first instance I set aside the  decision
not to make a fee award. That is a matter to be dealt with at  the  remitted
hearing before the First-tier.


Signed this 24 April 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

