
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: EA/09581/2016
                                                             & EA/10682/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th September 2018               |On 14 February 2019                  |
|& 11th February 2019                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                      IOANNIS KONSTANTINOS ARGYRIOU (1)
                           JOHN PAUL ARGYRIOU (2)
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr F Lawson of Charlton Legal Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The first appellant is a citizen of Greece, the second appellant  is
       his adult (28 year old) son and  is  a  citizen  of  the  USA.  They
       applied for  EEA  residence  cards  on  the  basis  that  the  first
       appellant was entitled to  permanent  residence  due  to  his  self-
       employment in the UK, and the second appellant entitled to remain as
       his dependent. The application was refused in a decision dated  27th
       July 2016. Their appeal against the decision was dismissed by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Freer in a determination promulgated on the 28th
       March 2018.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       ID Boyes on 6th August 2018 on the basis that it was  arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had erred in law.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. The matter had to be  adjourned  on  25th
       September 2018 due to the non-attendance of Dr F Lawson of  Charlton
       Legal Practice, who was required  to  explain  his  behaviour  in  a
       direction  sent  out  on  29th  September  2018.  No  response   was
       apparently received from Dr Lawson. When Dr Lawson  appeared  before
       me on 11th February 2019 he said that he had provided a response  to
       this direction but could not find a copy of it amongst  his  papers.
       He said that he would forward a copy to the Upper Tribunal after the
       hearing. For clarity's sake Dr Lawson must provide this document  to
       the Upper Tribunal within 7 days of the date this decision  is  sent
       to the parties. Failure to do this may lead to a report to the  OISC
       for non-professional behaviour.

    4. At the start of the hearing it appeared that there was  a  state  of
       animosity between the first appellant  and  his  legal  adviser,  Dr
       Lawson. There were also  emails  on  the  file  sent  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal by the appellants complaining about Charlton Legal Practice
       and accusing them of corresponding with the Upper  Tribunal  without
       consulting them and failing to be in  contact.  I  asked  the  first
       appellant to  decide  carefully  whether  he  wished  Dr  Lawson  to
       represent him at the hearing  or  whether  he  wished  to  represent
       himself. I made it clear that if he chose Dr Lawson to represent him
       he could not speak to  me  during  the  hearing,  but  instead  must
       quietly pass Dr Lawson notes  if  he  felt  this  was  necessary  or
       helpful. Dr Lawson asked for time  to  take  instructions  from  the
       first appellant outside of the Tribunal hearing  room,  and  he  was
       given an opportunity to do  this.  When  Dr  Lawson  and  the  first
       appellant re-entered the hearing room the first  appellant  informed
       me that he wanted Dr Lawson to represent him. Throughout the hearing
       the first appellant passed Dr Lawson notes,  which  he  appeared  to
       read before proceeding with his presentation of the case.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. In grounds of appeal; a skeleton argument and oral  submissions  the
       appellants contend in summary as follows.

    6.  It  is  said  that  the  decision  is  an  embarrassment  which  is
       "incoherent, disjointed and littered  with  simple  and  conspicuous
       errors". It is contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by
       holding himself out as an expert in business in his  decision-making
       and in failing to inform the parties that he  would  be  making  his
       decision by reference to his own knowledge and understanding, and in
       not putting them on notice as to  what  his  position  was  in  this
       respect. It is contended that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
       problems with documents accepted as valid and  satisfactory  by  the
       respondent,  for  instance  his  HMRC  documents  and  created   new
       requirements beyond those of the respondent, for  instance  evidence
       of company internet activity or signed  business  contracts.  It  is
       contended  that  he  acted  unfairly  in  making  directions  as  to
       documents  needed  (namely  accounts   produced   by   a   chartered
       accountant) and then being dissatisfied  without  good  reason  when
       this was done and requiring different  documents  (bank  statements)
       which would clearly have been used by the  chartered  accountant  to
       produce the accounts.

    7. It is also contended that the First-tier Tribunal errs  by  applying
       irrelevant case law, namely Begum (EEA - worker  -jobseeker)  [2011]
       UKUT 275,  which  was  not  relevant  to  someone  who  was  seeking
       permission to remain on the  basis  of  self-employment.  The  Judge
       found matters that  the  respondent  was  satisfied  with  were  not
       satisfied, for instance that the business existed,  without  putting
       the appellant on notice of his doubts. He confusingly found at  some
       points in the decision that the first appellant is the sole director
       and  shareholder,  whilst  at  other  points  says  that  there   is
       insufficient evidence to support this. It was  clear  that  the  six
       years tax returns had been produced and it would not be possible for
       this to happen if there was  no  business.  The  decision  therefore
       contains  fundamental  contradictions,  such  as  finding  that  the
       appellant had produced evidence rebutting the  respondent's  refusal
       at paragraph 52 but in not allowing the appeal; and is fundamentally
       unfair as the dismissal is based on matters on which  the  appellant
       was not on notice about (despite the fact that the judge  had  given
       directions in the case and reserved it to  himself)  and  which  are
       speculations based on the mistaken  business  understanding  of  the
       judge.

    8. When asked by myself directly Dr Lawson could point  however  to  no
       documents which had been before the First-tier Tribunal  other  than
       those from HMRC with zero figures which were of relevance to proving
       the operation of the first appellant's contended business. Dr Lawson
       clarified that only evidence that the first  and  second  appellants
       live at the same address or that there was dependency  between  them
       was that they had given  that  same  address  on  their  application
       forms. All the evidence of cohabitation via  energy  bills  and  the
       like appeared to simply show that the first appellant and  his  wife
       lived together.

    9. Dr Lawson's principal oral contentions were firstly that the  First-
       tier Tribunal had erred in law in not allowing  the  appeal  as  the
       appellants had addressed the  issues  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter as they  had  been  successful  in  showing  that  the  first
       appellant was the sole director of Bellerphon Investment  Management
       LTD which had been doubted by the  respondent,  and  the  appellants
       were not on notice that other issues such as the genuine nature  and
       efficacy of the business and dependency of the second appellant were
       in play. As such the  proceedings  were  unfair.  Secondly,  it  was
       argued that the proceedings had been procedurally unfair as  at  the
       CMR all documents that the First-tier Tribunal would have  liked  to
       see, as evidence by the decision, were not listed as ones which  the
       appellants should have lodged.

   10. In response  in  a  Rule  24  notice  and  in  oral  submission  the
       respondent argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  directed  itself
       appropriately. There were no material errors of law as it was  clear
       on the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal the appellants  could
       not have shown that Regulation  15(1)(a)  of  the  2006  Immigration
       (EEA) Regulations was met as there was  insufficient  evidence  that
       the first appellant was exercising Treaty rights for the  five  year
       period  or  of  the  second  appellant's  dependency  on  the  first
       appellant. It was rationally open to the First-tier Tribunal to find
       that there was no evidence of the claimed genuine and effective self-
       employment for the reasons set out at paragraphs 55  to  60  of  the
       decision. There was no procedural unfairness as it  was  clear  from
       the reasons for refusal letter that all issues were in play, and  it
       was up to the appellants to  prepare  their  case  to  show  on  the
       balance of probabilities that these requirements were met.  The  CMR
       hearing was not one at which the  evidence  of  the  appellants  was
       prescribed,  but  simply  some  helpful  directions  to  guide   the
       appellants as to what could be useful.

Conclusions - Error of law

   11. The first issue raised in the refusal letter was  that  it  was  not
       accepted that the  first  appellant  was  the  owner  of  Bellerphon
       Investment Management LTD because of variants in the spelling of his
       first names, and the fact that the month  of  birth  for  the  first
       appellant is different in the Companies House records,  and  it  was
       noted that there was a lack of HMRC tax calculations as evidence  of
       the first appellant's self-employment. As  a  result,  it  is  said,
       there was no evidence that the first appellant had  been  exercising
       Treaty rights for a five year period. Secondly  the  refusal  letter
       contends that the documentation did not show that  second  appellant
       was dependent on the first appellant which he needed to show  as  he
       was over the age of 21 years. I find that the refusal letter clearly
       put all issues under the relevant EEA  Regulations  in  play,  there
       were no concessions that any elements were met, and thus  there  was
       no procedural unfairness to the appellants in their having  to  show
       on the balance of probabilities that all  aspects  of  the  relevant
       tests under the 2006 EEA Regulations at Regulation  6  (showing  the
       first appellant was self- employed as claimed) and  Regulation  7(1)
       (showing the second appellant was the first  appellant's  dependent)
       were met before the First-tier Tribunal.

   12. I find that the directions issued at the CMR hearing were an attempt
       to assist the appellants  and  their  representative  in  assembling
       relevant evidence to address issues in the appeal. As  the  identity
       of the first  appellant/  his  ownership  of  Bellerphon  Investment
       Management LTD was in dispute due to many variants in  the  spelling
       of his name and the fact that he and his son have the  same  initial
       in the Greek alphabet it was rational to require his  current  Greek
       passport and as it was  clear  that  the  effective  nature  of  the
       business was in issue business accounts were logically directed. The
       directions do not give any  indication  that  these  were  the  only
       documents required for the appellants to  succeed.  It  is  for  all
       appellants to prove their case in accordance with the  relevant  EEA
       Regulations, or other legal provisions, and the need for  additional
       documentation ought to have been  assessed  by  the  appellants  and
       their legal advisers particularly when the content of the  documents
       obtained in accordance with directions was  viewed.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge could not have been  aware  of  the  content  of  the
       accounts for instance, and thus what their  evidential  worth  would
       be, when he ordered their production.  It  will  always  be  for  an
       appellant to assess whether the evidence obtained in accordance with
       directions  suffices  or  whether  further  supporting  evidence  is
       needed.

   13. It was unwise and unnecessary for the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
       have set  out  that  he  had  relevant  expertise  in  business  and
       accounts: it is for the appellant to prove his case and there is  no
       need for a judge to have such expertise, and if he or she  does  and
       this is pertinent to deciding an appeal it must always  be  notified
       to the parties. I do not find however that in  this  case  that  the
       Judge actually took on the role of expert. At  paragraph  3  of  the
       decision there is some irrelevant raising of other  topics  such  as
       Brexit, naturalisation and  the  entrepreneur  rules.  This  is,  of
       course, not to be encouraged when determining an appeal but I do not
       find that it has led to a decision which did not  then  move  on  to
       deal rationally with the issues that were raised by the refusal  and
       determine them lawfully.

   14. At  paragraph  49  of  the  decision  the  Judge  accepts  that  the
       differences in the first appellant's name  that  had  concerned  the
       respondent were caused by transliteration from Greek, and  therefore
       were not an indication against his owning the company. At  paragraph
       50 the Judge accepts that the appellant is  the  sole  director  and
       shareholder of Bellerphon, and that there is no evidence the  second
       appellant is  involved  with  the  company  so  concludes  that  all
       documents relating to the company related to the first appellant. At
       paragraph 51 the Judge dismisses the  difference  in  the  month  of
       birth by Companies house as a minor error.  He  therefore  concludes
       that he finds for the appellant on this issue at paragraph 52 of the
       decision, therefore finding that the first appellant was  the  owner
       of Bellerphon Investment Management LTD.

   15. From paragraphs 55 to 62 of the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       then considers whether the evidence amounted to  showing  the  first
       appellant  had  shown  five  years  or  a  lesser  amount  of  self-
       employment.  These  paragraphs  focus  on  the  entirely  legitimate
       question as to whether the appellant was in  genuine  and  effective
       self-employment or employment or present as a work  seeker.  I  find
       that this was the correct legal  test  to  apply,  and  nothing  the
       appellants have argued shows otherwise. It was  rationally  open  to
       the First-tier Tribunal to find that as  the  HMRC  corporation  tax
       records all showed zero amount payable and that there was  no  other
       evidence had  been  placed  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
       assisted the first appellant in showing that  there  was  no  actual
       self-employment taking place. I find that the consideration of other
       evidence that could have been  supplied  by  the  appellants  was  a
       lawful approach in accordance with TK (Burundi) v SSHD  [2009]  EWCA
       40. Before me Dr Lawson accepted that there was no material evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal which was omitted from  consideration
       on this issue. At  paragraph  65  there  is  then  consideration  of
       whether the second appellant has shown that he is dependent  on  the
       first appellant and for entirely rational reasons it is  found  that
       he is not. Once again Dr Lawson could not identify any evidence that
       the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  consider  in  reaching  this
       conclusion.

   16. If the first  appellant  has  evidence  that  he  is  genuinely  and
       effectively exercising Treaty rights in the  UK,  and  if  there  is
       evidence that the second appellant is dependent  upon  him  for  his
       essential living needs then a new application can  be  made  to  the
       respondent with this evidence and the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal which helpfully clarifies  in  the  appellants  favour  the
       issues of identity which  the  Home  Office  had  doubted  in  their
       previous decision.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I uphold the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeals under the EEA Regulations.






Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   12th  February
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






