

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/09092/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 14 February 2018                  |               On 22 February 2018   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  Md ADEEL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Anderson
Rizwan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision  by  FtT  Judge  M  R  Oliver,
    promulgated on 18 January 2017, dismissing his appeal  against  refusal
    of a residence card as the husband of an EEA citizen.  His grounds  are
    that the judge erred by reversing the burden of proof, and that it  was
    for  the  respondent  to  establish  that  the  marriage  was  one   of
    convenience.

 2. The authorities which the appellant cites are in his favour, and he now
    has the further imprimatur of Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.

 3. The judge also  went  wrong  by  holding  that  an  application  for  a
    residence card cannot succeed where the applicant was in the UK  before
    the EEA spouse.

 4. There are therefore two errors of law in the FtT decision, such that it
    cannot stand.

 5. The respondent's decision leading to  these  proceedings  is  based  on
    alleged discrepancies arising from interviews of the appellant and  his
    sponsor on 12 May 2016, the day  before  they  married.   However,  the
    decision does not say what the discrepancies are.

 6. Mr Matthews could not identify any discrepancies to  support  the  case
    for the respondent or point to any other materials before  the  FtT  by
    which the respondent might discharge the burden upon her.

 7. There is no basis on which we might  remit  to  the  FtT  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

 8. We remake the decision by finding that the  respondent  has  failed  to
    discharge the onus of showing the marriage to be  one  of  convenience,
    and that the appellant is entitled to a residence  card  as  a  spouse.



 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the following
    decision is substituted: the appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed.



10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



            [pic]


            14 February 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




