
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09825/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 10 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                  TOSEEF aHMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not legally represented (appellant's brother, Sana
Ullah, attends)
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne ("the FtJ") has been granted by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal.
    The FtJ concluded that he  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal
    against the decision to refuse an EEA family permit,  in  circumstances
    where the appellant's claimed entitlement to such  is  as  an  extended
    family member. The FtJ made his decision in the light  of  Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC). Permission to appeal  against
    his decision was granted following Khan v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 175.


 2. In a 'rule  24'  response  (which  had  not  found  its  way  onto  the
    Tribunal's file prior to the hearing, although it is dated  24  October
    2018) the respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appeal  and  invites  the
    Tribunal to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  ("FtT").  That
    was also Mr Bates' position at the hearing before me.

 3. I explained the circumstances to Mr Ullah who appeared on behalf of the
    appellant, his brother. It was not suggested on behalf of the appellant
    that the course proposed by the respondent should not be followed.

 4. In the circumstances, in the light of decision in Khan which found that
    Sala was wrongly decided, as well as the decision  in  SM  (Algeria)  v
    Entry Clearance Officer [2018] UKSC 9, I am satisfied that there is  an
    error of law in the decision of the FtJ in his conclusion that  he  had
    no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 5. Accordingly, the decision of the FtT is set aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo before  a  judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne.

 6. In the light of the new address of the sponsor which  the  Tribunal  is
    aware of, the remitted hearing should take place in Birmingham.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            5/12/18


