
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09535/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 October 2017                    |On 23 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                               mrs anita brown
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOt Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Okunowo, Counsel instructed by Toltops
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  who  was  born  on  20  December
    1975.  She appeals the decision  of  Judge  Abebrese  (the  Immigration
    Judge) who dismissed her paper appeal against the refusal to grant  her
    a permanent residence card in the UK to  join  her  husband,  Mr  Jacob
    Akinwale Johnson, a German national.

2.   It appears that Mr Johnson arrived in the UK as long ago as 10  January
    2004 and that the appellant obtained a permit to join him  on  9  March
    2010.  She was initially given a residence card on 27 January 2011  but
    later applied for a permanent residence card in the UK.  Judge Abebrese
    when he considered the case noted that this was a paper appeal and that
    the appellant had not put in any witness statement from either  herself
    or her sponsor husband.  He also noted that the evidence that had  been
    supplied in support of the application was limited. In particular,  the
    only key part of the evidence that he had in front of him was a P60 for
    the period 2013 to 2014.  He noted that a  witness  statement  had  not
    been provided in support of the evidence and he said that the  evidence
    before him did not provide the respondent with  sufficient  information
    to decide whether the sponsor was in fact  been  carrying  on  economic
    activities within the UK for the required  five-  year  period  as  was
    required by  Regulation  15  of  the  EEA  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA
    Regulations).   The 2014/15 document was clearly  inadequate  for  this
    purpose as it did not cover the requisite continuous  five-year  period
    required  by  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of   the   EEA   Regulations   and,
    furthermore, he noted that this evidence had not even been mentioned in
    the refusal, it  had  not  been  tested  in  cross-examination  and  he
    therefore decided that the evidence was not sufficient to discharge the
    burden of proving that the Regulations were met to the  civil  standard
    of proof, which applies to the application, at the date of decision.

3.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  considered  the  application  for
    permission to appeal and noted  that  in  his  view  it  was  at  least
    arguable that the Immigration Judge failed to give any good reason  for
    rejecting the evidence.  It was incumbent upon the Immigration Judge to
    consider all the evidence placed before him in support of  the  appeal.
    Judge Holmes thought it was at least arguable that sufficient  evidence
    had been placed before him  to  satisfy  the  requirement  of  the  EEA
    Regulations to grant the required permanent residence card.

4.   Before me it has been argued by  the  appellant,  who  has  produced  a
    helpful bundle of documents in support of the  appeal,  that  the  P60s
    were more than sufficient to satisfy  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    15(1)  (b)  of  the  EEA  Regulations.  They  are  official   documents
    recognised by the Inland Revenue, which are  frequently  relied  on  in
    courts and tribunals and the Immigration Judge did have  at  least  one
    document confirming the sponsor's employment with a company called NSL,
    which I am told is a security company.  He took me to the  actual  P60s
    themselves which start at page 18 of his bundle and they do indeed show
    a continuous period of employment without a break.  His case  therefore
    was,  that  there  were  insufficient  grounds  for  dismissing   these
    documents. They could be relied upon  at  face  value  given  that  the
    ordinary civil standard of proof applied to evidence in this case.

5.   However ,Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued that  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the evidence and decide what  weight  to  attach  to  it.   At
    paragraph 11 he balanced all the relevant factors  but  concluded  that
    the evidence was insufficiently robust.  It was open to  the  appellant
    and the sponsor to provide proper witness statements.  In  fairness  to
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, she accepted it was perfectly within the rights of
    the appellant to decide to  have  a  paper  appeal  and  therefore  the
    reference to her being cross-examined was something of an  irrelevance.
    No original documents were supplied and it was therefore difficult  for
    the respondent to properly consider the application and decide  whether
    to dispute the validity or authenticity of the documentation.

6.   Mr Okunowo responded to say that  the  documents  clearly  demonstrated
    the period of employment in question.  It was up to the Home Office  to
    dispute the P60 that they had been supplied with  and  if  they  needed
    more information they should have requested it.  The Immigration  Judge
    was obliged to consider  all  documents  supplied  in  support  of  the
    appeal.

7.   Whilst I have some sympathy with the Immigration Judge, who  was  faced
    with a paper appeal and very little documentation in support, there was
    sufficient   documentation   to   properly   determine   this   appeal.
    Unfortunately, it seems that the respondent was not supplied  with  all
    the documents she should have  been  supplied  with.   However,  as  Mr
    Okunowo has rightly submitted, the ordinary  civil  standard  of  proof
    applies to this appeal and the test that had to be satisfied was not  a
    particularly high or difficult one. The  issue  was:  whether  the  EEA
    national had resided in the UK in accordance with the  EEA  Regulations
    for a continuous period of five years? It seems that the appellant  was
    in continuous  employment  throughout  the  five  year  period  as  was
    required by those Regulations.

8.   The appellant had a right of appeal under  Regulation  26  of  the  EEA
    Regulations.  The  Immigration  Judge  was  required  to  consider  all
    material evidence provided in support of the appeal at the date of  the
    hearing, whether or not it was supplied in support of the  application.
    It was open to the respondent to challenge the P60 for  the  year  that
    had been produced and the respondent did not  suggest  that  that  was,
    effectively, a fabrication. But, if she doubted its  authenticity,  the
    respondent should have said so.

9.   I have concluded there was a material error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. I find that the evidence  supplied  discharged
    the ordinary civil standard of proof in absence of any evidence to  the
    contrary. I substitute my decision for that of the First-tier Tribunal,
    which is to allow the appeal of the appellant against  the  refusal  of
    the respondent to grant a permanent residence card and I so direct.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the EEA Regulations

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award but have decided to make no  fee  award
because the appellant did not supply all the documents  he  should  supplied
at the outset.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

