
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09265/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2018                 |On 15 October 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                          Diana Isabel Cruz Cachola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     in person
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Aujla, promulgated on 16 May  2018  dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision made on  9  November  2017  dismissing  her
    application for a residence card as confirmation of her permanent right
    to reside in the United Kingdom pursuant to the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2016 ("the EEA Regulations").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal born in 1997.   She  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in 2012 to join her mother who has been resident  in
    the United Kingdom  for  over  fifteen  years  and  who  holds  a  card
    confirming her right of permanent  residence.   She  attended  college,
    undertook some part-time employment and then in 2016 took up  full-time
    employment.

 3. The respondent refused the application on the basis that the  appellant
    had not shown that she had been exercising treaty rights for five years
    continuously.  That is because although she had  provided  evidence  of
    studies, she had not provided evidence showing that:-

      1) she had held sufficient funds for the entire duration  of  studies;
         or

      2) she had held comprehensive medical insurance while a student.

 4. The appellant did  not  request  an  oral  hearing.   The  matter  then
    proceeded to determine the application on the papers, noting  [9]  that
    the respondent had not provided a bundle but he was satisfied  that  he
    could proceed in any event, concluding that the appellant had not shown
    that she  had  comprehensive  medical  insurance  and  on  that  basis,
    although she was maintained by her mother throughout  the  period,  she
    could  not  be  regarded  as  exercising  treaty  rights.   The   judge
    considered at [16] that the appellant could not succeed as a  dependent
    child of her mother given the lack of documentary evidence  of  support
    in the claim such as a birth certificate.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to note that there was evidence that she was related to  her
    mother, given that their ID cards stipulated the names of  her  parents
    and as her mother had sent a letter explaining that she was living with
    her and paying for all her needs as well as a  copy  of  her  permanent
    residence card.

 6. On 6 August 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell granted  permission
    noting that the judge had observed that the respondent had not provided
    a copy of the bundle which, arguably, the  appellant  could  reasonably
    have expected to have been provided.

 7. When the matter came before me, Mr Bates explained that a copy  of  the
    respondent's bundle had indeed been forwarded to  the  Tribunal  on  22
    March 2018 in electronic form but it was unclear why this had not  been
    put before the judge.  He was also concerned that the  bundle  appeared
    in any event to be incomplete.

 8. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that there was a procedural  error
    in this case in that a bundle had indeed been provided but for  reasons
    which are unclear, had not been put before the judge.  I  am  satisfied
    that this was an error and I  am  satisfied  also  that  the  error  is
    material given that this clearly establishes that the appellant and her
    mother are related, those documents being attached within  the  bundle.
    There was no proper determination of the appeal through no fault of the
    judge and accordingly the matter falls to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.

 9. The appellant will also need to provide the following to the First-tier
    Tribunal:-

      1) Evidence that she has been supported by  her  mother,  for  example
         evidence that  they  are  living  together  at  the  same  address,
         evidence of transfers of money from the appellant's mother  to  her
         in form of, for example, bank statements for each of them, as  well
         as

      2) witness statements from both the appellant and her mother  as  they
         will need to give evidence on the issue of dependency

10. The appellant should also if possible obtain a letter from HM Revenue &
    Customs setting out:-

      1) the date at which she entered into the National  Insurance  system;
         and

      2) the amount of contributions she has made since then.

11.  The  appellant  is  reminded  that  in  order  to  assist  the  First-
    tierTribunal she will need to provide the following:-

      1) a bundle comprising copies of all the relevant documents; and

      2) take the original documents to court on the day of the hearing.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.


 2) I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues, the appeal not to be heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aujla.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 9 October 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul




