
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/09727/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 November 2018                           |On 18 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                               bushra farhana
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A De Ruano, Legal Representative of Goodfellows
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the wife of a British citizen, Mr [AT].  The  marriage
    took place in Pakistan in 2013.  Her husband  returned  to  the  United
    Kingdom and she remained in Pakistan  where  she  was  caring  for  her
    parents.  In July 2014 the sponsor moved to Ireland and in  March  2016
    the appellant obtained entry clearance to join him  there.   In  August
    2016 they moved to the United Kingdom.

2.   On 11 April 2017 the appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as  a
    family member of a British citizen who has exercised treaty  rights  in
    Ireland.

3.   In a decision dated 22  November  2017,  the  respondent  refused  that
    application for  reason  of  Regulation  9  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  The respondent was not satisfied  that  the  sponsor
    had genuinely exercised treaty rights in another  EU  member  state  in
    accordance with that Regulation.

4.   It was noted that the appellant had entered Ireland on  17  March  2016
    with her two children and that the family had left Ireland  in  October
    2016.

5.   It was the case advanced by the sponsor that the  reason  that  he  had
    gone to Ireland was to develop a business.  In a detailed decision  the
    respondent analysed the nature of the evidence presented about such  an
    occupation.  The respondent found the documentation to  be  undermining
    of credibility and in part to be contradictory.

6.   It was also noted that in a birth  certificate  the  sponsor  described
    himself as a cab driver but no evidence whatsoever of  that  occupation
    was presented.

7.   The evidence presented as  to  accommodation  and  residence  was  also
    found to be unsatisfactory for the reasons as set out in the  decision.
    It is not accepted that the documents as presented were indeed credible
    or that much weight could be placed upon them.

8.   In essence it was the view of  the  respondent  that  the  presence  in
    Ireland was not genuine but rather was part of a process to enable  the
    appellant to claim rights of residence in the United Kingdom.

9.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup for hearing on  14  August
    2018.   In  a  determination  dated  28  August  2018  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

10.  The appellant sought to challenge that decision and leave to do so  was
    granted on 26 September 2018.  Thus  the  matter  comes  before  me  to
    determine the issues.

11.  In essence it is submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  the  Judge
    has failed to give due weight to the length  of  residence  in  Ireland
    namely from July 2014 to October 2016, he has failed to appreciate that
    the appellant herself lived in Ireland for some  six  months.   It  was
    submitted that the Judge failed to consider Regulation  9  within  that
    context.

12.  It is a requirement set out in Regulation  9  that  the  appellant  and
    sponsor should have resided together in the EEA  state  and  that  such
    residence was genuine the factors  which  are  relevant  to  whether  a
    residence is or was genuine include:-

    (a)  whether the centre of sponsor's life transferred to the EEA state;


    (b)  the length of the sponsor and appellant's joint residence in  that
         state;


    (c)   the  nature  and  quality  of   the   appellant   and   sponsor's
         accommodation in the state in  the  way  that  it  is  or  was  the
         sponsor's principal residence;


    (d)  the degree of the appellant and sponsor's integration in  the  EEA
         state;


    (e)  whether the appellant's first lawful residence in the EU with  the
         sponsor was in the EEA state.

13.  Consideration had to  be  given  as  to  whether  the  purpose  of  the
    residence in the  EEA  state  was  as  a  means  of  circumventing  any
    Immigration Rules applying to non-EEA nationals to which the  appellant
    would otherwise be subject.

14.  The reason given by the sponsor for moving to Ireland  is  set  out  in
    his witness statement of 2 August 2018, namely he identified a business
    opportunity with a friend of his,  a  Mr  [TA]  that  was  to  start  a
    catering business.  He indicated in the statement that whilst he was in
    Ireland he registered himself on a self-employed basis  and  started  a
    business of catering providing cooked food to the customers  for  their
    functions and parties.  He said that he was  able  to  earn  reasonable
    earnings from the business. Later he was to say  that  demand  for  his
    business began to fall by prompting his return to  the  United  Kingdom
    upon an offer of employment there.

15.  The sponsor was asked if  he  had  any  invoices  in  relation  to  his
    catering business and he said that they were not with him.  In terms of
    the accounts submitted by the accountant, these showed a profit in 2014
    as E2,915 and in 2015 E4,500 and in December 2016 E1,900.  The  sponsor
    agreed that his family could not survive on those amounts  particularly
    when his rent was E900 per month.   He  agreed  when  asked  about  the
    accounts that were submitted that the figures did not match the figures
    that he had given.

16.  It was  the  finding  of  the  Judge  that  the  sponsor  had  provided
    inconsistent evidence about his  earnings  in  Ireland  and  failed  to
    produce invoices in relation  to  his  work.   This  of  course  is  of
    particular significance given the detailed challenges that were set out
    in the refusal decision but seemingly had not been addressed.

17.  Further complications  seem  to  have  arisen  in  that  in  the  birth
    certificate of his daughter the sponsor described his occupation  as  a
    minicab driver.  His daughter had been born on 26 December  2016  at  a
    time when the sponsor and appellant were clearly  back  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The sponsor denied that he had worked in that  capacity.  The
    Judge found however that his  statement  that  he  had  undermined  his
    credibility generally.

18.  If the main reason for the  sponsor  having  gone  to  Ireland  was  to
    establish his business, it is perhaps significant  and  undermining  of
    his credibility in that regard, that he failed to produce the requisite
    evidence that he was so employed.

19.  In terms of his residence that also was the subject of  challenge.   He
    asserted that he had lived at [~] Fearann Ri for  the  period.  He  was
    referred to documents in the respondent's bundle showing that he  lived
    at three addresses in that road.  He said that the same landlord  owned
    those properties and sometimes he would be asked to move to one of  the
    others.  Once again he had not brought the tenancy agreements to  court
    although the nature of  his  accommodation  had  been  the  subject  of
    challenge in the decision letter.

20.  As Ms Isherwood submits, there was a marked lack of any  detail  as  to
    any integration into society or anything  to  indicate  that  when  the
    appellant joined the sponsor in Ireland that it was then the  intention
    that they live in Ireland rather than elsewhere.

21.  I note, so far as the appellant is concerned,  that  her  statement  is
    very brief indeed.  It  is  recorded  in  the  determination  that  the
    appellant also  indicated  that  she  intended  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Judge found on that basis that it was not  her  intention
    to establish family life in Ireland but rather to live  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was relevant in that  context  that  the  application  for
    settlement in  the  United  Kingdom  otherwise  than  through  the  EEA
    Regulations would not have succeeded.  The Judge having considered  the
    evidence that was presented did not find it to indicate any  degree  of
    commitment to living in Ireland and there was little  evidence  of  any
    integration in that country.

22.  The grounds of appeal cite a number of documents  showing  the  sponsor
    lived in Ireland during that period and that when the appellant  joined
    him they lived together. Whilst documentation is in the bundle  and  it
    is clear that the Judge had made reference to  that  documentation  but
    gave it little weight in  determining  the  relevant  issues  as  to  a
    genuineness of occupation for the reasons that are set out.

23.  For the most part the grounds seek to challenge the conclusions of  the
    Judge.

24.  In practical terms this was  a  sponsor  and  appellant  who  had  been
    alerted to the concerns of the respondent in relation to  Regulation  9
    in a decision in that they were represented at the hearing  almost  one
    year later.  It is not unreasonable of the Judge to have expected  some
    clarity in the evidence that was presented relevant to the issues which
    were highlighted in the appeal.

25.  Given the paucity of evidence as to what the sponsor was doing  in  the
    significant period before the appellant joined him indeed  the  absence
    of evidence as to the lifestyle  and  activity  of  the  appellant  and
    sponsor whilst in Ireland, I find that it  was  properly  open  to  the
    Judge in the assessment of the factual situation and having  regard  to
    the overall context to have come to the conclusions that  were  arrived
    at.

26.  In granting permission to appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    identified the case of O and B v Minister voor  Immigratie,  Integratie
    en Asiel (Directive 2004/38/EC - Article 21(1) TFEU) Case  C-456/12  of
    that noted that the scope of Union law could not be extended  to  cover
    abuses.  Proof of  such  abuse  required  a  combination  of  objective
    circumstances in which, despite formal  observance  of  the  conditions
    laid down by the European Union Rules, the purpose of those  Rules  has
    not been achieved and secondly, a  subjective  element  consisting  the
    intention to obtain an advantage  from  the  European  Union  Rules  by
    artificially creating the conditions laid down for obtaining it.

27.  It was the clear view of  the  Judge  supported  by  reasons  that  the
    purpose of the sponsor moving to Ireland was precisely to  artificially
    create a situation in which the EEA rights could indeed extend  to  him
    and his family. Indeed it would also seem on the basis of  the  Judge's
    findings that the sponsor was not exercising treaty rights  in  Ireland
    in any event or to any significant extent so as to create  or  exercise
    any such rights.

28.  In  all  the  circumstances  therefore  the  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal shall stand namely that  the  appeal  of  the  appellant
stands dismissed under the EEA Regulations.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 17 Dec 2018

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

