


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
ea/10487/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27th March 2018                         |On 11th April 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                         miss temitayo adeola marble
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Ferguson of Counsel instructed by Okafor & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who  was  born  on  31st  January
    1980, and who arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage in August 2011.  She was issued with a residence card on  26th
    October 2011, with an expiry date of 26th October 2016.  The  residence
    card was revoked because she was  no  longer  living  with  her  family
    member.  The appellant claimed that she married a  French  national  on
    6th November 2010, and that sadly they divorced on 12th  October  2015.
    She maintained that at  the  time  of  their  marriage  and  since  the
    divorce, both she and her French  national  former  husband  have  been
    working and, therefore, that her  former  spouse  has  been  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

2.   The respondent having  revoked  the  appellant's  residence  card,  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her appeal was heard at
    Newport on 13th July  2017,  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson.  She dismissed the appeal.

3.   The appellant challenged the  judge's  determination.   Throughout  her
    determination the  judge  appears  to  assume  that  the  appellant  is
    required to demonstrate  that  both  she  and  her  former  spouse  are
    continuing to exercise treaty rights in the United Kingdom, whereas  in
    fact, of course, it was only necessary for the appellant to demonstrate
    that her Sponsor husband had been exercising treaty rights at the  time
    of their marriage and at the time of the divorce.

4.   There was evidence in  the  appellant's  bundle  from  HM  Customs  and
    Revenue, which effectively demonstrated  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, because clearly at all  material
    times her  former  spouse  was  exercising  treaty  rights  as  an  EEA
    national.

5.   At the hearing before me Ms Ahmad  confirmed  that  she  was  satisfied
    that the appellant's former spouse was exercising treaty rights at  all
    relevant times.  In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson does contain a  material
    error of law.  I set aside her decision and remake the decision myself.

6.   I therefore allow the appellant's appeal.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   Date: 11 April 2018



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal.  I have considered  making  a  fee  award  and
have decided to make a fee award of any fee which has been paid  or  may  be
payable for the following reason.  The appellant's appeal was successful.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley   Date: 11 April 2018
