
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/10103/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7th June 2017                          |On 29th June 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                              mr Sid Ali Sebti
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Paraskos (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   On 4th  August  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  issue  a
    permanent residence card to the appellant.   His  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shergill  ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 22nd November 2016.

2.   In his application, the appellant relied upon his relationship with  an
    EEA national, which began in March 2010 and broke down on 2nd May 2015.
     On 21st March 2012, the Secretary of State issued a residence card  to
    him.  In assessing whether the appellant  could  bring  himself  within
    regulation 15 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations"), and in particular  the  requirement  that  a  continuous
    period of five years' residence in the  United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
    national in accordance with the 2006 Regulations be  shown,  the  judge
    found that the period of five years was to be calculated from the  date
    of application, in this case 11th February 2016.   As  the  appellant's
    durable relationship had come to an end almost a  year  beforehand,  he
    had no permanent right of residence under the 2006 Regulations  and  so
    his application could not succeed.

3.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended  that  the
    judge erred in relation to the assessment of  the  relevant  period  of
    five years.  There was  nothing  in  regulation  15(1)(b)  requiring  a
    family member to show residence with the EEA national as at the date of
    application for a permanent residence card.  The requirement was met so
    long as  the  relationship  had  lasted  for  five  years,  subject  to
    residence being in accordance with the 2006 Regulations.  The Secretary
    of State acknowledged that the relationship began  in  March  2010  and
    issued a residence card to the appellant valid  from  31st  March  2012
    until 21st March 2017.  The five years fell to be calculated  from  the
    date the relationship began.

4.   Permission to appeal  was  refused  on  23rd  March  2017.   The  judge
    refusing permission  found  that  although  the  decision  contained  a
    misdirection in relation to the calculation of the relevant  period  of
    five years, the error was not material.  The appellant was not a family
    member of  a  qualified  person  and  never  had  been.   As  the  2006
    Regulations made no provision for permanent residence  by  an  extended
    family member such as the appellant, or for the issue  of  a  permanent
    residence card to such a person, there was no arguable  material  error
    of law.

5.    The  application  was  renewed.   An  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   granted
    permission on 25th April 2017, again finding that the judge misdirected
    himself in relation to the period of five years, on the basis  that  if
    the appellant were able to show such a continuous period of  residence,
    he might fall within regulation 17(4) and (5) of the  2006  Regulations
    as a person who might benefit from the exercise of  discretion  by  the
    Secretary of State.  As the judge appeared not to have made findings of
    fact regarding whether or not the sponsor was exercising treaty  rights
    for  the  relevant  period,  the  misdirection  arguably  deprived  the
    appellant of the  benefit  of  regulation  17  and  so  the  error  was
    material.

6.   On 5th May 2017, the Principal  Resident  Judge  at  Field  House  made
    directions, sent to the parties on that date.   They  were  advised  to
    prepare for the hearing on the basis that  if  an  error  of  law  were
    found, the decision would be remade at the  same  hearing.   The  fresh
    decision would be made in the light of the evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and any further evidence admitted and the parties were to
    prepare accordingly.

7.   In a rule 24 response, the Secretary of State opposed the appeal.   The
    appellant could not succeed, not least because there  was  no  evidence
    that the EEA national he relied upon,  his  former  partner,  had  been
    present in the United Kingdom as a qualified person during the relevant
    period  of  five  years.   In   a   response   from   the   appellant's
    representative,  it  was  asserted  that  any  evidential   requirement
    regarding the sponsor could be met and that the Secretary of State  had
    recognised part of this requirement in issuing a residence card to  the
    appellant in 2012.  On 2nd June 2017, the appellant's solicitors sent a
    skeleton argument to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  prepared  by  counsel,  Mr
    Paraskos.  Attached to it was a copy  of  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Samsam [2011] UKUT 00165.  In the course of the hearing, Mr
    Paraskos handed  up  a  copy  of  Directive  2004/38,  transposed  into
    domestic legislation by the 2006 Regulations.

Submissions on Error of Law

8.   Mr Paraskos said that the period of five  years  fell  to  be  assessed
    from the date the appellant's relationship with his partner  began,  in
    March 2010.  A residence card was issued  in  2012,  the  Secretary  of
    State accepting that he was in a durable relationship for the  purposes
    of regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.  From the  date  of  issue,
    the appellant fell to be treated as a family member of an EEA  national
    under regulation 7(3).  Once he was able to show five years' continuous
    residence, he acquired a right  to  reside  here  permanently  and  was
    entitled to a permanent residence  card,  by  operation  of  law  under
    regulation  15  and  Directive  2004/38.   There  was   an   evidential
    requirement as the appellant had to show that  he  was  living  with  a
    person exercising treaty rights but, subject to that, he  was  entitled
    to  succeed.   Mr  Paraskos  accepted,  however,  that  the  evidential
    requirement could not be met on the day of the  hearing.   Nonetheless,
    the Tribunal had before it five years' worth of P60s in  the  sponsor's
    name.  If a decision were made not to adjourn, the Tribunal would  need
    to take into account these items to assess  the  position  of  the  EEA
    national.  The appellant would say that she fell within regulation 6 of
    the 2006 Regulations and was a qualified  person  during  the  relevant
    years.

9.   Mr Wilding said that even though the Secretary of State accepted  as  a
    broad principle that in assessing the period of five years,  there  was
    no counting back from the date of application, the appellant could  not
    succeed.  It was important to bear in mind how  he  said  that  he  had
    acquired a right to reside here permanently.  Regulation 15 applied  in
    terms to an EEA national or the family member of  such  a  person.   An
    extended family member could not  bring  himself  within  scope  unless
    issued with a residence card first.  Once such a document  was  issued,
    an extended family member would fall within regulation  7(3)  and  only
    then was that person in a position to begin  to  acquire  the  relevant
    right.  The precise terms  of  regulation  7(3)  were  important.   The
    requirement was that an extended family member  "...  has  been  issued
    ..." with a residence card and, if so, that person "shall be treated as
    the family member ... for as  long  as  he  continues  to  satisfy  the
    conditions in regulation 8 ... (5) in relation to that EEA national and
    the ... card has not ceased to be valid or been revoked".

10.  It followed that the appellant was not able to argue his  case  on  the
    basis of accrued residence before 2012, the year he was issued with the
    residence card.  Before the date of  issue,  he  did  not  fall  to  be
    treated as the family member of an EEA national, for  the  purposes  of
    regulation 15.  There was a broad contrast between the rights  accruing
    to family members and the position of extended family members  able  to
    benefit from the exercise of  discretion  under  regulation  17(4).   A
    similar difference between the two categories was found  in  regulation
    10, where there was a certain protection of rights after divorce but no
    similar protection where a durable relationship came to an end.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge who refused permission erred  in  finding
    that an extended  family  member  was  simply  unable  to  qualify  for
    permanent residence but  was  otherwise  correct  in  relation  to  the
    general principle that an  extended  family  member  without  more  was
    unable to start the clock running, prior to issue of a  residence  card
    or similar document.  The relationship the appellant relied upon lasted
    from March 2010 until early May 2015 but he was unable to rely  on  the
    years between 2010 and 2012.  The relationship ended in May 2015 and so
    he ceased to be a person falling within regulation 8(5) on that  event.



12.  As a secondary point, Mr Wilding said that as  a  durable  relationship
    was one akin to marriage, the very fact that it ended would  show  that
    it was not durable.  Again,  regulation  10  of  the  2006  Regulations
    revealed a sharp distinction between those who were married and who had
    protection on divorce and  those  whose  durable  relationships  ended.
    Thirdly, save  for  the  five  P60s,  there  was  no  evidence  of  the
    whereabouts or the activities of the  EEA  national  relied  upon.   If
    those items were considered, the amounts earned were not sufficient  to
    show that she had been working continuously during the relevant  period
    of five years.  The evidence did not reveal precisely what the economic
    activity was but the Secretary of State accepted that she  was  working
    at the time the residence card was issued.  Similarly, the Secretary of
    State accepted that the appellant  was,  at  the  time,  in  a  durable
    relationship but nothing could be read into the period beforehand.  The
    P60s showed that she earned about �10,000 in  each  year,  with  a  new
    employer annually.  There was an obvious evidential  gap.   It  was  no
    answer to say that the appeal should be remitted.  Even if  a  material
    error was shown, there was nothing to prevent the Upper  Tribunal  from
    remaking the decision today, in the light of the evidence before it.

13.  In response, Mr Paraskos drew attention to Directive  2004/38  and,  in
    particular, Article 25.  This made it perfectly clear  that  possession
    of a registration  certificate  or  a  residence  card  "may  under  no
    circumstances be made a precondition for the exercise of a right or the
    completion of an administrative formality, as entitlement to rights may
    be attested by any other means of proof".  Once the Secretary of  State
    provided for an extended family member to be treated as a family member
    and once a period of five years' continuous residence  was  shown,  the
    Secretary of State was not able to say that a claimant had no right  to
    permanent residence merely because the residence card issued to him  or
    her bore a date falling within that period of five years. The Secretary
    of State recognised the existence of the  durable  relationship.   Also
    relevant was Article 3, defining beneficiaries  at  3.2.   Subparagraph
    (b) referred to a partner with whom  a  Union  citizen  has  a  durable
    relationship, "duly attested".  The 2006 Regulations provided that such
    a partner, being a non-EEA national, would be  treated  as  the  family
    member once a residence card was issued.  An entitlement  to  permanent
    residence would follow after five years.

14.   In  response  to  the  submission  that  the  ending  of   a   durable
    relationship showed that it was not durable, the  same  might  be  said
    about a marriage.  In  the  present  appeal,  in  order  to  issue  the
    residence card to  the  appellant  in  2012,  the  Secretary  of  State
    determined that the relationship was durable.  The appellant's case was
    that the notional "start date" for the acquisition of a right to reside
    permanently was March 2010, when the relationship began.   It  was  not
    possible to issue the residence card on the basis that the relationship
    was recognised as beginning only as at the date of issue as this  would
    conflict with Article 25 of the Directive.  The period before the issue
    of the residence card fell to be taken into  account,  which  was  also
    made plain by the words "duly attested" at the end of Article 3.2(b) of
    the Directive.  The residence card was evidence  of  the  relationship,
    including the period of time in which it subsisted  before  issue.   In
    issuing the residence card, the Secretary of State  accepted  the  pre-
    existing facts or circumstances.  The spirit of the Directive  fell  to
    be applied, in favour of  those  entitled  to  be  beneficiaries.   The
    Secretary of State had, through the 2006 Regulations, tied  herself  to
    treating  extended  family  members  as  family  members   in   certain
    circumstances.

15.  Article 16 of the Directive, in paragraphs 1 and 2, provided a  general
    rule for Union citizens and their  family  members,  so  that  extended
    family members could benefit.

16.  Mr Wilding responded briefly on the Directive, saying that Articles  25
    and 16 were concerned with family members,  as  was  Article  2,  which
    defined the term.  Extended family members fell within  Article  3,  as
    beneficiaries in a distinct category.  Mr Paraskos  said  briefly  that
    Article 2 was indeed concerned with the definition  of  family  members
    but where a person was treated as such, that person's rights under  the
    Directive and the 2006 Regulations applied.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17.  It is appropriate to start with the Directive and to observe  that,  as
    submitted by Mr Wilding, Article 2(2) defines family members.  They are
    bearers of rights.  Article 3 identifies beneficiaries,  including  the
    partner with whom a Union citizen has a durable relationship, as  those
    in relation to whom member states shall, in  accordance  with  national
    legislation, facilitate entry and residence.  Article  16  and  Article
    25, referred to by Mr Paraskos in  his  submissions,  apply  to  family
    members.  The transposition of the Directive into our domestic law,  by
    means of the 2006 Regulations, provides for  extended  family  members,
    falling within the  category  of  beneficiaries  under  Article  3,  to
    acquire rights as persons treated  as  family  members  falling  within
    Article 2 of the Directive.  The mechanism by which  this  is  achieved
    is, for the purposes of this appeal, contained in  regulation  7(3)  of
    the 2006 Regulations.  Without this mechanism, extended family  members
    have merely the benefit of regulation 17(4), which  provides  that  the
    Secretary of State may issue a  residence  card  to  a  person  falling
    within that category, not falling within regulation 7(3),  so  long  as
    the EEA national relied upon is a qualified person or an  EEA  national
    with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 and so long  as
    it  appears  to  the  Secretary  of  State  in  all  the  circumstances
    appropriate to issue the residence card.

18.  The precise terms of regulation 7(3) are important.  This part  of  our
    domestic law does not seek to transpose any part of  Directive  2004/38
    and there is no discrete Article within that  Directive  providing  for
    beneficiaries falling within Article 3 to be treated as family  members
    falling within Article 2.

19.  In order for an extended family member to  be  treated  as  the  family
    member of the relevant EEA national, regulation 7(3)  requires  him  or
    her to show that he or she "has been issued with" a residence card.  If
    so, he or she "shall be treated as the family member", "for as long  as
    he continues to satisfy the conditions" in regulation  8(5),  in  other
    words so long as the appellant in  this  case  continues  to  be  in  a
    durable relationship, and the residence card  "has  not  ceased  to  be
    valid or been revoked".  Taking into account the particular phrase "for
    as long as he continues to satisfy the conditions", it is clear that an
    extended family member will cease to be treated as the family member of
    an EEA national if the durable relationship comes to an end, as will be
    the case also if the residence card ceases to be valid.

20.  There is nothing in regulation 7(3) to suggest that an  earlier  period
    of time, before the residence card is issued, may be taken into account
    in calculating the period of time in which the extended  family  member
    "shall be treated as the family member of the relevant  EEA  national",
    for the purposes of establishing whether such  a  person  acquires  the
    right to reside permanently  under  regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  That  right  accrues  where  a  family  member  can  show
    relevant residence for a continuous period of  five  years  but  as  an
    extended family member is only treated as the family member of  an  EEA
    national in circumstances where he  or  she  has  been  issued  with  a
    residence  card,  continues  to  satisfy  the  relevant  conditions  in
    regulation 8 and so long as the residence card has  not  ceased  to  be
    valid  or  been  revoked,  earlier  periods  of  time  in   which   the
    relationship may have existed fall outside  scope.   During  the  years
    March 2010 to March 2012, the appellant was simply unable to show  that
    he was a person to whom a residence card "has been issued".  Being able
    to show that the relationship with his partner existed in  those  years
    is not enough.

21.  Is this analysis compatible with Article 25 of the  Directive?   In  my
    judgment, it is.  In the first place, as Mr Wilding submitted,  Article
    25 applies to registration certificates for Union  citizens,  documents
    certifying permanent residence and residence cards  or  similar  items.
    All of these may be issued to family members  and  Union  citizens  but
    not, under the Directive, to beneficiaries falling within Article  3.2.
    Article 25 provides that under no circumstances may possession of  such
    a document be made a precondition for the exercise of a  right  or  the
    completion of an administrative formality.  In  the  appellant's  case,
    the residence card issued to him in 2012 cannot sensibly be viewed as a
    precondition for the exercise of  a  right  or  the  completion  of  an
    administrative formality.  The residence card was instead  confirmation
    or evidence that he was in a relationship with an EEA national and,  as
    such, and importantly having been issued with the residence card,  fell
    to be treated as the family member of his EEA national  partner,  under
    regulation 7(3).  An extended family member falling  within  regulation
    7(3) may apply to the Secretary of  State  for  a  residence  card  and
    invite the exercise of discretion under regulation 17(4) in any  period
    of time before five years' continuous residence can be shown.  There is
    no  entitlement  to  be  issued  with  a  residence   card   in   these
    circumstances but, insofar as access to the exercise of discretion  may
    broadly be described as a right, the issuing of  a  residence  card  is
    plainly no precondition for the exercise of it.   Once  the  period  of
    five years' continuous  residence  has  been  shown,  so  long  as  the
    extended family member has fallen within regulation  7(3)  during  that
    period of time, he or she will acquire  the  right  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom permanently under regulation 15 but, again, the  issuing
    of the residence card or possession of it is no  precondition  for  the
    acquisition or exercise of the right.   Nor  does  the  residence  card
    amount to any barrier to an application.

22.  Mr Paraskos submitted that the words "duly  attested"  at  the  end  of
    Article 3.2(b) suggest that a period of time before a residence card is
    issued might be taken into account.  I do not accept  that  submission.
    The words "duly attested" simply mean that what  is  required  is  some
    form of evidence or confirmation of  the  relationship.   There  is  no
    inconsistency or incompatibility between the requirements of regulation
    7(3) of the 2006 Regulations and Article 3.2(b) or any  other  part  of
    the Directive.

23.  It follows that I accept Mr Wilding's submission that  the  error  made
    by the judge in relation to the calculation of the period of five years
    is not a material error.  The appellant was unable to rely on the years
    between 2010 and 2012, prior to the issuing of the residence card,  and
    the relationship came to an end in May  2015,  before  five  years  had
    passed from the date of issue.  Once the relationship came to  an  end,
    the appellant was unable to bring himself within regulation 8(5) and so
    ceased to be an extended family member altogether.

24.  Turning briefly to the  grant  of  permission  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge, as the appellant's durable relationship came to an  end  in  May
    2015, his application in February 2016 was doomed to  failure,  whether
    or not it was intended that he would seek the exercise of discretion in
    his favour under regulation 17(4) of  the  2006  Regulations.   Nothing
    more need be said on this aspect.  I have taken into account the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in Samsam but find that this is of no  assistance  to
    the appellant.

25.  For these reasons, I find that although the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains an error of law, it is not a material error.  I  find
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  dismissing  the  appeal,
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  shall  stand  as  it  contains  no
material error of law.


Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

No application for anonymity has been made in these proceedings and  I  make
no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge RC Campbell

