
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/10609/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 13 February 2018                   |            On 15 February 2018      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                         Janasenthuran Kanagenthiran
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mrs A Basharat, instructed by Linga & Co
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Callow  promulgated  16.10.17,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  19.7.16,  to
    refuse his application for an  EEA  Residence  Card  as  the  dependent
    extended family member (EFM)  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    15.11.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 13.2.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 4. For the reasons briefly summarised below, I found an error  of  law  in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the
    decision of Judge Callow should be set aside and remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be remade.

 5. Applying the then current and binding case  authority  of  Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC), Judge Callow found that there
    was no statutory right of appeal for a person claiming to  be  an  EFM.
    The judge did not address the merit of the appeal but found that  there
    was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

 6. Subsequently, the Court of Appeal in Khan v Secretary of  State  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1755 held that Sala was wrongly decided, and  that  there,  is
    after all, a statutory right of appeal.

 7. It follows that, with no criticism of Judge Callow, the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal was in error of law and cannot  stand.  The  appeal
    will have to be reheard and remade.

 8. Whilst the appellant has served a supplementary bundle  and  seeks  the
    admission of new evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A), the practice of  the
    Upper Tribunal in the very many of these similar Sala/Khan  appeals  is
    to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

 9. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. As  there  has  not  been  a  valid
    determination of the issues in the appeal,  this  case  falls  squarely
    within the Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph  7.2.  In
    the circumstances, the appropriate course is to remit  this  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be  set
aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.
     [pic]
         Signed
                                Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Consequential Directions

10. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House;

11. The ELH is 2 hours;

12. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judge Callow;

13. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

14. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


