
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/10446/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th March 2018                           |On 10th April 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                                MR HAMDULLAH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Hashmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of Designated Tribunal Judge
    Shaerf, promulgated on the 25th August  2017,  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against refusal of his application for an EEA  Residence  Card  as  the
    extended family member of a person exercising European Community Treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

 2. The judge dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction, following  and
    applying the decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411
    (IAC). Through no fault of Judge Shaerf, that transpires to  have  been
    an error of law because it was subsequently held  that  Sala  had  been
    wrongly decided (Khan [2017] EWCA Civ 1755). It is therefore  necessary
    to set aside his decision.

 3. Given the basis upon which  Judge  Shaerf  dismissed  the  appeal,  the
    substantive  merits  have  yet  to  be  determined.  It  is   therefore
    appropriate to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  it
    will be heard afresh. For the convenience of the appellant, the  appeal
    will now be heard at the Bradford Hearing Centre.

Notice of Decision

 4. The appeal is allowed.

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and will be  heard
    afresh at the hearing centre in Bradford.

No anonymity direction is made.


Judge Kelly                             Date: 9th April 2018

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

