

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/10932/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 19 October 2018                            |On 30 October 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                MR JOSEPH TOE

                           (Anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Williams    (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    M A McVeety      (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from a decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it sent to the parties on
12 October 2017; whereupon it decided it did not have jurisdiction to
entertain the claimant's appeal from a decision of an entry clearance
officer of 12 August 2016 refusing to grant his application for a
Family Permit.

2.    The tribunal had thought it did not have jurisdiction following what
had been decided by the Upper Tribunal in Sala EFM's:  Right of Appeal
[2016] UKUT 411 (IAC).  However, after a hearing of 13 July 2018, I set
aside the tribunal's decision on the basis that Sala had been reversed by
the Court of Appeal such that there had been a right of appeal.

3.    Having heard from the parties I decided I would remake the decision
in the Upper Tribunal after a further hearing and I issued some case
management directions in order to facilitate that.

4.    The matter next came before me on 19 October 2018.  Representation
was as stated above.  I have been assisted by the straightforward approach
of the two representatives.  Indeed, Mr McVeety on behalf of the Secretary
of State, indicated, in effect, that he was content for me to remake the
decision by allowing the claimant's appeal against the entry clearance
officer's decision.  In those circumstances my explanation as to why I have
acceded to that request is short, there no longer being any disagreement
between the parties as to the appropriate outcome.

5.    The entry clearance officer had refused the application because he
was not satisfied that the claimant and his sponsor had been in a "durable
relationship" such that the claimant could not be regarded as an extended
family member of an EEA national (the sponsor).  That was on the basis
that, whilst there did not seem to be any dispute about the genuineness or
indeed the longevity of the relationship, the two had not been living
together for a period of two years.  The entry clearance officer's position
as to that was that such a requirement could and should be read into
regulation 8 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
in consequence of there being such a requirement, or there seeming to be
such a requirement, in paragraph 295A of the Immigration Rules.

6.    Before me, Mr McVeety said he would accept that the living together
for two years requirement was not an absolute requirement and that, in the
circumstances of this case, and in light of what had been said in YB (EEA)
reg. 17(4) - proper approach Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT 0062, he would accept
that there was a durable relationship such as to satisfy the requirements
of the EEA Regulations.

7.    There then remained the question of the requirement for an extensive
examination of the personal circumstances of the claimant pursuant to
regulation 12(5).  Here, the entry clearance officer had not conducted any
such extensive examination.  However, Mr McVeety indicated that he would
accept that there was nothing to suggest that any such extensive
examination would reveal any difficulties.  So, on that basis, he said he
was content for me to allow the appeal outright.  In those circumstances
and given Mr McVeety's conciliatory and helpful approach, it was not
necessary for me to hear further from Mr Williams.



8.    In light of the above I have decided to allow the claimant's appeal
from the entry clearance officer's decision.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and has already been set aside.

In remaking the decision:  the Upper Tribunal allows the claimant's appeal
from the entry clearance officer's decision of 12 August 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.  None was sought.


Signed:                      Date: 29 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                      Date: 29 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

