
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/10599/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 March 2018                        |On 17 April 2018                    |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                             MR KOMRAD ATLINSKI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Poland,  date  of  birth  10  July  1973,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 15  August  2016,  to
    remove him with reference to Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 which applies by virtue of  Regulation  19(3)(a)  pursuant  to
    Regulation 21B(2) and 24(2) of the Immigration ( EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    O'Neill, (the Judge) who, on 27 July 2017, dismissed the  appeal.   The
    Appellant was not represented at the hearing of the appeal.  An  appeal
    against the Judge's decision [D] was made by  Mr  Clark,  care  of  the
    Bradford Deaf Centre, on 7 August 2017.  Permission to appeal was given
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 22 January 2018.

3.   Notice of hearing of the appeal was sent to the Appellant at  his  last
    identified address in Little Horton Lane, Bradford on 13 February  2018
    as well as to Mr Clark at the Bradford Deaf  Centre.   Directions  were
    contained with the notice of hearing, and the notice of hearing  stated
    "if a party or his representative  does  not  attend  the  hearing  the
    Tribunal may determine the appeal in the absence of that party".

4.   The Appellant and/or Mr  Clark  did  not  attend,  no  explanation  for
    absence was forthcoming, no request for an adjournment or  a  relisting
    of the case was made either in advance or at the hearing, and there was
    no indication as to why the Appellant or  his  representative  did  not
    attend.

5.   In the circumstances, having checked the  case  file  I  was  satisfied
    that proper notice of hearing had been given in good time  as  required
    under the Rules and the notice identified the date, the  time  and  the
    venue for the hearing.  The Secretary of State had received  notice  of
    the hearing and thus Mr McVeety attended.

6.   The permission that was given stated as follows:

         "2.  ... It is alleged that the appellant provided written evidence
             of his employment which the judge did not accept and in  doing
             so set too high a standard of proof.


         3.   It is arguable that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons
             for rejecting the letters from  the  appellant's  employers  -
             particularly as no suggestion of fraud had been  made  by  the
             respondent or that the employments had been checked and  could
             not be verified.  The evidence  of  the  employment  had  been
             submitted with the grounds of appeal.  It was  also  mentioned
             at Annex A1 to the respondent's bundle".


7.   The  Judge  also  in  granting  permission  makes  a  somewhat  delphic
    reference to public  security  grounds  and  the  need  for  imperative
    grounds because the Appellant had claimed to be in the  United  Kingdom
    for ten years.

8.   Those grounds do not reflect the facts of the  case,  nor  was  removal
    being sought  on any basis other than that the Appellant had ceased  to
    reside under the terms of the Regulations, i.e. as a qualified  worker,
    so as to meet the requirements of Regulation 4 of the 2006 Regulations.

9.   The grounds of appeal  settled  it  seems  by  a  Mr  Baker  of  Biasan
    essentially argued that the Appellant had  submitted  evidence  of  the
    necessary chain of employment to showed he was qualified  person.   The
    Judge in the decision set out [D23 to 31] the documentation with  which
    he had been provided and why he did  not  find  it  sufficient.   Those
    reasons were the Judge's, which he was entitled to give and as is clear
    from [D35] the Judge said that the  Appellant  had  not  shown  on  the
    balance of probabilities that he was a worker.

10.  I do not find on a fair reading of the decision that there is  anything
    that demonstrated too high, i.e. above a balance  of  probabilities,  a
    standard of proof was applied to the evidence.  On  the  contrary,  for
    reasons which the Judge gave he did not find the Appellant  a  credible
    witness and he found the Appellant to  be  contradictory,  evasive  and
    implausible.  The Judge did not believe the Appellant's evidence and as
    he said  [D33]  in  the  light  of  his  findings  on  the  Appellant's
    credibility he was not inclined to accept these  were  genuine  letters
    from employers: For other reasons he also identified  why  the  letters
    were not sufficient.  The Judge made the point that the  Appellant  was
    unable  to  produce  any  formal  document  normally  associated   with
    establishing worker status, nor a letter of engagement, no contract  of
    employment, no wage slip, no letters from HMRC, no  P60  forms  or  any
    other form of documentation.

11.  In doing so that was not applying a higher  standard  of  proof;  those
    are documents commonly produced in such EEA appeals and  tend  to  show
    whether a partner or  an  Appellant  is  a  qualified  person  for  the
    purposes of the Regulations 2006.  I can  find  nothing  that  suggests
    that the wrong standard  of  proof  was  being  applied,  nor  was  the
    Appellant being set unreasonable targets of documentation  to  produce.
    The grounds refer to it being unreasonable to have asked an  unprepared
    and unrepresented Appellant for the documentary evidence necessary. The
    fact is that the Appellant had been represented by immigration advisors
    and there was nothing unduly onerous even for litigants  in  person  to
    produce relevant documents that evidence their employment.   The  Judge
    [D3] asked the Appellant whether he wished to continue on the day  with
    the representations without assistance and he indicated that he did.

12.  The grounds settled by Mr Baker also make reference to the  Appellant's
    wife, a Polish national, being in full-time employment  and  with  wage
    slips from her employment as evidence.  If  that  was  so  it  was  not
    produced  to  the  Tribunal  and  other  information  suggested  rather
    strongly that the Appellant's wife was in Poland and looking after  and
    caring for the Appellant's mother.  How it can therefore be thought she
    was a qualified person in the sense of working  in  the  UK  exercising
    treaty rights I do not know and the grounds simply  do  not  adequately
    explain the matter.  Either way, she had not provided such evidence  in
    support of his appeal and the fact that she might  be  working  in  any
    event was not the issue being  addressed:  Rather  the  extent  of  the
    Appellant's employment was the issue  which  had  been  raised  by  the
    Respondent's decision to remove.

13.  Accordingly, I do not conclude that the Judge's decision disclosed  any
    material error of law.  The Judge reached  a  conclusion  that  he  was
    entitled to on the evidence and there is no demonstrable unfairness  or
    prejudice demonstrated by the Judge's consideration of those matters at
    the appeal.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity direction was sought nor is one required.

Signed   Date 28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed, therefore no fee is payable.

Signed   Date 28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

