
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/10889/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2018                 |On 9th November 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                            HASUMATI YASHVANTLAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 4th October 2018, directions were issued to the effect that,  unless
    submissions were made to the contrary, the Upper Tribunal was minded to
    find a material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  failure  to
    take into account the fact that the Appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with a family permit, the Respondent having issued the same  on
    the basis that he was satisfied as to dependency outside of the  United
    Kingdom, there being no issue with the validity of  the  family  permit
    and no  issue  as  to  present  dependency.   The  Upper  Tribunal  was
    therefore minded to set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    preserving the findings made  in  respect  of  present  dependency  and
    substitute the decision on the appeal to allow the appeal.

 2. There has been no response to those directions within the  time  period
    allotted from either party.

 3. For the reasons set out in the directions issued and summarised  above,
    I am satisfied that there was an error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal such that it should be set aside.  The decision  is
    remade to allow the appeal on the basis  of  Ewulo  (effect  of  family
    permit - OFM) [2012] UKUT 238, that the Appellant had  arrived  with  a
    family  permit  and  therefore  the  Respondent  had   accepted   prior
    dependency outside of the United Kingdom and on the basis of  preserved
    findings of fact in the First-tier Tribunal of present dependency,  the
    Appellant has established that she meets the requirements of regulation
    7 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute  it  with
a decision allowing the appeal  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
Area) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        [pic]        Date     2nd November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

