
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/10124/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                             |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                              ALI FOUAD SABBAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:              The Appellant did not appear and had asked
to have the appeal              heard on the papers
For the Respondent:                   Mt. T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Appellant, who was born on 13 January 1984, is a  national  of  The
    Palestinian Authority. He married  a  Hungarian  national  in  a  proxy
    marriage on 7 March 2011 and he applied for an EEA Residence Card on  6
    May 2011. His application was refused but he appealed  and  his  appeal
    was allowed.  As a consequence, he was issued  with  an  EEA  residence
    card on 27 January 2014 that was valid until 27 January 2019.

2.   On 5 February 2016 the Appellant applied for  permanent  residence,  as
    the spouse of an EEA national.  His application was refused on 4 August
    2016 on the basis that the Respondent believed that  his  marriage  was
    one of convenience.  This followed a home visit which took place on  19
    July 2016. The refusal letter  it  was  said  that  during  that  visit
    immigration officers obtained information that  demonstrated  that  the
    Appellant and his wife did not and had never lived at their matrimonial
    home. His initial residence card was also revoked.

3.   The Appellant appealed but First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters  dismissed
    his appeal in a decision, promulgated on 9 August 2017.  The  Appellant
    appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted him  permission
    to appeal on 15 February 2018.

THE ERROR OF LAW HEARING
4.   On 6 April 2018 Haris  Ali  Solicitors  wrote  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    explaining that the Appellant was without the necessary  funds  to  pay
    for representation at the hearing and asking for the appeal to be heard
    on the papers. On 10 April the  Appellant's  solicitors  were  informed
    that the appeal would remain in the list in order for the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer to have an opportunity to make oral submissions.  In
    the event, the Home Office Presenting Officer agreed that, as there had
    been a procedural error, the appeal should be  allowed  to  the  extent
    that it be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION
5.   On 6 April 2017, the Appellant's appeal was set down for 17  July  2017
    and detailed directions were given. On 16  May  2017,  the  Appellant's
    solicitors requested that his appeal be determined on the papers, as he
    did not have sufficient financial resources to pay to be represented at
    the hearing. On 18 May 2017 directions were made that all evidence  and
    submissions must be received by the Upper Tribunal by 30 June 2017.  On
    3 July 2017 the Appellant's solicitors applied for an extension of time
    to do so and there is an email in the Tribunal file which confirms that
    time was extended until 5 p.m. on 13 July 2017.

6.   In paragraph 7 of  the  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Walters
    stated that he did not complete his decision until  25  July  2017  and
    that the Tribunal had  still  not  received  any  further  evidence  or
    submissions by that time.

7.   In paragraph 20 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters  then
    went on to find that the Respondent had led prima facie  evidence  that
    the Appellant's marriage was one of convenience. He also found that, as
    the Appellant and his  wife  had  not  attended  the  hearing  and  the
    Appellant had not submitted evidence and submissions in  reply  to  the
    directions, he had concluded that his marriage was undertaken solely to
    allow him to stay in the United Kingdom. Therefore,  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  him  permanent
    residence and to revoke his initial residence card.

8.   However, there is a receipt and a letter from Farani Taylor  Solicitors
    in the Tribunal file which confirms that  the  Appellant's  Bundle  was
    received by the Upper Tribunal at 16.24 on 13 July 2017.  However,  the
    Bundle was not placed before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Walters  before
    he reached his decision.

9.   This amounted to a common law breach of  fairness  in  so  far  as  the
    Appellant was not provided with the opportunity to meet  the  case  put
    against him. The Respondent's Bundle, which was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, did  contain  some  of  the  evidence  upon  which  the
    Appellant wished to rely but  the  evidence  contained  in  the  Bundle
    submitted by the Appellant on  13  July  2017  was  significantly  more
    extensive.

10.  In the refusal letter, the Respondent asserted that during a  visit  to
    the Appellant's home on 19  July  2017  immigration  officers  obtained
    information that demonstrated that the Appellant and his wife had never
    lived there. This information does not appeal to  have  been  disclosed
    and  the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any enquiries about the
    nature of this evidence. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted  that  the
    Appellant had not addressed this point in his grounds of appeal but  it
    is difficult to ascertain what more he could have  done  except  submit
    further evidence of  cohabitation  in  the  absence  of  more  detailed
    information about the alleged evidence.

11.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  also  said  that  the  decision  by  the
    Appellant and his wife not to attend the  hearing  led  to  him  making
    adverse  findings  against  the  Appellant.  Before  reaching  such   a
    decision, the Judge should have given some weight to  the  letter  from
    the Appellant's  solicitors,  which  explained  that  it  was  lack  of
    finances which had caused the Appellant to request a paper hearing  and
    also that it would not have been possible for  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife to attend a paper hearing.

12.  As a consequence, I find that the hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Walters  the  Appellant  was  not  provided  with   the   proper
    opportunity to put his case and that the paper hearing was procedurally
    unfair.

13.  At today's hearing, the Appellant sought to rely  on  further  evidence
    relating to the question of whether he was cohabiting  with  his  wife,
    which had not been before First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters.  For  this
    reason it could not be considered but it should be  formally  submitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal along with any further updating material. It
    may also be useful to make enquiries about any record of the home visit
    made  by  Immigration  Officers  which  led  to  a  finding  that   the
    Appellant's marriage was one of convenience.   So that  this  evidence,
    if any, can be addressed.

14.  It may also be that the Appellant and  his  wife  will  be  advised  to
    attend the  remitted  hearing  referred  to  below  so  that  they  are
    available to answer any  questions  from  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer or the First-tier Tribunal Judge, even if they cannot afford to
    pay for legal representation at that hearing.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters, for a de novo hearing.



Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 13 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
