

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/10184/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 10 January 2018                         |On 11 January 2018             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                                 ADEEL TAHIR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S. Mustafa, of Britain, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent,  made  on
      16 August 2016, to refuse his application for a residence card  as  an
      extended family member of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights  in
      the United Kingdom was dismissed on the basis that it was  established
      by the reported decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT
      00411 (IAC) that the tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the
      appeal.


   2. It has now been held that Sala was wrongly decided and that there  was
      indeed a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision
      taken pursuant to the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  to  refuse
      such an application. See Khan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.


   3. The decision under challenge in these proceedings was  taken  pursuant
      to the 2006 Regulations and therefore it was an error of law  for  the
      First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal for want of jurisdiction.


   4. This means that this appeal has not yet begun its journey through  the
      First-tier Tribunal and, as it is  agreed  between  the  parties  that
      there is a triable issue to be  resolved,  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the appeal is remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal to be determined on its merits.

Summary of decision:

      In dismissing the appeal  for  want  of  jurisdiction  the  First-tier
      Tribunal made a material error of law.


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined on  its
      merits.

                               Signed        [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                               Date: 10 January 2018







