
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/10941/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 August 2017                      |On 04 September 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                          Ejimiagbon Grace Omonkhoa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Rashid of Counsel instructed by Carlton Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shergill promulgated on 4 January 2017 brought with the  permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Pullig  granted  on  4  July  2017.   Judge
    Shergill dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 23  August  2016  to  refuse  to  issue  a  derivative
    residence card as a primary carer of an EEA national child.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  15  October  1985.   She
    entered the United Kingdom pursuant to a visa  granted  on  24  January
    2014, valid until 8 May 2016.  On 27 April 2016 she made an application
    for a derivative residence card.   That  application  was  refused  for
    reasons set out in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated
    23 August 2016.

3.   The Respondent addressed seriatim the  requirements  for  a  derivative
    residence card and reached the following conclusions in support of  the
    refusal.  It was accepted that the Appellant was the mother of  an  EEA
    national child, a German citizen under the  age  of  18.   It  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had produced satisfactory evidence that the
    child was  self-sufficient.   It  was  nonetheless  accepted  that  the
    Appellant held fully comprehensive  medical  insurance.   It  was  also
    accepted that she was, as the mother of the child, a  direct  relative.
    It was also accepted that she was the child's primary carer.

4.   In  addition  to  refusing  the  application  on  the  basis  that  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the child  was  self-sufficient,  the
    Respondent also considered that the  mother's  departure  from  the  UK
    would not  inevitably  require  her  child  also  to  leave  -  it  was
    considered that the child's father would be in a position to  care  for
    the child.

5.   The Appellant lodged an appeal. Her appeal  was  considered  without  a
    hearing @on the papers' by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill.

6.   At paragraphs 3 and 4 of  the  Decision  the  Judge  characterises  the
    appeal in these terms:

         "3.  The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of birth  15/10/85
             and is therefore not an EEA national.  She appeals against the
             Respondent's decision not  to  issue  her  with  a  derivative
             residence card under Regulations 15A and 18A.   The  Appellant
             relies on the fact she is the primary carer (i.e. mother) of a
             self-sufficient German child.


         4.   The Respondent  refused  the  application  ostensibly  on  the
             grounds that the Appellant had failed to prove  that  she  was
             the primary carer".

7.   It may be seen that the Judge fundamentally  misunderstood  the  nature
    of the issues in the RFRL.  The Respondent had in  fact  accepted  that
    the Appellant was the primary carer of her child; the issues upon which
    the Respondent had refused the  application  were  those  that  I  have
    outlined above.

8.   The Judge went on to  address  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant was the primary carer, and at paragraph 12 concluded in these
    terms "I am not satisfied she  has  satisfactorily  shown  she  is  the
    primary carer for the child".  That is the core of  the  Judge's  brief
    decision.

9.   It seems to me inevitable that this case must be set  aside  for  error
    of law in  circumstances  where  the  Judge  has  seemingly  failed  to
    identify the issues in the Respondent's  decision,  and  has  seemingly
    failed therefore to address those issues.   Moreover  this  mistake  is
    compounded by the fact that the Judge has focused on a matter that  was
    conceded by the Respondent.  I find  the  Decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is vitiated for error of law and must be set aside.

10.  In respect of remaking the decision it seems to me that  the  Appellant
    has in substance been deprived of a full and fair  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing and that the most appropriate forum therefore for remaking  the
    decision is indeed the First-tier Tribunal.

11.  Although this case was decided 'on the papers' at the  request  of  the
    Appellant it is to be noted that the Judge observed that there  were  a
    number of factors or  issues  that  he  would  like  to  have  had  the
    opportunity of exploring in oral evidence.  In those  circumstances  it
    does seem to me that perhaps this case is not best suited  to  disposal
    without a hearing, and accordingly I direct that the appeal  should  be
    listed for an oral hearing for the  decision  to  be  remade  with  all
    issues raised in the RFRL at large.

12.   It  is  unnecessary  to  issue  any  particular  Directions;  standard
    Directions will suffice.

Notice of Decision

13.  The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

14.  The decision in the appeal is to be remade pursuant to an oral  hearing
    before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shergill.

15.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 2 September 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

