
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/11391/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 October 2017                         |  On 11 January 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                              MARK KWAME BOADU
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1967.  He appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against two decisions  of  the  respondent,
    being decisions on 20 July 2015 to remove him  pursuant  to  regulation
    19(3) of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations"), and 5 September  2016,  being  a  decision  to
    refuse a residence card on the basis of retained rights of residence.

 2. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain ("the FtJ") at
    a hearing on 4 November 2016, following which  the  FtJ  dismissed  the
    appeal in relation to both decisions.

 3. The central issue in the appeal was whether the  appellant's  marriage,
    upon which he based the claim to entitlement to  a  retained  right  of
    residence,  was  a  marriage  of  convenience,  as  asserted   by   the
    respondent.  The FtJ concluded that it was.

 4. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    appellant.  By letter dated 25 October 2017, his legal  representatives
    informed the Tribunal that the appellant was in Ghana, and did not have
    entry clearance to attend the hearing.  They  were  however  instructed
    that the appellant wanted the appeal to proceed,  although  the  letter
    stated that no legal representative would attend on his behalf.

 5. I considered whether, given that the appellant had  left  the  UK,  his
    appeal was to be treated as abandoned.  Ms Aboni suggested not, on  the
    basis that the appellant's appeal against the EEA  decisions  was  non-
    suspensive.  Having considered the matter, I agree with her.  It is not
    necessary for me to set out in detail the reasons for my having come to
    that conclusion.  Suffice to say, I  am  satisfied  that  the  combined
    effect of reg 26 and schedule 1 of the EEA Regulations, and s.92(1) and
    (8) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, mean that  the
    abandonment provisions do not apply to this appellant's appeal.

 6. The grounds of appeal in relation to the FtJ's  decision  contend  that
    the FtJ's assessment of whether the marriage was one of convenience was
    flawed.  It is said that the  FtJ  had  failed  to  consider  that  the
    appellant attended the first marriage interview at Liverpool  and  that
    the only reason why the sponsor, his wife, did not attend  was  because
    of the problems they were having in their marriage.   Furthermore,  the
    FtJ had failed to take into account the appellant's explanation of  the
    circumstances surrounding an immigration officers' visit  to  the  home
    address.

 7. It is further contended that the FtJ was wrong to fail to consider oral
    evidence from a witness, Mr Adu-Ansere, who had  written  a  letter  in
    support of the appellant's appeal.  The FtJ  had  wrongly  limited  his
    findings to the letter written by that witness, whereas the witness was
    at the hearing and ready to give evidence.

 8. The grounds also raise an issue in relation  to  the  FtJ's  conclusion
    that the appellant's proxy marriage needed to have been  recognised  in
    an EEA State.

    The FtJ's Decision

 9. The FtJ referred to  the  appellant's  immigration  history,  which  in
    summary is that he lived in Ghana until  he  travelled  to  Holland  in
    January 1999, where he met a woman, JA, a Dutch national.  They came to
    the UK  and  married  on  5  December  2002.   The  appellant  made  an
    application for a residence card as a result of that  marriage,  and  a
    residence card was issued on 17 February 2003, valid until 17  February
    2008.  However, the relationship broke down  and  they  divorced  on  5
    November 2009.

10. On 5 December 2010 he met MN at a party.  She was also a Dutch national
    of Ghanaian parentage.  On 14 May  2011  they  married  under  Ghanaian
    customary law and the marriage was registered on 8 February  2013.   On
    13 March 2013 he made an application for a residence card on the  basis
    of the marriage to MN.  The application  was  refused,  but  after  the
    appellant appealed the respondent withdrew the decision.

11. On 12 August 2014 the appellant  and  MN  were  invited  to  attend  an
    interview on 10 September 2014.  However, MN refused to attend as  they
    were apparently having domestic problems.  A further invitation  on  15
    September 2014 to attend an  interview  resulted  in  neither  of  them
    attending.  Their differences were said to have been unresolved at that
    time.

12. That marriage also broke down and on 20 September  2015  he  instituted
    divorce proceedings which were finalised on 20 January 2016.  It was on
    8 March 2016 that the appellant applied for a  residence  card  on  the
    basis of the retained right of residence.

13. In relation  to  the  decision  refusing  a  residence  card,  the  FtJ
    considered the issue of the Ghanaian  proxy  marriage.   He  noted  the
    respondent's assessment of that issue, and the  validity  of  customary
    marriages in Ghana.  However, he concluded that it  was  not  necessary
    for him to examine the question of whether the appellant's marriage was
    recognised in Ghanaian law because the appellant  in  addition  had  to
    prove that the marriage was recognised in the  EEA  State  of  the  EEA
    spouse, citing the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]
    UKUT 24 (IAC).  He concluded that the appellant had not shown that  the
    proxy marriage is recognised as valid in Holland.

14. He then went on to consider the issue of whether the marriage  was  one
    of convenience.  He noted that the  respondent  carried  an  evidential
    burden  of  justifying  a  suspicion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.  Thereafter, the burden, he said, shifted to the appellant
    to demonstrate that the marriage was not one of convenience.

15. There was evidence before the FtJ of a visit by immigration officers on
    3 September 2013 to  the  appellant's  address.   Immigration  officers
    first spoke to a female via the intercom who said  that  the  appellant
    did not live at the address and that she had never heard of  him.   She
    gave her name as MN.  The immigration officer told her that she was the
    sponsor for the appellant whereupon she said that he had gone to  work.
    After she allowed the immigration officers entry,  they  encountered  a
    female who gave her name as DA but the immigration  officer  recognised
    her voice from the intercom as the person identifying herself as MN.  A
    second female at the address attempted to pass herself off as  MN,  but
    was warned by the immigration officer about misidentifying herself.

16. The FtJ referred to the immigration officer's opinion that there was no
    validity to the EEA residency application  because  the  appellant  was
    clearly not living at the address and the occupier was using two  names
    for identification.

17. The FtJ at [29] then referred to the appellant on 20 July  2015  having
    been "encountered" and asked about the whereabouts of his EEA  national
    sponsor.  He said that she was travelling to Holland.  In  relation  to
    the interview that was supposed to take place on 10 September 2014, the
    appellant said that he had a row with his sponsor the night before  and
    that she had left the family home and he was unable to contact her.  In
    relation to a second  interview  arranged  for  15  September  2014  at
    Liverpool, the appellant failed to attend.

18. In the  light  of  all  that  evidence,  the  FtJ  concluded  that  the
    respondent was justified in being suspicious about the  marriage  being
    one of convenience.

19. In relation to the failure of his spouse to attend the  first  marriage
    interview, he referred to the appellant's explanation  for  that  fact.
    He noted a number of bank statements, payslips and other items  in  the
    names of the appellant and his wife  in  the  appellant's  bundle.   He
    concluded however, that those were  not  sufficient  to  discharge  the
    burden on him of  demonstrating  that  the  marriage  was  not  one  of
    convenience,  particularly  in  the  light  of  the  findings  of   the
    immigration officers.

20. In relation to the evidence of Mr Adu-Ansere, he noted that the  letter
    from him confirmed that the appellant married MN in 2011 and that  they
    live together as husband and wife.  However, he said  that  the  letter
    was very brief in its detail  and  set  against  the  totality  of  the
    evidence he found that his testimony was not sufficient  to  allay  his
    concerns in relation to the marriage being one of convenience.   As  to
    the removal decision under reg 19(3), he concluded that the  respondent
    had been wrong to exercise the power to remove the appellant under that
    regulation.  He therefore concluded that the  decision  to  remove  was
    unlawful, and thus invalid.  He found that in consequence of an invalid
    decision, any appeal must also be invalid.  He concluded by  dismissing
    the appeals in relation to each decision.

    Submissions

21. On  behalf  of  the  appellant,  there  being  no  appearance,  I  have
    considered the grounds in support of the appeal.

22. Ms  Aboni  submitted  that  even  if  the  FtJ  was  incorrect  in  his
    conclusions relying on the decision in Kareem, any error of law in that
    respect was not material because the main issue related to whether  the
    marriage was one of convenience.  The  appellant  could  not  therefore
    acquire any retained rights.

23. She submitted that it was probably wrong for the FtJ to say that  there
    was no valid appeal, but again, there was no materiality in  any  error
    of law in that respect.



    Conclusions

24. There is no merit in the complaint about the FtJ's  assessment  of  the
    issue of whether the marriage was one  of  convenience.   The  FtJ  was
    fully aware of the fact that the appellant attended the first  marriage
    interview at Liverpool.  He also noted the reason given for the failure
    of his wife to attend, said to be because of  the  problems  they  were
    having in the  marriage.   In  any  event,  that  hardly  supports  the
    contention that the marriage was a genuine one.

25. The grounds suggest that the  FtJ  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's  explanation   of   the   circumstances   surrounding   the
    immigration officers' visit to his home address, and that he failed  to
    consider "the credibility of the individual and or the  reliability  of
    her statement".  However, all that the appellant says about this in his
    witness statement dated 1 November 2016 is that  he  believes  that  DA
    gave her name as MN because she did not have leave to be in the UK  and
    she feared being arrested.  The statement also says that  he  does  not
    know why she had his ex-wife's card.  It then states that Deborah  (DA)
    is a family member and Mary (MN) and he were living under one roof.

26. However, the appellant's speculation as to why the person named  as  DA
    would give her name as MN, is just that; speculation.  It confirms that
    a false name was given, and that knowledge of the appellant was denied.
     The FtJ was perfectly entitled to take that evidence into account  and
    attach what weight he considered appropriate to it.

27. In relation to the evidence of Mr Adu-Ansere, the FtJ said that he gave
    that evidence "some weight".  He noted the import of  the  letter.   It
    was for the appellant and his representatives to put  forward  evidence
    in support of his appeal and it was not for  the  FtJ  to  subject  the
    witness to detailed questioning.  If it was thought necessary on behalf
    of the appellant for anything other than a very brief  letter  to  have
    been provided by this  witness,  it  was  for  the  appellant  and  his
    representatives to provide it.  It was a matter for the FtJ as to  what
    weight he attached to that evidence.  Furthermore, he was  entitled  to
    conclude that notwithstanding what that witness had said, the  evidence
    in its totality did not support the conclusion that  the  marriage  was
    anything other than one of convenience.

28. I am not satisfied that  there  is  any  error  of  law  in  the  FtJ's
    assessment of the marriage being one of convenience.

29. I am satisfied that the FtJ  erred  in  law  in  his  reliance  on  the
    decision in Kareem.  Kareem has now been  overruled  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Awuku v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 178, in relation to the  need  for  a  proxy  marriage  to  be
    recognised as valid in an EEA State.  Although the  FtJ  very  properly
    relied on the law as it was then thought to  be,  obviously  not  being
    aware of the decision in Awuku which came after the hearing before him,
    he did nevertheless err in law in that respect.  However, it is not  an
    error of law that is material given the FtJ's  sustainable  conclusions
    in relation to the marriage of convenience point.

30. I do also consider that the FtJ erred in law in concluding that because
    the respondent was not entitled to make a removal decision under reg 19
    of the EEA Regulations, that  the  appeal  was  invalid,  following  an
    invalid decision.  In that respect, it seems to me that the  FtJ  ought
    to have allowed the appeal, but  only  in  respect  of  that  decision.
    Again, that error of  law  is  not  material  however,  given  that  he
    concluded that the appellant was not entitled to a  residence  card  on
    the basis of being a person with a retained right of residence.

31. In conclusion therefore, I am not satisfied that the errors of  law  to
    which I have referred are material to the outcome of the  appeal.   The
    appellant is not entitled to  a  residence  card  on  the  basis  of  a
    retained right of residence, because he had no right  of  residence  in
    the first place, being a party to a marriage of convenience.


Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law such as to require its decision  to  be  set
    aside.  The FtJ's decision to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 10/01/18

