
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/11767/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 April 2018                              |On 19th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


                                   Between

                                 NAEEM ANJUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born 2 December 1985.  He  made
    an application to the Secretary of State for  an  EEA  residence  card.
    The application was refused in a decision served on 5  September  2016,
    for reasons that I need not need to set out herein.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant lodged an appeal before the FtT. That appeal came  before
    FtT Judge Shiner, who concluded in a decision dated 9  September  2017,
    that the FtT did not have jurisdiction  to  determine  the  appeal.  No
    findings were made in relation to the  substance  of  the  appeal.  The
    Judge's conclusion was informed by the guidance given by this  Tribunal
    in Sala [2016] UKUT 00411.

 3. The appellant appealed such decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  FtT
    Judge Shimmin granted permission. Thus, the matter comes before me.

Discussion

 4. The Court of Appeal has now given consideration to the  very  issue  in
    play in the instant case - see Khan v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. The Court  concluded  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had been wrong in its conclusion and rationale in Sala.  It is
    not in dispute that the effect of the decision in Khan, if  applied  to
    this case, is that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to  conclude  that
    it did not have jurisdiction in this appeal.

 5. For this reason, I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and remit the appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:                                               Dated: 17th April
2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

