
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
EA/11109/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|Oral determination given following       |On 08 March 2019                   |
|hearing                                  |                                   |
|On 21 January 2019                       |                                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                               ms Inna Pavliuk
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The applicant is a national of Ukraine who had  apparently  arrived  in
    this country without leave and remained unlawfully for about two  years
    before returning to Ukraine.  On 14 February 2011 she was  recorded  on
    exit as having been in this country unlawfully.  While in  the  Ukraine
    she married a Lithuanian national and on 21 August 2011 she applied for
    a residence card to be with him in  the  UK  where  he  was  exercising
    treaty rights and this residence card was issued.  At this stage  there
    was no investigation as to whether or not the marriage  was  a  genuine
    one or whether it had been a marriage of convenience.

 2. The marriage ended in divorce on 28 January 2015 following which on  11
    February of that year she applied for a retained right of residence  as
    she would be entitled to, if the marriage had been genuine and they had
    been living together for a year and the marriage had  lasted  for  more
    than three years before the commencement of divorce proceedings.

 3. It is not known when the divorce proceedings  were  commenced  but  the
    respondent has not suggested that they were commenced before the couple
    had been married for three years and accordingly there is no basis  for
    finding other than that subject to  the  marriage  not  having  been  a
    marriage of convenience the appellant would indeed  be  entitled  to  a
    retained right of residence as claimed.

 4. Again a permit confirming that she had a retained  right  of  residence
    was issued without any further investigation.

 5. On 8 March 2016 the appellant applied for permanent  residence  on  the
    basis that she had been residing in the UK for five years in accordance
    with the EEA Regulations but following this application for  the  first
    time the respondent decided to interview her.  They discovered that she
    was living with someone, not her husband, which  would  not  of  itself
    have been surprising for a young lady who was by  this  time  divorced.
    However during her interview a number  of  other  matters  arose  which
    caused concern.  There were inconsistencies within  the  interview  and
    also it appeared to the respondent that the appellant had in fact  been
    living with her current partner both before and during  the  time  when
    she was married to her "husband".  The respondent accordingly took  the
    view that the previous grants of residence cards have been obtained  by
    deception and that the "marriage" had been a  marriage  of  convenience
    from its inception.   For this reason the application for  a  permanent
    residence card was refused.

 6. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas, sitting at Hatton Cross  on  13
    September 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on  15  October
    2018 Judge Lucas dismissed the appeal.

 7. The issue before the judge was whether or not the marriage had from its
    inception been a marriage of convenience  and  in  the  course  of  his
    decision the judge emphasised that there had been a  lack  of  evidence
    from either the appellant's "husband" or from her current  (or  as  the
    respondent  believed  previous  and  permanent)  partner.    This   was
    emphasised by the judge as a reason for his finding that  the  marriage
    was a marriage of convenience.

 8. In fact (and this has been confirmed by a note which was referred to by
    Mr Whitwell, representing the respondent at  the  hearing  before  this
    Tribunal), there had been brief statements  before  Judge  Lucas  which
    were contained in the supplementary bundle from  both  the  appellant's
    husband  and  her  current  partner.   Clearly  therefore  the  judge's
    reference to there having been no witness statement  "from  either  the
    appellant's partners in this case" (at paragraph 24  of  his  decision,
    repeated at paragraph 30) was an error.

 9. The appellant's husband's statement includes as follows:

         "I am writing to confirm that [the  appellant]  and  I  were  in  a
         relationship from July 2009 until we got divorced in January  2015.
         [The appellant] and I married on 18 February 201 (sic).  I confirm
         that our relationship was genuine from the movement we (sic) we met
         in 2009 until we separated".

10.  The  appellant's  husband  also  confirmed  that  they  had  lived  in
    Peterborough from December 2009 until January 2011, which  had  been  a
    matter relied upon on behalf  of  the  appellant  during  the  hearing,
    because the appellant's current partner had not, although this was  not
    referred to in the decision.

11. The statement from the appellant's current  partner  refers  to  having
    first met the appellant in 2007 (which suggests that the  stay  of  the
    appellant in the UK may have been longer than is currently claimed) and
    that they lived together for a brief period in that year but that  they
    did not maintain any form of relationship thereafter.  He says that  he
    met his ex-wife in 2010 after Christmas and that they were married from
    June  2012  until  their  divorce  in  November  2015  and  that   that
    relationship was  genuine.   He  says  that  he  reconnected  with  the
    appellant when her then husband moved into a room in the property  that
    he was renting in Greenford and that although they  became  friends  at
    first "but as both of our relationships started to break down we became
    closer" and that they "started an affair when we went to the  Dominican
    Republic together in April 2013".

12. In other words, the statements of both the appellant's husband and  her
    former partner are to the  effect  that  the  marriage  was  a  genuine
    marriage and that it had not been a sham conducted during a period when
    the appellant and her current partner were in fact  in  a  relationship
    together.

13. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Whitwell accepted that as these witness
    statements  had  been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge's
    statement both at paragraph 24 and 30 of his decision  that  there  had
    not been witness statements from either of these witnesses had  been  a
    material error, because it had led to the finding at paragraph 31  that
    the relationship was not genuine.

14. In my judgment Mr Whitwell was entirely correct in  so  accepting.   It
    may well be the case  that  the  marriage  was  indeed  a  marriage  of
    convenience, as was asserted on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  but  the
    appellant was and remains entitled to have her case  considered  having
    regard to all the evidence which is put before the Tribunal,  including
    such evidence as supports her claim that the  marriage  was  a  genuine
    one.  Her case was not  so  considered  and  accordingly  must  now  be
    reheard.

15. As the  appellant's  case  has  not  been  considered  properly  it  is
    appropriate to remit this case back to the First-tier Tribunal so  that
    it can be considered by any judge  other  than  Judge  Lucas,  with  no
    findings retained and I shall so order.





Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas, dismissing the  appellant's
appeal, is set aside as containing a material error of law  and  the  appeal
is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  for
rehearing before any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
               Date:  27 February 2019
