
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/11296/2016
     & EA/11300/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 8 September 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                            Juliette N'da Dietlin
                                Herve Kamgam
                     (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE/NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior HOPO
For the Respondent:    Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Buckwell  promulgated  on  7  December  2016
    dismissing the appeals of Miss Juliette N'Da Dietlin  and  her  husband
    Herve Kamgam against decisions of the Secretary of State to  refuse  to
    issue them with documents confirming their right of permanent residence
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The application had been made on the basis that  the  first  respondent
    had acquired the permanent right of  residence,  having  exercised  her
    Treaty Rights for a period of 5 years between 2007 and 2012.  It is not
    the respondents' case that she had been in  employment  for  the  whole
    period, but that she had not lost her  status  as  a  worker  while  at
    different times looking for employment, undergoing vocational  training
    and maternity leave within the terms of Jessy St  Prix  v  SSWP  [2014]
    CJEU C-507/12. The second respondent has at  all  material  times  been
    married to the first respondent. It is accepted that his case stands or
    falls with that of the first respondent.

 3. It is I consider important to bear in mind in this case the history  of
    how this appeal arose.  It does not appear to  be  in  doubt  that  the
    first respondent has been living in the United Kingdom  since  2007  or
    that she started working at that point.  She and her husband  have  had
    two children.  She has also had a work record which includes periods of
    unemployment and, it would  appear,  recommended  training.   She  also
    relies on periods spent on maternity  leave  as  counting  towards  her
    status as a worker.

 4. There was an earlier decision in this case which came before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kempton sitting in North  Shields.   That  decision  was
    refused  on  the  basis  that  the  first  respondent   had   not   had
    comprehensive sickness insurance for  a  period  whilst  Judge  Kempton
    considered that she had been a student.   Rather  than  appeal  against
    that decision by seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the
    appellants made a fresh application which was in turn  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State relying on the decision of Judge Kempton and stating
    also that the issue of comprehensive sickness insurance  had  not  been
    resolved.

 5. In brief the case at it is put to me today is that the first respondent
    has at all material times retained the status of being a worker.  It is
    not in dispute that she initially worked in the  United  Kingdom.   She
    had periods of unemployment but it is said materially for the  purposes
    of this case that she  had  become  involuntarily  unemployed  and  had
    embarked on a vocational training course which covered a period in 2010
    to 2012 whereby if she had retained the status of worker meant that she
    had a continuous five year period of residence in the United Kingdom as
    a worker.  Whether the first respondent had retained status as a worker
    is  important  because  workers  (unlike  students)  do   not   require
    comprehensive insurance under the EEA Regulations  as  a  condition  of
    residence.  It does not appear to me  that  Judge  Kempton  appreciated
    this point but it is equally important to note  that  in  her  decision
    that she considered that all the other requirements had been met and it
    was only the issue of comprehensive insurance which was not resolved in
    the respondents' favour.

 6. Judge Buckwell does not appear from his decision to  have  focussed  on
    that point.  His findings  are  brief  in  that  he  had  relied  quite
    properly on Judge Kempton's findings and directed himself in accordance
    with Devaseelan (Sri Lanka) [2002] UKIAT 702.

 7. At paragraph 18 the  judge  stated  that  "having  considered  all  the
    evidence it does appear to me  that  the  first  appellant  has  strong
    grounds of appeal in maintaining  that  her  previous  application  was
    inappropriately considered as was her subsequent appeal in relation  to
    her failure to assess the terms  thereof  with  respect  to  Regulation
    6(2)(c) of the EEA Regulations.  From the information before  me  I  am
    satisfied that the first appellant met that criteria.   On  that  basis
    the first appellant was  a  qualified  person  and  has  established  a
    permanent residence entitlement consequently the second appellant  also
    enjoys the same status."

 8. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on the basis first that the judge had misdirected  himself  in
    law in that he had failed properly to apply the decision of  Devaseelan
    to the findings of Judge Kempton specific reliance is made on the sixth
    principle set out in Devaseelan.  It is also maintained in this context
    that the appellant's claim remains unchanged from that which was before
    Judge Kempton.

 9. Having heard submissions I was satisfied that the issue here is a mixed
    issue of law and fact in that what is really in issue  is  whether  the
    first respondent had retained status  as  a  worker  through  attending
    vocational training. Neither judge appears  to  have  made  any  proper
    finding on whether the training the first respondent  clearly  did  was
    vocational training or not. There is thus no real finding on the  issue
    binding on the second judge whose his reasoning is inadequate  on  this
    point.

10. As the issue of comprehensive insurance and  the  different  status  of
    whether of being a worker or a student whilst  on  vocational  training
    does not appear properly to have been addressed by either Judge Kempton
    or Judge Buckwell, I consider that the decision needs to be  set  aside
    on that point in that the reasoning is not adequate and  as  Mr  Melvin
    submitted out there is no proper finding of  fact  as  to  whether  the
    course at which the first respondent attended at the relevant time  was
    in fact a vocational course and to that end I set aside the decision on
    that point and asked for further submissions as to whether the training
    was vocational or not.

11. There is some merit in Mr Melvin's submission that the  course  studied
    is more general than might be expected but  equally  I  note  that  the
    course there is no dispute that the first respondent  attended  it  nor
    that  the  dates  of  attendance  are  in  dispute  was  to  take  BTEC
    qualifications.  Those are I consider as a matter of judicial knowledge
    primarily vocationally orientated.

12. More importantly it has to be borne in mind that this is a course  that
    the first respondent was advised to attend by the  relevant  Jobcentre.
    It is also important to note that she was also as the documents show in
    a letter from the Jobcentre Plus dated 27 September 2012 that  she  had
    continued to receive Jobseeker's Allowance income based whilst on  that
    course.  I considered that as Jobseeker's Allowance could not  normally
    be available whilst  someone  is  a  student  that  this  is  a  strong
    indication that Jobcentre Plus  which  is  a  part  of  the  state  was
    satisfied that this was vocational training,  and  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, I am satisfied that it was.

13. Accordingly I find that the course on which the  first  respondent  was
    studying at the Thomas Danby Campus of Leeds City College was indeed  a
    vocational course.  I am therefore  satisfied  that  having  made  that
    finding and the findings of Judge Kempton  with  regard  to  the  other
    periods  in  which  the  applicant  was  either  working  or  otherwise
    maintained the status of the worker that  the  applicant  had  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 6 (2) (c) of the EEA Regulations that is that
    she  was  involuntarily  unemployed  and  had  embarked  on  vocational
    training and  that  accordingly  whilst  she  was  on  that  vocational
    training she retained the status of worker.  It therefore follows  that
    I find that the first respondent had been  a  worker  and  therefore  a
    qualified person for a continuous period of five  years  and  therefore
    she was entitled to a document confirming that status.  It also follows
    that her husband is also  entitled  to  such  document  and  for  these
    reasons I allow the appeal of the first and second respondents

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing the  appeals  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations.

Signed                                  Date 7 September 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE - FEE AWARD

I am satisfied on the facts of this case that there should be  a  fee  award
made in favour of the appellant.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  material  put
before the Secretary of State is the material that was put before  me  today
and also before Judge Buckwell and that no point that  has  been  made  that
has not previously been identified.  In the circumstances it is  appropriate
and in the interests of just to make a fee award.

Signed                                  Date 7 September 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
