
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/11788/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7th June 2017                         |On 9th June 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                  MR VISHAL
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and no representation
For the Respondent:    Mr K. Norton, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  the  15th  May  1985.  He
    appeals with permission, against the decision of Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin (sitting as a First-tier Tribunal Judge) who, in a determination
    promulgated on the 2nd February  2017  considered  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction to hear his appeal against the decision of the  respondent
    (to refuse to grant residence card as an extended family member  of  an
    EEA national based on the decision in Sala  (EFM's:  right  of  appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC).

 2. There has been no appearance by or on  behalf  of  the  applicant.  His
    previous solicitors Malik Law Chambers no longer act on his behalf  and
    the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  were  completed  by  the
    applicant in person. The file demonstrated that the Notice  of  Hearing
    was sent by first class post to the appellant's address on the 8th  May
    2017. On checking with the Presenting Officer, he  confirmed  that  the
    address where the NOH was sent was to the address notified to the  Home
    Office of the appellant's address. Therefore in the circumstances I  am
    satisfied that he has been served with the hearing notice and is  aware
    of the appeal hearing. There has been no further communication from the
    appellant since the grounds were submitted.  I therefore proceed in his
    absence, there being no explanation for his non-attendance.

 3. No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

The background:

 4. The appellant is a national of India. He entered the United Kingdom  on
    10 January 2011 on a student Visa. On 30 November 2011 he  applied  for
    further leave as a student which was granted in 2012 to expire  on  the
    27 January 2014. On 16 January 2012 curtailment was considered but  not
    pursued. He applied the further leave to remain as a student which  was
    granted on 13 February 2014 which expired on 26 May 2015. On  that  day
    he applied for leave to remain as a general migrant which  was  refused
    on the 14th July 2015. On 25 August 2015 he  applied  the  family  life
    leave to remain which was refused on 8 February 2016.

 5. He then submitted a further application on the 20th February  2016.  He
    applied for a residence card as an extended family  member  of  an  EEA
    national exercising  treaty  rights,  namely  his  claimed  partner,  a
    national of Poland.

 6. The application was refused in a decision made on 30th August 2016. The
    notice of decision made reference to the basis of the application for a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right of residence on  the  basis
    that he was an extended family member.

 7. Accompanying the notice of decision was a reasons  for  refusal  letter
    which expanded on the reasons given for the refusal of the  application
    and made reference to the documentary evidence that had  been  produced
    with the application. He claimed to have met his partner in a  cafe  in
    November 2015 and had begun residing with  her  on  19  February  2016.
    However he had failed to  provide  sufficient  evidence  of  this.  The
    Secretary of State considered the documentation that had been  provided
    with the application  but  was  not  satisfied  that  he  had  provided
    sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the parties were in  a  durable
    and subsisting relationship. Whilst he had provided a maternity  record
    of 26 May 2016 the evidence did not demonstrate that the appellant  was
    currently living with his partner or that he  was  the  father  of  the
    unborn  child.  Thus  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    his EEA sponsor (Regulation 8 (5) of the immigration (European economic
    area) Regulations 2006.

 8. It was further  considered  that  even  if  he  demonstrated  that  the
    relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting,  the  appellant  had  only
    provided one payslip dated 8 January 2016 as evidence  of  the  sponsor
    exercising Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom. Therefore the Secretary
    of State not accept that the sponsor was a qualified Person as  defined
    under Regulation  6  of  the  Regulations.  The  decision  letter  made
    reference to any Article 8 claim noting  that  if  he  wished  UKBA  to
    consider an application he must make  a  separate  charged  application
    using the specified application form. It further stated that as he  had
    not made a valid application under Article  8,  consideration  had  not
    been given as to whether his removal from the UK would breach Article 8
    of the ECHR. The letter went on to state that the decision not to issue
    a residence card did not require him to leave the United Kingdom if  he
    could otherwise demonstrate that he had a  right  to  reside  under  to
    reside under the Regulations.

 9. The appellant appealed the decision on the 27th September 2016. In that
    notice of appeal the appellant asserted that the secretary of state had
    not properly considered material presented and that he  was  a  durable
    relationship and that his partner was exercising treaty rights  in  the
    UK. It was further submitted that the decision was contrary to  section
    6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 and that the appellant  demonstrated  in
    his  evidence  that  his  circumstances  were  "exceptional"  and   the
    Secretary of State  should  considered  his  human  rights  claim.  The
    grounds were generic in nature and made no  reference  to  the  factual
    circumstances of the appellant by reference to the  documentation  that
    has been provided with  the  application.  No  further  documents  were
    provided with the grounds. Along with those grounds was an  application
    for extension of time and  statement  of  additional  grounds.  It  was
    accepted that the appellant had failed to lodge his appeal  grounds  in
    time and section 3 of the form gave the reason for  the  delay  on  the
    basis that he did not  have  adequate  funds  to  pay  the  appeal  fee
    including representation. He claimed that he  had  an  arguable  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE and EX 1 of Appendix FM. There was no  reference
    to his appeal grounds relating to his appeal against the refusal of the
    residence card.

10. A notice of directions was sent to the appellant and his solicitors  on
    5 January 2017 drawing their attention to the upper  Tribunal  decision
    in  Sala  (EFM's:  right  of  appeal)  [2016]  UKUT  00411  (IAC).  The
    directions went on to state, "as the subject of this appeal appears  to
    be extended family membership pursuant to the EEA regulations 2006, the
    appellant or his representative should, within 14 days of today sent to
    the Tribunal, any reasons why the Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to  hear
    this appeal within 14 days of today it is proposed that  a  judge  will
    determine the appeal on the papers."

11. On 25 January 2017 a letter was sent on behalf of the  appellant  which
    submitted that the decision in Sala was  wrong  and  "contrary  to  the
    legislature's intentions in Regulation 26 and Regulation 17 of the 2006
    Regulations. It went on to state that Regulation 26 conferred the right
    of appeal to both "family members" and "extended family members," of an
    EEA national provided they prove and establish that they family members
    and/or extended family members of the  EEA  national.  The  legislation
    made no distinction between the groups for the purposes of the right of
    appeal set out in Regulation 26. The letter made no  further  reference
    to any human rights claim nor any application for extension of time  to
    appeal.

12. In accordance with those  directions,  the  appeal  came  before  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Martin on the 2nd February 2017 and was determined  upon
    the papers. She took into account the letter  sent  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant but did not consider that the  contents  of  it  altered  the
    decision in Sala (as cited) (see paragraphs 2 and 3). I  take  that  to
    mean that there was nothing in those submissions to undermine the ratio
    of Sala. Accordingly she found that the FTT did not  have  jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal. She went on to state that:

         "5. Even if there had been a  valid  appeal  before  the  Tribunal,
         human rights issues could not have  been  argued  in  that  appeal-
         Amirteymour and others (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT
         00466(IAC)."

    She therefore dismissed the appeal for want of jurisdiction. There  was
    no reference made to the application for extension of  time  which  was
    attached to the grounds of appeal either in the directions issued or in
    the determination.

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision advancing  what
    can be described as generic grounds. It was submitted that the decision
    of the Tribunal was flawed in law; that the Tribunal failed to  ascribe
    appropriate weight to the evidence; the reasoning of the  Tribunal  had
    no jurisdiction to hear the matter (although no  reasons  were  given);
    the Tribunal erred in its approach to the question of compassionate and
    compelling circumstances and failed to ascribe  appropriate  weight  to
    the circumstances of the appellant. It is further asserted the Tribunal
    failed to weigh the balance between the interests of the family and the
    public interest consistent with the decision in Huang.  It  is  further
    submitted that the Tribunal set a higher  standard  of  proof  that  is
    proper in EEA case and that the judge erred in law when  assessing  the
    credibility of the appellant and his witnesses in line with the case of
    Chiver. It further submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider
    Section 117  of  the  2002  Act  when  conducting  the  proportionality
    assessment.

14.  As  can  be  seen  from  those  grounds  they  did  not  reflect   the
    determination of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin;  the  judge  had  not
    assessed the credibility the appellant or his  witnesses  nor  did  the
    judge consider any Article 8 issues for the reasons given.



15.  On the 2nd May 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Deans granted permission  for
    the following reasons:



         "The application for permission to appeal ,which was made in  time,
         refers not only to the appeal against refusal of a  residence  card
         but also to an appeal on human rights grounds, which  it  said  the
         judge failed to consider properly.

         The appeal file shows that the appellant was subject to a  decision
         dated 30th August refusing a residence card and a decision  of  the
         1st June 2016 refusing a human rights claim. The notice  of  appeal
         was submitted out of time containing an application  for  extension
         of time which does not  appear  to  have  been  considered  by  the
         Tribunal. The notice of appeal contains  grounds  relating  to  the
         human rights claim as well as  the  EEA  application.  Neither  the
         covering letter with the notice of appeal nor the response  to  the
         directions made any reference to the human rights  decision  or  to
         any appeal against it. It is at least arguable, however,  that  the
         judge ought to have had regard to the application for an  extension
         of time in relation to the human rights grounds. In respect of  the
         appeal against refusal of a residence card, the judge was  entitled
         to follow Sala and did not arguably err in so doing."




16. The Secretary of State responded to the grounds of  appeal  under  rule
    24. That document opposed the appeal  observing  that  the  judge  when
    granting permission identified there was no arguable error  of  law  as
    the First-tier Tribunal who  had no jurisdiction  to  hear  the  appeal
    following the decision in Sala (as cited)  and  thus  there  was  no  a
    procedural error and that there was no right of appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal. Further that the Article  8  aspect  was  immaterial  by
    reason of the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Amirteymour  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 353.

17. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Norton  relied  upon  the
    rule 24 response and the decision of Sala (as cited). He submitted that
    it clarified what the law  should  have  been  and  that  as  such  the
    decision of the respondent did  not  attract  a  right  of  appeal.  He
    further submitted that there was no record on file of any human  rights
    decision, whether the 1st June 2016 or any other date, made in  respect
    of this appellant as referred to in the grant of permission by UT Judge
    Deans.

    Discussion:

18. As set out earlier in  the  determination,  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal judge who took the point that  there  was
    no arguable error of law in the  decision  relating  to  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction in the light of the decision in Sala. The generic  grounds
    advanced on behalf of the appellant make no reference to that  decision
    nor do they offer any argument as to why the judge was wrong to  follow
    that decision. Nor are there any further documents sent to  demonstrate
    that the decision made to refuse his EEA application was wrong  on  the
    merits. Thus has not provided any evidence to  demonstrate  to  address
    the grounds of refusal. I observe that at no  time  during  the  appeal
    process did the appellant provide any further documentation other  than
    that sent to the SSHD for the purposes of the application and  referred
    to in the decision letter.

19. The decision of Sala (EFM's: right of appeal) [2016] UKUT  00411  (IAC)
    was a decision of the Upper Tribunal which was reported  on  19  August
    2016 which was before the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    conclusion reached by the Tribunal in that decision was that there  was
    no right of appeal before the Tribunal against the refusal to  issue  a
    residence permit to an extended  family  member.  On  that  basis,  the
    Tribunal found that there was an error of  law  because  there  was  no
    right of appeal and  therefore  set  aside  the  first-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and remade the  decision  finding  that  there  was  no  valid
    appeal.

20. At paragraph 44 of the decision, the Tribunal stated that the fact that
    the right of appeal has been  long  assumed  or  accepted  is  not,  in
    itself, determinative of how we should decide this appeal which must be
    based on the proper construction of the  EEA  Regulations  2006  taking
    into account detailed submissions on the point. The Tribunal went on to
    state "long-standing universal mistake" is not a Canon of  construction
    of a legislative instrument...". Furthermore, the position  is  similar
    to circumstances which often come  before  this  Tribunal  whereby  the
    Court of Appeal makes a contrary decision to that of the  Tribunal  (or
    other court) which changes the law. In those circumstances the  law  is
    assumed always have been what the higher court says that it then is  as
    I understand the decision in Sala, the Tribunal was  stating  that  the
    EEA Regulations should  always  have  been  interpreted  as  they  have
    interpreted them in Sala.

21. Therefore I consider that the judge was right when  she  preferred  the
    legal analysis in Sala to that in the letter and she found  that  there
    was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal In those circumstances,  it  was
    not necessary to consider any application to extend the time limits  as
    there was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal for want of jurisdiction.

22. The grant of permission identified that the judge  ought  to  have  had
    regard to the application for an extension of time in relation  to  the
    human rights grounds. Judge Deans made reference to a decision made  in
    respect of this appellant on the 1st June 2016 refusing a human  rights
    claim. Mr Norton could find no trace of any decision made  on  the  1st
    June 2016 refusing a human rights claim. That is not surprising because
    the document referred  to  in  the  grounds  did  not  relate  to  this
    appellant. In the appeal  file  there  was  a  letter  from  Malik  Law
    Chambers in response to  the  directions  sent  out  by  the  Tribunal.
    Annexed to that letter was a large  bundle  of  documents  including  a
    decision letter of the 1st June 2016 refusing a human rights claim  but
    those  documents  and  the  decision  letter  related  to  a  different
    appellant and different appeal number HU xxx. Thus it  is  likely  that
    the judge when granting permission was in error in taking the view that
    there was such a decision. I am satisfied that it was an error  because
    Mr Norton can find no decision and importantly the  appellant  had  not
    made any reference to a decision of the 1st June 2016 or  provided  any
    copy decision.

23. As the FTT stated in the decision, even  if  there  had  been  a  valid
    appeal ( and in the event that an extension of time had been granted by
    the judge), human rights issues could not  have  been  argued  in  that
    appeal ( the decision in Amirteymour  [2015]  UKUT  00466(IAC)   (since
    upheld in the Court of Appeal; see Amirteymour v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    353). The decision considered the provisions as  they  related  to  the
    decision made on the 21st January 2014 and  therefore  the  legislative
    provisions in force at the time of the hearing and before  the  changes
    made to the appeal rights under the EEA Regulations which  took  effect
    on the 6th April 2015. Thus there  was  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  any
    appeal on human rights grounds.

24.  Even if there had been any such jurisdiction, there  was  no  material
    before the FTT concerning any factual basis for any  analysis  to  take
    place, either within the Rules under Paragraph 276ADE of Appendix FM or
    outside the Rules relating to Article 8. The appellant did not  provide
    any documentation other than that in support of his application  for  a
    residence card nor has he since  that  time  provided  any  documentary
    evidence of his circumstances.

25. Therefore in the circumstances, the appellant has not demonstrated that
    there was any material error of law in the decision made by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


    Decision:


    The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and the appeal is dismissed.






Signed [pic]
                                Date: 8/6/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds










