
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/11487/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


At Field House
        Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 5th April 2018
        On 12th April 2018


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                        MOHAMED YOONUS SHAHUL HAMEED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                             NOTICE OF DECISION

     1. In a  decision  promulgated  on  7.8.17  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Martin concluded that she had no jurisdiction to entertain
        the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated
        15.9.16 to  refuse  his  application  for  an  EEA  residence  card
        pursuant to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
        2006. Judge Martin's decision relied on the Upper Tribunal decision
        of Sala [2016] UKUT 0411. This was effectively  overturned  by  the
        Court of  Appeal  in  Khan  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1755.


     2. In the notice of decision dated 2.3.18 I indicated that  the  Upper
        Tribunal was minded to find an error of law, set aside the decision
        of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the  case  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. If either of the parties was opposed to this course  they
        were directed to inform the Tribunal in writing  (giving  reasons),
        not later than 7 days from the date  the  Directions  were  issued.
        Following that period, the parties were  informed  that  the  Upper
        Tribunal would issue its decision.


     3. The Upper Tribunal has not received any correspondence from  either
        party within the stipulated timeframe.  In  the  light  of  Khan  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1755,
        the First-tier Tribunal was wrong in law to conclude  that  it  did
        not have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.


     4. The Upper Tribunal is consequently satisfied  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's decision is  marred  by  a  material  legal  error  (the
        unlawful view that it lacked jurisdiction).


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by a  material  error  of  law.
The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)
hearing, before a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Martin.




         [pic]
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson                 5th April 2018
