
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/11590/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Cynthia deufi Monkan
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Cameroon born on 9 July 1991.  The history of the appeal  is  a  little
    complex but  with  the  assistance  of  the  parties  the  issues  were
    clarified and narrowed.

 2. The Claimant applied for an EEA family permit as the  dependant  of  Mr
    [GD], whom she believed to be her father, having been brought up in his
    household since the age of 5 years old. It was only upon the  necessity
    to obtain DNA evidence in support of her application for an EEA  family
    permit that it was discovered she was not his daughter biologically but
    that he was likely to be her uncle.

 3. The basis of the issue of the EEA family permit is that the Appellant's
    uncle was married to an  EEA  national,  [ML]  on  31  July  2000.  The
    Claimant arrived in the UK on 17 June 2007.  She was 15 at  that  time.
    Her former representatives applied for permanent residence  cards  both
    in respect of her uncle and the Claimant.  Her uncle  was  issued  with
    permanent residence on 3 March 2008, whereas the  Claimant  was  issued
    with a residence card valid for five years as the family member  of  an
    EEA national.

 4. Her uncle's relationship subsequently broke down.  On 29 June  2009  he
    petitioned for divorce and the decree absolute  was  pronounced  on  18
    November 2009.  The Claimant remained living with her  uncle,  but  not
    with his EEA national wife, until March 2015 when she moved out to live
    with her fianc� who is a French national living and working in the UK.

 5. The Claimant made an application for permanent residence on  the  basis
    of a retained right of residence on 22 February 2016.  This application
    was refused on 6 September 2016.  The Claimant appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal who allowed her appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  6
    March 2018.  The Judge at [86] was satisfied the Claimant and her uncle
    were honest and credible witnesses.  He found at [95] that the Claimant
    had, at all material times, been financially dependent  on  her  uncle,
    whom she had resided with from her entry to the UK in June  2007  until
    March 2015.

 6. The Judge took into account that in a previous determination in respect
    of an application for indefinite leave to remain, Judge Mayall had made
    a declaration  that  the  Claimant  had  acquired  a  right  to  reside
    permanently. The Secretary of State then wrote to  the  Claimant  on  6
    October 2014, referring to that decision and informing  her  she  would
    not be required to leave the UK and that if she wished  to  submit  her
    passport it would be endorsed with a permanent right to reside  in  the
    UK and should be submitted with an appropriate application  form.   The
    Claimant then made an application but this  was  rejected  because  she
    paid the old fee.

 7. A further application made  on  19  February  2016  was  refused  on  6
    September 2016 under  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  Judge Blake in  a  decision  and  reasons  dated  23
    February 2018 found at [110] that the Claimant had resided in the UK as
    a family member of an EEA national from 17 June 2007 until 18  November
    2009, and held as follows at [111]:

         "111.    I further noted from the time of the divorce of her  uncle
                from his EEA national spouse the Appellant had retained  the
                right of residence as a family  member  and  that  the  five
                years were therefore made up.

         112.     In light of my findings I concluded that the Appellant was
                entitled  to  a  permanent  residence  card  as   had   been
                recognised in June 2014".

 8. The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis that the judge had erred materially in  law
    at [95], in that it was asserted that:

      1) the Claimant would have needed to show she had  been  dependent  on
         her uncle's ex-wife, the EEA national  or  been  a  member  of  her
         household, rather than being dependent on her uncle;

      2) that the decision of Judge Mayall had clearly been  made  in  error
         when he found that the Claimant had acquired the permanent right to
         remain pursuant to Regulation 15 of the  2006  Regulations  on  the
         basis he believed the Claimant to be the  Sponsor's  daughter;  and



      3) that the Secretary of State had accepted Judge Mayall's finding and
         had written to her informing her she  had  acquired  the  right  to
         reside, whereas in fact the Secretary of  State  had  simply  noted
         that the Immigration Judge found  the  Claimant  had  acquired  the
         right to reside in the UK permanently and  the  letter  of  October
         2014 was not a grant  of  leave  and  could  not  give  rise  to  a
         legitimate expectation.

 9. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  and  in  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 4 September  2018,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rimington found that the judge had erred  materially  in  law.  A
    copy of that decision and reasons is appended.

     Hearing

10. The matter came before the Upper Tribunal for  hearing  on  25  January
    2019, where I invited submissions  from  both  Mr  Al-Rashid  for  the
    Claimant and Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State, in  order  to  narrow
    the issues.

11. Mr Al-Rashid's primary position is that, as  set  out  in  his  written
    submissions and his oral submissions, a purposive  interpretation  must
    be made in respect of CD 2004/38 and that the EEA Regulations  did  not
    properly give effect to the Directive bearing in mind  recital  15  and
    Article 13(2). Recital 15 of the Directive provides:

         "Family members should be legally safeguarded in the event of death
         of the Union Citizen, divorce, annulment of marriage or termination
         of a registered partnership. With due regard for  family  life  and
         human dignity, and in certain circumstances to guard against abuse,
         measures  should  therefore  be  taken  to  ensure  that  in   such
         circumstances family members already residing within the  territory
         of  the  host  Member  State  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on a personal basis."

    Article 13 of the Directive provides:

         "Retention of the right of residence by family members in the event
         of divorce, annulment of  marriage  or  termination  of  registered
         partnership

         1.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
         annulment of the Union citizen's marriage or termination of his/her
         registered partnership, as referred to in point 2(b) of  Article  2
         shall not affect the right of residence of his/her  family  members
         who are nationals of a Member State.

         Before acquiring the right  of  permanent  residence,  the  persons
         concerned must meet the conditions laid down in  points  (a),  (b),
         (c) or (d) of Article 7(1).

         2.    Without  prejudice  to  the  second  subparagraph,   divorce,
         annulment of marriage or termination of the registered  partnership
         referred to in point 2(b) of Article 2 shall not entail loss of the
         right of residence of a Union citizen's family members who are  not
         nationals of a Member State where:

             (a)   prior  to  initiation  of  the  divorce   or   annulment
             proceedings  or  termination  of  the  registered  partnership
             referred to in point  2(b)  of  Article  2,  the  marriage  or
             registered  partnership  has  lasted  at  least  three  years,
             including one year in the host Member State; or

             (b)  by agreement between the spouses or the partners referred
             to in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order, the spouse or
             partner who is not a national of a Member State has custody of
             the Union citizen's children; or

             (c)    this   is   warranted   by    particularly    difficult
             circumstances, such  as  having  been  a  victim  of  domestic
             violence while the  marriage  or  registered  partnership  was
             subsisting; or

             (d)  by agreement between the spouses or partners referred  to
             in point 2(b) of Article 2 or by court order,  the  spouse  or
             partner who is not a national of a Member State has the  right
             of access to a minor child, provided that the court has  ruled
             that such access must be in the host Member State, and for  as
             long as is required.

         Before acquiring the right of permanent  residence,  the  right  of
         residence of the persons concerned  shall  remain  subject  to  the
         requirement that they are able to show that  they  are  workers  or
         self-employed persons or that they have  sufficient  resources  for
         themselves and their family members not to become a burden  on  the
         social assistance system of the  host  Member  State  during  their
         period of residence and have comprehensive sickness insurance cover
         in the host Member State, or that they are members of  the  family,
         already  constituted  in  the  host  Member  State,  of  a   person
         satisfying these requirements. "Sufficient resources"  shall     be
         as defined in Article 8(4).

         Such  family  members  shall  retain  their  right   of   residence
         exclusively on personal basis."

12. Mr Al-Rashid submitted that the Regulations do not appear to cater  for
    the Claimant's situation as a former child whose relative has  divorced
    an EEA national.  Whilst her uncle was able to retain residence because
    the marriage lasted for more than three  years,  there  is  no  express
    provision in the Regulations for dependants in that situation.  Mr  Al-
    Rashid submitted it was necessary to go back to first principles as set
    out in the Directive, see also Gauswami [2018] UKUT 275, a decision  of
    President Lane, where it is  clear  that  the  Directive  should  offer
    protection to children and family members.

13. There was a discussion as to whether or not the amended EEA Regulations
    2016 applied given that they had come into force on  1  February  2017.
    In respect of the previous Regulations, i.e. the 2006  Regulations,  Mr
    Al-Rashid invited me  to  interpret  those  in  the  following  manner.
    Starting with Regulation 10(6)(b) the Claimant is the family member  of
    a person who falls within regulation 10(6)(a), which provides that s/he
    is not an EEA national but would if s/he were  an  EEA  national  be  a
    worker, a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-sufficient  person  under
    Regulation 6.

14.  Mr  Al-Rashid  submitted  that  the  Claimant's  uncle  falls   within
    regulation 10(6)(a) and the Appellant falls within  sub-paragraph  (b).
    He also sought to rely on Regulation 10(5) as follows:

         "(5)     a person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if

             (a)  he ceased to be a family member of the  qualified  person
                  on the termination of the marriage or civil partnership of
                  the qualified person;

             (b)  he was residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with  these
                  Regulations at the date of termination;

             (c)  he satisfies the condition in paragraph 6; and

             (d)  (i)      prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for
                      the  termination  of  the  marriage  or   the   civil
                      partnership the marriage  or  civil  partnership  had
                      lasted for at least three years and  the  parties  to
                      the marriage or civil partnership had resided in  the
                      UK for at least one year during its duration".

15. Mr Al-Rashid submitted that the  Claimant's  uncle  clearly  meets  the
    conditions set out in Regulation 10(5)(a), (b),  (c)  and  (d)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.   He  was  at  all  material  times
    employed by the NHS and thus was a worker in  his  own  right,  and  in
    order to meet the underlying  purposive  intention  of  the  Directive,
    Regulation 10(6)(b) must be seen to cover the  Claimant,  who  is  thus
    also entitled to be treated as somebody who has retained the  right  of
    residence.

16. Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State  expressly  accepted  that  Article
    13(2) of CD 38/2004 includes all family members and that  that  is  not
    reflected in the Regulations. Mr Tufan was also prepared to accept that
    the Claimant is an extended family member and thus qualifies under  the
    Directive if properly interpreted.

     Findings and Reasons

17. I am indebted to both parties for their assistance in this  matter,  in
    the absence of any clear jurisprudential guidance.  In  light  of  what
    ultimately was the  agreed  position  of  the  parties,  I  find  that,
    properly construed, the Claimant  should  be  considered  as  a  family
    member who has retained  the  right  of  residence  with  reference  to
    Regulation 10 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  This provides
    as follows:

         "Family member who has retained the right of residence

         10.  (1)      In these Regulations family member who  has  retained
                  the right of residence means  subject  to  paragraph  8  a
                  person who satisfies the conditions in paragraph 2,  3,  4
                  or 5 ... .

             (5)  A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if -

                  (a)  he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person
                      on  the  termination  of  the   marriage   or   civil
                      partnership of the qualified person;

                  (b)  he was residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance
                      with  these  Regulations   at   the   date   of   the
                      termination;

                  (c)  he  satisfies  the  condition  in  paragraph  6;  and



                  (d)  ...

                      (i)  prior to the initiation of the  proceedings  for
                           the termination of  the  marriage  or  the  civil
                           partnership, the marriage  or  civil  partnership
                           had lasted for  at  least  three  years  and  the
                           parties to the marriage or civil partnership  had
                           resided in the UK for at least  one  year  during
                           its duration ... .

             (6)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person -

                  (a)  is not an EEA national but would if he  were  an  EEA
                      national be a worker, a  self-employed  person  or  a
                      self-sufficient person under Regulation 6; or

                  (b)  is the family member of a  person  who  falls  within
                      (a)".

18. Whilst on the face of it Regulation 10 would appear  to  clearly  cover
    the Claimant's uncle, in light of  the  fact  that  it  is  clear  from
    Article 13(2) of the Directive 2004/38 EC that  the  retention  of  the
    right of residence also applies to family members who are not nationals
    of a member state, I find that Regulation 10 of  the  2006  Regulations
    properly  interpreted  must  also  cover  the  Claimant  and  that  the
    reference in Regulation 10, sub-paragraph 6(b) to a family member of  a
    person who falls within paragraph (a) must be read  as  including  that
    person as to fall properly within Regulation 10(5)  as  a  whole.  This
    would be consistent with a purposive interpretation of  the  Regulation
    and the President's recent judgment in Gauswami [2018] UKUT  275  (IAC)
    at [42] to [43].  See also recital 15 of 2004/38 EC.

19. Whilst I find that Schedule 4 (2) (3) of the 2016 Regulations  provides
    that that 2006 Regulations continue to apply to a case where  a  person
    had a right to an appeal or a pending appeal on 31st  January  2017,  I
    have  also  with  the  agreement  of  the  parties,  taken  account  of
    Regulation 8 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016, which post date
    the Secretary of State's decision  and  which  came  into  force  on  1
    February 2017. I find  that  the  amendments  to  the  Regulations  has
    informed the Secretary of State's position in this  particular  appeal.
    Regulation 8 provides:

         "8.  (1) In these Regulations  'extended  family  member'  means  a
                  person who is not a family member of an EEA national under
                  regulation  7(1)(a),  (b)  or  (c)  and  who  satisfies  a
                  condition in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).

             (2)  The condition in this paragraph is that the person is -

                  (a)  a relative of an EEA national; and

                  (b)  residing in a country other than the  United  Kingdom
                      and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member
                      of the EEA national's household; and either -

                      (i)  is accompanying the EEA national to  the  United
                           Kingdom or wants to join the EEA national in  the
                           United Kingdom; or

                      (ii) has  joined  the  EEA  national  in  the  United
                           Kingdom and continues to be  dependent  upon  the
                           EEA national, or  to  be  a  member  of  the  EEA
                           national's household.

             ...

             (6)  In these Regulations, 'relevant EEA national'  means,  in
                  relation to an extended family member -

                  (a)  referred to in paragraph (2), (3)  or  (4),  the  EEA
                      national  to  whom  the  extended  family  member  is
                      related;

                  (b)  referred to in paragraph (5), the EEA national who is
                      the durable partner of the extended family member.

             (7)  In paragraphs (2) and (3), 'relative of an EEA  national'
                  includes a relative of the spouse or civil partner  of  an
                  EEA national where on  the  basis  of  being  an  extended
                  family member a person -

                  (a)  has prior to the 1st February 2017 been issued with -

                      (i)  an EEA family permit;

                      (ii) a registration certificate; or

                      (iii)    a residence card; and

             (b)  has since the most recent issue of a document  satisfying
                  sub-paragraph (a) been continuously resident in the United
                  Kingdom".

20. Mr Al-Rashid drew attention to Regulation 8(7) of the 2016  Regulations
    2016 and submitted that  the  definition  of  family  member  had  been
    expressly  amended  to  include  extended  family  members  within  the
    definition of relative of an EEA national as set out in Regulation 8(2)
    and (3) and Mr Tufan accepted that this was correct.

21. It follows in light of the above that the Claimant is  properly  to  be
    considered as a person who has retained the right of residence  in  the
    UK,  pursuant  to  regulation  10(6)(b)  of   the   Immigration   (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed, with the effect that  the
decision by First tier Tribunal Judge Blake allowing the  Claimant's  appeal
is upheld.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 19 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
