
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/11426/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2018                           |On 6 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 enoch boadi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Sobowale, instructed by Quality Solicitors (AZ
Law)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Boadi against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Judge who,  on  4  October  2017,  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of his application for a residence  card.  I  need
    not say very much in this judgment because it is common ground that the
    judge erred.  She came to a  number  of  positive  findings  which  are
    helpfully summarised at paragraph 3 of the grounds of appeal concerning
    the validity of the marriage, the durable relationship and the marriage
    not being one of convenience.  I am satisfied that  the  child  is  the
    appellant's child, and also of crucial importance  to  today's  hearing
    the judge found that the sponsor was exercising treaty  rights  at  the
    date of decision and that she was doing so also at the date of hearing.



2.   The judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that the sponsor  had  been
    unemployed for a period of nearly six months earlier on in 2017 and  as
    a consequence did not  accept  she  had  been  continuously  exercising
    treaty rights or that she continues, he being a qualified person, to do
    so.

3.   The judge having accepted that the sponsor was working  and  exercising
    treaty rights at the date of decision and also doing so at the date  of
    hearing was sufficient  for  the  appeal  to  be  allowed.   It  is  an
    application for a residence card only, not for permanent residence, and
    as a consequence I am satisfied that the judge erred as a matter of law
    in this case and in light of her other findings and  in  light  of  the
    error now corrected with regard to the exercise of  treaty  rights,  it
    must follow that the appeal which was dismissed by  the  judge  is  now
    allowed.

4.   No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]
Signed                                  Date          06/11/2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
