
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/12495/2016
     EA/12496/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: UTIAC Liverpool            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 30 November 2018                 |On 10 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             fuleshwari kashyap
                              ramcharan kashyap
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer instructed by Jackson & Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are nationals of India born on 1 July 1948 and 9  April
      1943 respectively.  They appealed against the respondent's decision to
      refuse to issue them with EEA family  permits  under  the  Immigration
      (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  Regulations")  to
      accompany their British daughter-in-law, Shanty Kashyap, to the UK.

   2. The appellants' son, Kunj Kashyap, became  a  British  citizen  on  10
      April 2011 and his wife, the sponsor Shanty Kashyap, became a  British
      citizen on 23 November 2013. They were married in August 2008 and  had
      two children. In October 2015 the sponsor moved  to  Latvia  with  her
      children and on 3 July 2016 the appellants moved to Riga.  The  family
      decided to move  back  to  the  UK  after  the  Brexit  vote  and  the
      appellants made their application for a family permit on 26  September
      2016.

   3. The appellants' case is that the sponsor had moved the centre  of  her
      life to Latvia, she had been living there for two years and  had  been
      exercising treaty rights  there,  her  children  were  enrolled  in  a
      nursery there and also had a nanny and  she  and  the  appellants  had
      purchased a property there. The appellants' son had tried to  transfer
      his employment to Riga but had been unable to do so. The  sponsor  had
      moved to Latvia because the cost of living was cheaper  and  they  had
      managed to save money by renting out a room in their house in the UK.

   4. The appellants' application was refused by the respondent on 5 October
      2016. The respondent noted that the appellants had previously  applied
      for entry clearance to the UK as adult dependant  relatives  of  their
      son in October 2013 but their applications had been refused in January
      2014 and their appeals against the decision dismissed  on  20  January
      2015.  The  respondent  considered  that   the   appellants'   current
      application had been made solely in order to secure residence  in  the
      UK and had been engineered to circumvent the immigration  rules  under
      which they had previously been refused. The respondent did not  accept
      that it was cost effective for the  sponsor  to  move  to  Latvia  and
      therefore did not find the reason for the move  to  be  credible.  The
      respondent did not accept the explanation for moving back to  the  UK,
      namely the Brexit referendum, given that the referendum pre-dated  the
      appellants' move to Latvia. The respondent did not accept the evidence
      produced by the appellants  as  reliable  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
      employment in Latvia. The respondent did not, therefore,  accept  that
      the sponsor had moved the centre of her life to  Latvia  and  did  not
      accept  that  she  was  exercising  treaty  rights  as  claimed.   The
      respondent was not satisfied that the appellants met the  requirements
      of regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations.

   5. The appellants appealed against that decision. Their appeal was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Henderson on 11 October 2017.  The  judge
      accepted that the sponsor was genuinely resident in Latvia but did not
      accept the evidence of her employment as reliable and did  not  accept
      that she  had  genuinely  been  exercising  treaty  rights  in  Latvia
      throughout her residence as a worker. The judge concluded  that  there
      had been an intention to obtain an advantage from the Community  rules
      by creating artificially the conditions laid down  for  obtaining  it.
      She dismissed the appeals.

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision to  the  Upper
      Tribunal on three grounds: firstly that  the  judge  had  applied  the
      wrong burden and standard of proof and had failed  to  show  that  the
      respondent  had  met  the  burden  of  proving  that  the  appellants'
      residence in Latvia was fraudulent, considering  that  they  had  been
      issued with residence permits by the  Latvian  authorities;  secondly,
      that the judge's reasons for  concluding  that  the  sponsor  was  not
      actually working in  Latvia  were  lacking  in  cogent  reasoning  and
      involved speculation; and thirdly, that the appellants' intentions  as
      regards circumventing the immigration rules were  irrelevant  and  the
      judge erred by finding that they were relevant.

   7. Permission was granted on 12 June 2018, with particular  reference  to
      the judge's consideration of the residence cards issued by the Latvian
      authorities.

   8. Mr Greer submitted firstly that the judge had failed to deal with  the
      crucial issue of the appellants' and sponsor's residence cards,  which
      was evidence of the Latvian authorities' recognition that the  sponsor
      was exercising treaty rights. Mr Greer relied on the case of  Sadovska
      & Anor v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Scotland) (Rev 1)
      [2017] UKSC 54 in submitting that the judge, having effectively  found
      that there had been an abuse of rights, had failed  to  consider  that
      the burden of proof  lay  upon  the  respondent.  Secondly,  Mr  Greer
      submitted that the judge's reasons for concluding that the sponsor was
      not working were speculative and irrational and she had  misunderstood
      the information in the tax declaration forms. He  submitted  that  the
      judge had been nit-picking, whereas  there  was  overall  evidence  of
      genuine employment.  Thirdly  he  submitted  that  the  sponsor's  and
      appellants' motives were irrelevant, provided there was  no  abuse  of
      rights.

   9. Mr Bates submitted that the issue of residence cards to the appellants
      and sponsor was declaratory and was a snapshot of circumstances at the
      time, but was not relevant to the situation at the time of the hearing
      before the judge. The judge was right to consider matters at the  time
      of the hearing and was entitled to have concerns about the evidence of
      the sponsor's employment and exercise of treaty rights.

  10. In response, Mr Greer relied on the case of OB (EEA Regulations 2006 -
      Article 9(2) - Surinder Singh spouse) Morocco [2010] UKUT 420, whereby
      it  was  found  that  the  exercise  of  treaty  rights  need  not  be
      immediately prior to the return to the  UK,  in  submitting  that  the
      issue of  residence  cards  to  the  appellants  and  sponsor  was  of
      relevance to the issues in this appeal.

  11. I am in agreement with Mr Greer that the issue of residence  cards  to
      the appellants and sponsor is a matter of relevance to  the  questions
      arising in this appeal and that the judge's failure to take that  into
      consideration is a material error of law. It is correct that the issue
      of residence  cards  is  merely  declaratory  and  Mr  Bates  properly
      submitted that that was a  snapshot  of  circumstances  at  the  time.
      Nevertheless the issue of the residence  cards  is  evidence  that  in
      December 2015, when the  sponsor's  residence  card  was  issued,  the
      Latvian authorities were satisfied  that  she  was  exercising  treaty
      rights in Latvia and that in July 2016, when the appellants' residence
      cards were issued, they were satisfied that the appellants were family
      members  of  an  EU  citizen  exercising  treaty  rights  in   Latvia.
      Accordingly there  is  evidence  that  the  Latvian  authorities  were
      satisfied that the sponsor was exercising  treaty  rights  at  certain
      times. That has  to  be  a  relevant  and  material  consideration  in
      assessing whether the sponsor was genuinely exercising  treaty  rights
      during the period of her residence in Latvia, in particular where  the
      judge's finding was effectively  that  there  had  been  an  abuse  of
      rights. Contrary to the respondent's submission at [3] of the Rule  24
      response, there was  never  any  suggestion  in  the  grounds  seeking
      permission and the grant  of  permission  that  the  mere  issuing  of
      residence  cards  in  Latvia  was  determinative  of  the  appellants'
      appeals, but it was plainly a matter to be taken into consideration in
      an overall assessment of the sponsor's and appellants' intentions  and
      the question of whether their residence in Latvia was genuine for  the
      purposes of Regulation 9(3) of the EEA Regulations 2006.  The  judge's
      failure to consider that matter is plainly a material  omission  which
      undermines the sustainability of her credibility findings. Accordingly
      it seems to me that the judge's decision is materially flawed and  has
      to be set aside in its entirety. I am in agreement with Mr Greer  that
      it is appropriate,  in  such  circumstances,  for  the  matter  to  be
      considered afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

  12. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
      afresh, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(b), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Henderson.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  3 December
2018
