
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ea/12704/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 June 2019                      |On 3 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                              mrs Cecilia Awuah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipi of Counsel, Devine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She was born on 6 November  1982.



 2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  her
    a residence card dated 5 August 2015.

 3. This appeal has a considerable history which I need to set out.   Judge
    Obhi (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 October 2017.  The judge did not accept that  a  proxy
    marriage had taken place.

 4. The original grounds claimed the judge erred materially.   The  grounds
    read inter alia as follows:

         "2.  ... The appellant confirmed in evidence that she had  marriage
             under Marriage Ordnance on 10 August 2013 and subsequently her
             customary ceremony took place as her father was not well.

         3.   It is submitted that the judge made a material  error  of  law
             through resolve a material matter.   The  appellant  had  said
             they had  'booked'  not  'put'  (the  date  for  the  Marriage
             Ordnance.  The Ghanaian authorities had not put a date  as  17
             September instead the statutory declaration was  sworn  on  17
             September 2013.  The judge  could  not  distinguish  statutory
             declaration from the marriage certificate by Marriage Ordnance
             therefore her findings cannot be relied upon.

         4.   The judge had proceeded on  the  basis  that  she  had  to  be
             satisfied that the marriage  was  valid  under  customary  law
             only.  The marriage was registered under  the  licence  number
             JDA/0019/2013 was in accordance with  Ghanaian  law.   In  the
             case of Metock the ECJ ruled against host  nation  restriction
             on when and where the marriage took place and how the  non-EEA
             national entered the host country.  The judge  seems  to  have
             erred in this regard.  The witness statements were  signed  at
             pages 9 and 11 of the appellant's bundle."

 5. Further grounds at 5-9 alleged that the judge failed to take account of
    the  statutory  declaration  and  could  not  distinguish  between  the
    marriage certificate and the statutory  declaration.   Further,  whilst
    the judge referred to discrepancies as regards the date of the marriage
    she erred in law by failing to specify the date and give reasons as the
    information was contained in the  statutory  declaration  and  marriage
    certificate and was confirmed orally by  the  appellant.   The  judge's
    assessment of case law was in error.

 6. Judge C A Parker granted permission on 6 December 2017.  She said inter
    alia as follows:

         "The grounds allege that the judge made material errors of  law  as
         she misunderstood the  appellant's  evidence  at  the  hearing  and
         failed to consider the statutory declaration, sworn on 17 September
         2013 which had been submitted with the application.   The  decision
         in Kareem (proxy - EU law) [2014] is no longer good law and  should
         not have been applied.

         I have carefully considered the judge's decision and note that,  as
         claimed in the grounds of appeal, a statutory declaration, dated 17
         September 2013, forms part of the respondent's bundle.  However, at
         paragraph 26 of her decision the judge refers to the absence  of  a
         statutory declaration in this case and places weight upon  this  in
         reaching  negative  findings.   The   statutory   declaration   was
         considered at some length at pages  6  to  7  of  the  respondent's
         refusal decision and found to be lacking.  I have  considered  this
         in assessing whether there is an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
         decision and find that the judge may have come to a different  view
         about the document, had she been aware of it.  I am satisfied  that
         this is an arguable error of  law.   Although  the  refusal  letter
         refers to the case of Kareem, the judge placed no reliance upon  it
         in her decision.

         There was no  reference  to  this  in  the  judge's  decision,  but
         evidence was before her concerning the appellant's  pregnancy  with
         twins, due in November 2017.  There is no criticism  of  the  judge
         for not considering the appeal under  Regulation  8  (other  family
         member -  durable  relationship).   She  was  bound  by  Sala  and,
         further, the  appellant's  sponsor  did  not  attend  the  hearing.
         However, this may fall to be explored at any further hearing."

 7. The Secretary of State filed and  served  a  Rule  24  response  on  27
    December 2017 inter alia as follows:

         "2.  Even if the judge is mistaken about the statutory declaration,
             other reasons are given for rejecting the marriage as  validly
             conducted as set out in paragraphs 25 and 27  -  29.   It  was
             open to the judge to find that the  marriage  is  not  validly
             conducted due to the discrepancies in the  documents  and  the
             explanations given at the hearing.

         3.   The judge also has  concerns  about  the  genuineness  of  the
             marriage itself, given  that  the  appellant  an  EEA  sponsor
             failed to attend two marriage interviews and the  EEA  sponsor
             also failed to attend the hearing before the FTT.

         The respondent opposes the appellant's  appeal.   In  summary,  the
         respondent will submit inter alia that the Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal directed himself appropriately."

 8. In a decision promulgated on 5 March 2018, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen
    found that the decision of the judge contained a material error of law.
     He remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  but  preserved  the
    particular finding of the sponsor's qualifying status.

 9. The  appeal  was  heard  again  before  Judge  Nixon.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 31 July 2018, she dismissed the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  She did not find the appellant to be a credible  witness.
    She found the appellant had failed to show  she  was  in  a  subsisting
    relationship  with  the  sponsor.   Judge  Nixon  did  not  accept  the
    paternity of the children being that of the sponsor.  See [21]  of  the
    decision.  Judge Nixon also found that the appellant had failed to show
    that she and the sponsor lived together for  any  lengthy  periods  and
    concluded that the appellant had failed to show  she  and  the  sponsor
    were in a durable relationship.  Judge Nixon dismissed the appeal under
    Regulations 7 and 8.

10. The grounds before me claim that the judge erred in proceeding  on  the
    basis that the appellant was required to prove that her proxy  marriage
    was valid under Ghanaian law rather than to require the respondent, who
    alleged that it was not valid to prove the same.  The  judge  correctly
    said at [15] that she was starting by considering whether  or  not  the
    marriage conducted in Ghana was conducted in accordance with  the  laws
    of that country, however, Judge Nixon did not quote  the  Ghanaian  law
    and erred in ending [15] by saying "...... provided she is able to show
    that the marriage certificate is reliable".

11. The judge said at [16] that she had concerns about the validity of  the
    certificate but did not consider Ghanaian law in that regard such  that
    it was not clear how she arrived at her conclusion.

12. Awuku [2017] EWCA Civ 178 overturned the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Kareem such that the respondent's decision was in error.   At  [15]  of
    Awuku it was said that "...... the law of the country where a  marriage
    is solemnised must alone decide all questions relating to the  validity
    of the  ceremony  by  which  the  marriage  is  alleged  to  have  been
    constituted ('the lex loci Celebrationis')."

13. The judge did not refer to any Ghanaian law in her decision  such  that
    her conclusion that the marriage was not  valid  was  contrary  to  the
    ruling in CB Brazil and lex loci celebrationis.  The judge referred  to
    the statutory declaration at [7] of her decision and said  "......  the
    parents were there but there was  no  mention  of  her  husband".   The
    grounds claim that was evidence that the judge did not know the purpose
    of the statutory declaration.  At page 4 of the refusal the  respondent
    quoted Ghanaian law PNDC law 112; at Section 3(2).  For the purpose  of
    registering the marriage, the parents were mandated to confirm  certain
    information in the Statutory Declaration which the judge  appeared  not
    to understand.

14. At [19]-[22] the judge considered the appeal under  Regulation  8.   It
    was  accepted  that  the  couple   resided   at   different   addresses
    temporarily, however, their relationship was claimed to be  subsisting,
    they had twins and there was nothing wrong for the appellant  "to  seek
    respite" after the birth of twins.  The judge was  in  error  when  she
    said the appellant and sponsor no longer live together.  The fact  that
    they were not under a single roof did  not  mean  that  they  were  not
    husband and wife.

15. Judge Simpson granted permission to appeal  in  her  decision  dated  3
    September 2018.  She said inter alia as follows:

         "2.  Permission to appeal is granted because:

               i) Notwithstanding the real lack of clarity  of  the  grounds
                  upon which the application for permission  to  appeal  was
                  advanced, on  careful  reading  of  the  totality  of  the
                  decision  there  was  arguable  that  the  appellant   was
                  deprived of a fair determination of her  appeal  according
                  to law with reference to Reg 7  of  the  EEA  Regulations,
                  including clarity of  the  respondent's  decision  against
                  which  she  appealed  and  furthermore  clarity   of   the
                  applicable  law  in  her  appeal,   firstly,   the   legal
                  principles concerning the validity  of  foreign  marriages
                  under  English  law,  namely  following  CB  (Validity  of
                  marriage: proxy marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080  (that
                  they are governed by the law  of  the  country  where  the
                  marriage took place i.e. lex loci  celebrationis  and  not
                  the domicile of  the  parties,  and  secondly  where,  the
                  applicable lex loci celebrationis, Ghanaian law recognises
                  proxy marriages, the marriage of  the  appellant  and  her
                  husband would fall to be treated  in  principle  as  valid
                  under English law, if shown by  her  to  have  been  valid
                  under Ghanaian law, i.e.  that  the  requirements  of  the
                  marriage law of Ghana were met and thereby in turn clarity
                  concerning what  those  requirements  were  of  which  the
                  appellant was determined to have shown  were  met  or  not
                  met;

              ii)  With  reference  to  the  permission  grounds  concerning
                  dismissal of the appeal in the alternative  under  Reg  8,
                  durable relationship, there appeared that the  failure  of
                  the husband to attend the appeal hearing  did  not  assist
                  her appeal,  together  with  her  failure  to  attend  two
                  marriage interviews, however, there was arguable that  the
                  judicial treatment of the evidence of the  birth  of  twin
                  children on 24 November 2017  to  the  appellant,  present
                  with her at the hearing, with  formal  evidence  of  their
                  birth certificates showing the appellant's claimed husband
                  as the father and informant  to  the  registrar,  together
                  with a record of the father in attendance on  the  day  of
                  their birth, by way of postnatal notes, that that judicial
                  treatment was arguably inadequate to the determination  of
                  the issue.

             iii) The application for permission was lodged one day of  time
                  with bare explanation i.e. 'due to administrative  error'.
                  Notwithstanding given likely importance of the  matter  to
                  the parties and the presence of children,  discretion  was
                  exercised and time extended.

              iv) By way of observation those instructed  by  the  appellant
                  will need to ready themselves as the application  proceeds
                  to the next stage to  advance  with  greater  clarity  and
                  persuasion the grounds advanced."

Submissions on Error of Law

16. Mr Pipi relied upon the grounds.  Mr Whitwell conceded that  the  judge
    had erred in her approach to the proxy marriage.  The burden was not on
    the appellant to prove that  the  marriage  was  valid.   Nevertheless,
    there was considerable evidence to  show  that  the  marriage  was  not
    genuine or subsisting.

Conclusion on Error of Law

17. I do not find the judge's error with regard to the burden of  proof  as
    regards the proxy marriage to be material. The judge noted that as with
    the previous hearing and the interview, the sponsor  failed  to  attend
    and his absence was significant. The judge  identified  inconsistencies
    and contradictions leading to her  adverse  credibility  findings.  See
    [25]-[31] of the decision. The judge  made  careful  and  comprehensive
    findings on the evidence  before  her.    She  gave  clear  and  cogent
    reasons which she was entitled to come to on the evidence.

18. The judge was entitled to come to the conclusion that the paternity  of
    the children as evidenced by the declaration on the  birth  certificate
    was not conclusive.

19. Whilst the judge erred with regard to the burden of proof in  terms  of
    the proxy marriage as I have identified above, I do not find that error
    to be material given her other findings which shall stand.





Notice of Decision

20. The judge's error was not material and her decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
