
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/12934/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 February 2019                   |On 16 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                         SULAIMON OWOLABI SALAUDEEN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr R.O. Ojukotola of SLA Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  18  October
    2016 to refuse to  issue  a  residence  card  recognising  a  right  of
    residence as the family member of an EEA national under The Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006").



2.    The respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence  produced  in
    support of the application showed that a valid marriage had taken place
    under Nigerian law, specifically, section 42 of the Birth,  Death  etc.
    (Compulsory Registration) Decree No.69 1992 Act Cap.  B9  Laws  of  the
    Federation of Nigeria,  2004.  The  respondent  noted  that  background
    evidence indicated that a proxy marriage is only lawful when celebrated
    in accordance with native law and custom. Nigerian law specifies that a
    customary marriage must be registered within 60 days  and  must  be  in
    accordance with local government bye-laws.  The  registration  document
    produced by the appellant did not contain all the relevant requirements
    to show that the marriage was registered properly under  Nigerian  law.
    The evidence did not show that the relevant details were  provided  for
    the EEA sponsor, including the consent of her parents.  The  fact  that
    the claimed registration  document  did  not  contain  the  information
    required by Nigerian law cast doubt on the reliability of the document.
     The respondent was not satisfied that the  evidence  showed  that  the
    marriage  was  valid.  The  respondent   concluded   that   there   was
    insufficient reliable evidence to show that the appellant was a 'family
    member' for the purpose of regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations 2006.

3.    The respondent went  on  to  consider  whether  there  was  sufficient
    evidence to show that the appellant was in a durable  relationship  and
    was therefore an 'extended family member' for the purpose of regulation
    8(5), but the respondent was not satisfied that  there  was  sufficient
    reliable  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with the EEA national sponsor as claimed.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup ("the judge")  dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 03 July 2018. The appellant asked for  the
    appeal to be determined without  a  hearing.  The  judge  proceeded  to
    determine the appeal on the papers. The judge noted that the burden  of
    proof was on the appellant to show that  the  marriage  was  valid.  He
    identified the correct case of Awuku v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 178,  which
    overturned the earlier decision of the Upper Tribunal in Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024. He considered the four documents
    relied upon by the appellant to show that a valid  proxy  marriage  had
    taken place in Nigeria. The judge considered  the  general  submissions
    made on behalf of the appellant and found that they failed  to  address
    the concerns raised by  the  respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter. The judge went on to find:


         "20.     I would have been helpful if  I  had  been  provided  with
             expert opinion evidence from  a  suitably  qualified  Nigerian
             lawyer. The appeal  bundle  does  contain  a  letter  from  Mr
             Ojukotola, who appears to be a solicitor practising in London.
             His letter is undated and does not refer specifically  to  the
             issues in this case but to concerns about the 2013 COIR and to
             misunderstandings by the Respondent about the  Nigerian  legal
             system.


         21.      That letter is undated and does not appear  to  have  been
             obtained  in  connection  with  this  appeal.  There   is   no
             information about the author's qualifications or expertise.


         22.      For all those  reasons  I  attach  little  weight  to  the
             report.


         23.      It follows that  the  Appellant  has  not  discharged  the
             burden of providing that this customary marriage is  valid  in
             Nigeria."


5.    In the alternative, the judge went on to consider  whether  there  was
    sufficient evidence to  show  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  durable
    relationship for the purpose of regulation 8(5).  He  referred  to  the
    evidence in some detail but concluded that, while there was evidence to
    show that correspondence was sent to the same address, the evidence did
    not show to the required standard of proof that the appellant was in  a
    durable relationship with the EEA national sponsor as claimed.

6.          The appellant appealed the First-tier Tribunal decision  on  the
    ground that the judge failed to consider whether the evidence  produced
    by the appellant showed that a valid marriage took place under Nigerian
    law. The grounds accepted that the appellant's solicitors did not  deal
    with issues under regulation 8(5) because the appellant  relied  solely
    on regulation 7.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

7.     After  having  considered  the  grounds  of  appeal  and   the   oral
    submissions I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    involved the making of an error of law. Although it  was  open  to  the
    judge to observe that the evidence produced by the  appellant  relating
    to the application of Nigerian law did not directly tackle  the  points
    raised in the reasons for refusal letter, his decision  rested  on  the
    assumption that what was said in that letter  was  correct.  The  judge
    failed to carry  out  the  central  task  of  a  fact-finding  judicial
    decision maker, which  was  to  assess  the  evidence  for  himself  to
    ascertain whether it met the relevant requirements of Nigerian law.

8.    The appellant does not challenge the findings made with  reference  to
    regulation 8. Only that part of the First-tier Tribunal  decision  that
    deals with the assessment under regulation 7 is set aside and  will  be
    remade.

Remaking

9.    The respondent asserts that the documents produced in support  of  the
    application for a residence card were not sufficient  to  show  that  a
    valid marriage took place according to Nigerian law.

10.   Despite his findings relating to regulation 8(5) the  respondent  made
    no allegation that this is a marriage of convenience entered  into  for
    the purpose of using rights conferred by the EU treaties as a means  to
    circumvent the requirements of the immigration rules or to  demonstrate
    rights of residence.

11.   The appellant relied on four  key  documents  to  demonstrate  that  a
    valid marriage took place by proxy in Nigeria on 28 June 2012.

       i) Marriage certificate


          The document states that it is a "Native Law  &  Custom  Marriage
          Certificate" and purports  to  be  issued  by  the  Mushin  Local
          Government on "13th Agust, 2012". The reference number given  is:
          "MCC/MLG/011/2012". The document is addressed: "To  whom  it  may
          concern" and purports to certify that Dos Prazeres Pataco Claudia
          Marisa was married to Salaudeen  Sulaimon  Owolabi  according  to
          native law and custom on 28 June 2012. However, the document does
          not contain any  other  information  about  the  parties  to  the
          marriage apart from their names. It purports to be signed by  the
          registrar for the "Chairman Mushin Local Government Council". The
          name of the registrar is not included. The certificate is  sealed
          with a stamp stating "Grade 'A' Customary Court - Mushin"

      ii) Letter from Mushin Local Government

          The letter purports to be issued by the Mushin  Local  Government
          Grade 'A' Customary Court.  It is also dated 13 August  2012  and
          gives the  reference  number  "MCC/MLG/224/2012".  Again,  it  is
          addressed "To whom it may concern". The letter  states  that  the
          two people named were married under native law and custom  on  28
          June 2012 at an address in "Awofeso Street, Palm Groove, Shomolu,
          Lagos  State,  Nigeria".  It  states  that  the  groom's  father,
          Salaudeen Ganiyu Oerinde, "moved an oral motion in the  court  on
          the 13th day of August, 2012 to this effect suitably supported by
          7 paragraph affidavit and completed Form MCM. 1 submitted to  the
          Court by himself."  The  letter  is  signed  by  Joshua  Olushola
          Adetomiwa, JP who is said to be the Court Registrar.  The  letter
          purports to be on headed paper but there is no address  or  other
          contact details in the header. The only contact details given  in
          the letter is a Yahoo email address for the registrar who  signed
          the letter. The letter is  sealed  with  the  same  seal  as  the
          marriage certificate.


          While I do not purport  to  be  an  expert  in  handwriting,  the
          signature on the marriage certificate and the letter appear to be
          similar. The first letter 'J' has a  distinctive  sweep  that  is
          similar on both documents. The original documents  indicate  that
          the same blue pen may have been used to sign both documents.  The
          impression is that both documents purport to  be  issued  on  the
          same day by the same registrar.

     iii) Affidavit of Salaudeen Ganiyu Oderinde

          The affidavit is said to be sworn by the appellant's father on 13
          August  2012.  It  contains  a  photograph  and   various   seals
          purporting to be from  the  "Cashier  -  Magistrate  Court  Lagos
          State". The affidavit runs to seven paragraphs.  The  appellant's
          father confirmed the name and address of his son in  the  UK.  He
          also confirmed the name and the address of the EEA  sponsor.  The
          marriage was said to have taken place according to native law and
          custom at the same address in Awofeso Street, which is the  given
          address for the appellant's father.  The  affidavit  states  that
          "the marriage was conducted by proxy  with  the  consent  of  the
          parties, both families and dowry accepted  as  confirmed  in  the
          attached completed Form MCM.1" It is  reasonable  to  infer  from
          what is said in the letter purporting to be  from  the  customary
          court that this was the affidavit mentioned by the registrar.

      iv) Form MCM.1 - registration of marriage by native law and custom

          The final document completes the set. It purports to be a copy of
          the Form MCM.1 document  referred  to  in  the  letter  from  the
          registrar and the affidavit. The document does not appear to be a
          form, as such, but is  a  typed/word  processed  document,  which
          purports to have been received by way of a seal of the  "Grade  A
          Customary Court - Mushin" on 13 August 2012. The signature on the
          original document is similar in form and  ink  to  those  of  the
          registrar who purported to issue the marriage certificate and the
          letter from the customary court in Mushin.

          The document outlines the name, marital status, occupation,  age,
          nationality, state of origin (if applicable), residential address
          and the name and relationship of the person who consented to  the
          marriage for the appellant and the EEA sponsor. The form provided
          details of the date of the customary  marriage  and  the  address
          where it took place. The dowry is was stated to be: "Kolanuts and
          fruits". The details of four witnesses were  given  (i)  Oderinde
          Hammed Babatude; (ii) Lateef Adebayo Sulaimon;  (iii)  Lopez  Vas
          Carina Anna; and (iv) Mendes Claudia. The declaration  is  signed
          by the appellant's father and is dated 13 August 2012.

12.    Taken  together,  the  four  documents  purport  to  be  a   marriage
    certificate issued by the registrar in the Grade 'A' Customary Court in
    Mushin with the supporting documents that were stated to  be  necessary
    to register the marriage.

13.   The Court of Appeal in Awuku made clear that the  general  rule  under
    the law of England and Wales is that the formal validity of a  marriage
    is  governed  by  the  law  of  the  country  where  the  marriage  was
    celebrated.

14.   The evidence contains a copy of the underlying  source  material  from
    the Foreign and Commonwealth Office referenced in the Nigerian  Country
    of Origin Information (COI) Report dated 14 June 2013  referred  to  in
    the decision letter. The letter from the British High Commission to the
    Country of Origin Information Service at the UK Border Agency is  dated
    04 February 2013. The letter outlines the BHC's  understanding  of  the
    relevant Nigerian law as follows:

            "One of the functions of local  governments  in  Nigeria  is  to
           register all marriages. This  is  provided  for  in  the  Fourth
           Schedule to the 1999 Constitution of  the  Federal  Republic  of
           Nigeria. As a result, some local governments have  bye-laws  for
           the registration of customary law marriages.


            Some of  these  bye-laws  make  registration  of  customary  law
           marriages compulsory and prescribe  a  penalty  for  failure  to
           register such marriage. In addition to the foregoing, the Birth,
           Deaths etc (Compulsory Registration) Act  Cap.B9,  Laws  of  the
           Federation of Nigeria, 2004 (the  "Act")  also  stipulates  that
           customary law marriage be registered within  a  specific  period
           after its celebration.  Specifically,  section  30  of  the  Act
           provides as follows:


                 "Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment every
                 customary marriage is to be registered  within  sixty  (60)
                 days in  the  area  court  or  customary  court  where  the
                 marriage was contracted."

           The foregoing provision of the Act presupposes the statutory and
           therefore legal recognition  of  customary  law  marriages.  The
           Honorary Legal Adviser is  therefore  of  the  opinion  that  so
           called "proxy marriages" as an aspect of customary law marriage,
           are legal; and legal recognition is conferred by registration in
           an area or customary court."

15.   There follows an extract from the relevant "Act". Section 30  confirms
    that every customary marriage should be registered within  60  days  in
    the area or customary court where the marriage was contracted.  Section
    42 repeats the requirement for registration  within  60  days.  Section
    42(2) states  that  the  Chief  Registrar  shall  required  a  list  of
    specified information relating to the bride and groom  including  their
    full names, marital status, occupation, age, state of origin, place  of
    residence, nationality, the name of the person who has consented to the
    marriage and his relationship with the  bride  or  bridegroom.  Section
    42(3) states that Form CM.1 set out in the schedule to the Act "or  any
    similar form as may be used for giving the information  required  under
    paragraph (2)".

16.   This is the  legal  framework  upon  which  the  respondent  made  his
    decision. He was not satisfied  that  the  documents  produced  by  the
    appellant met the  requirements  of  section  42(2)  of  the  Act.  The
    reasoning at pages 4-5 of the decision letter is somewhat confused.  It
    seems the decision maker interpreted Nigerian law as requiring a  sworn
    affidavit from both sets of parents, but I can see no provision in  the
    Act to say that it was a requirement. It seems the decision maker  also
    interpreted the law as requiring the EEA sponsor's family members to be
    present when the marriage was registered, but I can see no provision in
    the Act to say that this was a requirement either.  The  decision  also
    seems to make a factually incorrect assertion. It was asserted that "by
    providing the claimed Customary court  document  that  states  an  oral
    motion was provided by a representative from both parties it is claimed
    that your EEA sponsor's father in law was in Nigeria on 28 June 2012 to
    attend the court oral motion". The letter says no such thing.  It  only
    says that the groom's father made an oral motion to the court supported
    by his affidavit and the  information  contained  in  Form  MCM.1.  The
    hearing was on 13 August 2012 not 28 June 2012, which is the  purported
    date of the marriage.

17.   The evidence suggests that proxy marriages are common in Nigeria.  The
    requirements for a customary  marriage  may  vary  depending  on  local
    customs. The appellant says  that  the  marriage  was  conducted  under
    Yoruba law and customs, but I was not referred to any evidence to  show
    what those customs involve.  The  MCM.1  form  appears  to  record  two
    witnesses with Portuguese names who are likely to be members of the EEA
    sponsor's family. It is not clear whether members of both families need
    to be physically present at the ceremony or whether it  was  sufficient
    for the EEA national sponsor's family to express their consent  to  the
    marriage in some other way.

18.   I am asked to determine a narrow issue. Does the evidence  before  the
    Upper Tribunal show on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  a  proxy
    marriage contracted by native law and custom in Nigeria was  registered
    and is therefore a valid marriage for the purpose of  regulation  7  of
    the EEA Regulations 2006?

19.   When the evidence produced by the appellant  is  analysed  it  becomes
    fairly clear that it forms  a  set  of  documents  that  were  used  to
    register a customary marriage with  the  registrar  in  the  Grade  'A'
    Customary Court in Moshin. The substance of the  requirements  outlined
    by the respondent in his decision letter appear to  be  satisfied.  The
    marriage  certificate  and  the  letter  from  the  registrar   contain
    consistent information and appear to be issued by the  same  registrar.
    In support of the oral application made by the  appellant's  father  in
    court on 13 August 2012, he filed an affidavit and an MCM.1 form, which
    appears to contain the information required by  section  42(2)  of  the
    Act.

20.   There are some gaps in  the  evidence,  which  does  not  explain  the
    requirements of Yoruba customary marriage. For example, it is not clear
    whether members of both families  need  to  be  physically  present  or
    whether there is provision for the EEA sponsor's family to witness  the
    marriage in some other way. However, I bear in mind that the  appellant
    does not have to prove his case with  any  certainty.  I  find  that  I
    cannot determine the issue with any certainty, but I satisfied that the
    evidence indicates that it is at least more  likely  than  not  that  a
    valid marriage was registered under Nigerian law.

21.   In light of the judge's unchallenged findings regarding the dearth  of
    evidence to show a subsisting relationship, some issues arise regarding
    the overall credibility of the application. Although I recognise that a
    person might still want to complete a customary ceremony, one might ask
    why a couple who both live in the UK chose  not  to  contract  a  civil
    marriage in the UK, the validity of which could not  be  disputed,  and
    instead chose to contract a marriage solely by native law and custom in
    Nigeria which they did not attend.

22.   However, I am conscious of  the  fact  that  the  respondent,  perhaps
    because he was concentrating on the validity of the marriage,  did  not
    make an allegation that this was a marriage of  convenience.  The  sole
    issue before me  is  whether  the  appellant  has  produced  sufficient
    evidence to show that a valid marriage  was  likely  to  be  registered
    under Nigerian law. I am satisfied that the evidence shows, at least to
    the balance of  probabilities,  that  the  appellant  appears  to  have
    registered  a  valid  marriage  under  Nigerian  law   and   that   the
    requirements of regulation 7 are met.

23.   It is a matter for the respondent what action might be taken in  light
    of the unchallenged findings of the First-tier Tribunal judge regarding
    the dearth of evidence of a subsisting  relationship  albeit  there  is
    quite a lot of evidence to show that the appellant and the EEA  sponsor
    both used the same correspondence address for several years.

24.   I conclude that the decision breaches  the  appellant's  rights  under
    the EU Treaties in respect of entry into or  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is remade and the appeal ALLOWED on EU law grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date  14 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








