
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  EA/12167/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision &  Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 21 December 2017                    |On 8 March 2018                     |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                    [V O]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ripon
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  [  ]  2005.   She  appeals
    against a decision of the respondent made on 6 September 2016 to refuse
    her application for an EEA family permit to join [FO] in the UK as  her
    daughter.  The application was refused under regulations 7 and  21B  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. It was accepted that her purported mother is a Dutch national who holds
    a Dutch passport and is exercising treaty rights in the UK.

 3. As evidence of the relationship the appellant provided a  copy  of  her
    birth certificate stating her date of birth as [ ] 2005  in  Accra  and
    her mother as [FO].

 4.  However,  checks  made  with  the  Ghanaian  Central  Registry  Office
    indicated that the birth certificate submitted was not genuine.   Thus,
    the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant's identity  was  as
    stated  and  that  the  Ghanaian  passport  provided   was   valid   or
    satisfactorily established her identity and nationality.

 5. The respondent noted that DNA  test  results  and  swab  identification
    sheets from a Home Office approved testing facility had been submitted.
     These results stated that the appellant's likely relationship  to  her
    sponsor was her daughter.  However, given that  the  birth  certificate
    was not genuine, the respondent was not satisfied  that  the  DNA  test
    results confirmed her identity as claimed, merely her relationship.

 6. The ECO was not satisfied that the appellant was the family  member  of
    an EEA national in accordance  with  regulation  7  and  that  she  had
    fraudulently attempted to obtain  a  right  to  reside  in  the  UK  in
    accordance with regulation 21B(1)(d).

 7. As such the requirements of regulation 12 were not met.

 8. She appealed.

    First tier hearing

 9. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 5 September 2017, Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Devittie dismissed the appeal.

10. He noted the sponsor's evidence.  In summary, that the sponsor  entered
    the UK in 2004 on a false  passport  issued  in  the  name  [FT].   She
    remained without leave.

11. She began a relationship with a man and became pregnant by him,  giving
    birth to the appellant in London on [ ]  2005.   The  father  abandoned
    them soon after the birth.

12. She found it difficult to cope  in  the  UK  as  a  single  parent  and
    returned with the appellant  to  Ghana  in  2005.   The  appellant  has
    remained there since then.

13. In 2006 the sponsor was issued with a Dutch passport as a family member
    of her mother and returned to the UK, leaving the appellant in the care
    of an aunt.  The sponsor supported her  financially  and  visited  when
    possible.

14. Eventually, in a position to provide the appellant with a stable  home,
    she took advice on how to proceed  with  the  visa  application.   Such
    resulted in the DNA test which confirmed her as the  biological  mother
    of the appellant.  As she did not want to reveal the  truth  about  her
    illegal history, she arranged for a birth certificate to be  issued  in
    Ghana.  The date of the birth certificate and parentage were  the  same
    as shown in the UK birth certificate.  The difference was her place  of
    birth.

15. The judge's findings are at paragraph 7 to 9 of his decision.

16. At [7] he did not accept her explanation that it was necessary, even if
    she had entered illegally, to  use  the  same  false  identity  in  the
    registration of her daughter's birth.   Also,  if  the  Ghanaian  birth
    certificate correctly reflected the names of all the  parties,  why  it
    was necessary to obtain a forged birth  certificate  instead  of  going
    through the normal  procedures  to  obtain  the  birth  certificate  in
    accordance with Ghanaian law.

17. At [8] and [9] the judge did not attach  weight  to  the  DNA  evidence
    having concerns about the 'chain in the transmission' of the  sponsor's
    blood sample  to  the  DNA  company  which  bore  a  USA  address.   In
    particular that the person who identified  her  appears  to  have  been
    based in the USA.  The judge considered that the proper course,  if  it
    was necessary to engage a US DNA company 'would have  been  to  arrange
    for a doctor based in the United Kingdom to take the sample  blood  for
    onward transmission to the USA'.

18. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  7
    November 2017.

    Error of law hearing

19. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Wilding agreed with  Ms  Ripon
    that the decision showed material error of law in that the judge failed
    adequately to assess the DNA evidence.  Whilst he correctly noted  that
    the company which carried out the test and provided the report has  its
    registered address in the USA and is approved by UK visas, he was wrong
    in stating that '... in respect of the blood sample of the sponsor, the
    person who identified her would appear to have been based at  the  time
    in the United States.'   Proper  scrutiny  of  the  report  would  have
    revealed that the sponsor's sample was taken  at  the  DNA  Diagnostics
    Centre, Glenthorne Road, London.  She was identified by a sample  taken
    at this centre in the UK and not by someone based in the USA.

20. I agreed.  In giving inadequate consideration to material evidence  the
    judge erred.

21. By consent the decision was set aside to be remade.  We  were  able  to
    proceed to that immediately.

22. I heard brief submissions from the representatives.   Mr  Wilding  said
    that there was no dispute that the appellant is a family  member  under
    regulation 7.  Nonetheless, the appellant, through the sponsor,  sought
    to get a right to reside  by  the  presentation  of  a  false  Ghanaian
    document.   Such  was  fraudulent  and  regulation  21B  applied.   The
    remaining   issue   was   whether   the   respondent's   decision   was
    proportionate.  In that regard it should  not  be  the  case  that  the
    appellant wins as a matter of course when fraud has been shown.   There
    was little evidence as to the appellant's circumstances  in  Ghana,  no
    suggestion that she was not being cared for properly there.   He  asked
    me to dismiss the appeal.

23. Ms Ripon submitted that there was evidence that the appellant's  carer,
    the aunt, had had enough of doing so.  It was difficult  to  know  what
    more evidence could be got.  It was in the best interests of the  child
    to be with her mother.

    Consideration

24. In considering this matter there is no dispute that the appellant is  a
    family member under regulation 7.  The remaining  issue  is  regulation
    21B which reads:

         "(1)     The abuse of a right to reside includes -

             ...

               d)  fraudulently  obtaining  or  attempting  to  obtain,   or
                  assisting another to obtain or attempt to obtain, a  right
                  to reside.

         (2)      The Secretary of State may take an  EEA  decision  on  the
         grounds of abuse of rights where there are  reasonable  grounds  to
         suspect the abuse of a right to reside and it is  proportionate  to
         do so."

25. There is no suggestion that  the  appellant  has  herself  fraudulently
    sought to obtain a right to reside.  It is  her  mother  who  has  been
    fraudulent.

26. It is not clear to me that the child can be fixed with the fraud of the
    mother  such  as  to  invoke  regulation  21B(1)(d).  I   received   no
    submissions on the matter. Even if I am wrong and it  does  because  of
    the actions of the mother, I consider that it is not  proportionate  to
    refuse the application as a result of the abuse of a right to reside by
    the mother.

27. It is accepted that the mother is an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights.  The appellant is her daughter and thus a family member.  I see
    no reason to doubt her explanation as to why she  submitted  the  false
    Ghanaian birth certificate.  As  she  accepts,  it  was  dishonest  and
    foolish.

28. However, the child is innocent in all this.  I  find  that  it  is  not
    appropriate to punish the child for the actions of her mother.

29. I do not see that in the context of this appeal under  the  Regulations
    the conditions in Ghana and the child's situation there  are  relevant.
    Regulation 12 (1) states that an entry clearance officer "must issue an
    EEA family permit to a person who applies for one if the  person  is  a
    family member of an EEA national  and  (a)  the  EEA  national  (i)  is
    residing in the UK in accordance with these regulations..."

30. In any event to refuse the application for the appellant flies  in  the
    face of her actual entitlement as  a  family  member  to  be  with  her
    mother.

31. The appeal succeeds.



Notice of Decision

32. The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  showed  material
    error of law.  That decision is set aside and remade as follows:

    The appeal is allowed under the Regulations.

    No anonymity order made.


Signed      Date 07 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

