
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/12991/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 November 2018                       |On 21 November 2018                |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MARK TURNER
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                            Miss Akua Oduro Agyei
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Spio-Aidoo, solicitor, R Spio & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

On 25 April 2016, the appellant submitted an application for a residence
card as the wife of an EEA national, Mr Hamza Sulemana, who is a citizen of
Spain born on 22 September 1977.  The basis of the application was that
they had married on 22 September 2015 in Ghana by proxy and had an Islamic
marriage ceremony in the UK on 19 March 2016.

The application was refused on 14 October 2016.  The basis of the refusal
was that the appellant had not provided proof that Mr Sulemana was
Ghanaian.  When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the
central question was as to whether the nationality of Mr Sulemana was
Ghanaian.  The submissions before the judge therefore were directed towards
the question as to whether or not it was a necessary ingredient of a lawful
marriage in Ghana by proxy that both parties should be Ghanaian, there
being no dispute that the appellant herself was a Ghanaian national.

Regrettably, the authorities to which the judge was referred were
inadequate to the extent that they related to cases which had been decided
either before or in ignorance of the existence of a UKBA document which
effectively would have determined the matter had the judge's attention been
drawn to it.  In the case of Amoako v Secretary of State for the Home
Department, appeal number IA/23315/2012, the matter was considered by the
Upper Tribunal and its attention was drawn to this document.

It was therefore unnecessary for the parties to look any further than the
contents of this publication.  It was entitled "Customary Marriage and
Divorce/Proxy Marriages contracted in Ghana" and dated 17 January 2012.  At
page 3 of that document is provided:

"Ghanaian nationals in Ghana or abroad:

At least one of the parties must be a Ghanaian national;

if both parties are non-Ghanaian nationals at least one of the parents of
any of the couple must be a Ghanaian national."

In this case, the test set out in the Customary Marriage and Divorce/Proxy
Marriages contracted in Ghana document was satisfied.

However, on the incomplete materials with which she was provided, the First-
tier Judge concluded that as a matter of Ghanaian law both parties had to
be shown to have been Ghanaian nationals.  It is clear, therefore, that the
judge was inadvertently misled and that feature persisted up until the date
of this hearing with the respondent continuing to promote the suggestion
that Ghanaian law required both parties to a proxy marriage to be of
Ghanaian nationality.

Mr Bramble, who appears on behalf of the respondent before us today, having
been shown the detail of the case of Amoako and the reference there to the
UKBA document has, realistically, conceded that there is no residual basis
upon which he can resist this appeal and in these circumstances, we have no
hesitation in allowing this appeal and remaking the decision of the judge
on the basis that the Secretary of State was in error in refusing the
application by the appellant in relation to the residence card.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Turner                             Date 13 November 2018

Mr Justice Mark Turner
