

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/12702/2016


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2018                           |On 26 January 2018            |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 SHER AFGAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: no appearance.
For the Respondent: Mr Duffy - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. On 15 September  2017  the  Upper  Tribunal  found  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had erred in law  and  set  aside  the  decision  of  that
        Tribunal promulgated on 29 December 2016.  The matter comes  before
        the Upper Tribunal today for the  purposes  of  a  Resumed  hearing
        after which this tribunal shall substitute  a  decision  to  either
        allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born  on  20  September  1970,
        entered the United Kingdom on 20 October 2010 with a student  Visa.
        Whilst in  the  United  Kingdom  the  appellant  married  a  Polish
        national. An application for a residence card, as proof of a  right
        to reside in the United Kingdom made on the  6  October  2016,  was
        rejected by the Secretary  of  State  who  was  not  satisfied  the
        appellant had established that  the  EEA  national  was  exercising
        treaty rights in the United Kingdom.
     3. Notice of hearing was sent out to the parties informing them of the
        Resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 25 January  2018.  The
        appellant's representatives wrote two letters to the Upper Tribunal
        in relation to this matter the first of 10 January 2018  confirming
        that they had already sent a paginated bundle to the Upper Tribunal
        on 18 July 2017, which is the bundle the appellant  is  seeking  to
        rely upon for the purposes of the Resumed hearing. The letter  also
        confirms receipt of notice of hearing on 8 January 2018  confirming
        the hearing on 25 January 2015.
     4. On 24 January 2018 a second letter was received from the appellants
        representatives in which it is confirmed they continue to represent
        the appellant in the matter but which then contains  the  following
        text:


             "The appellant requests  the  tribunal  that  the  hearing  be
             decided on the papers submitted to the tribunal. However, also
             requests the tribunal to consider the appellant's  exceptional
             circumstances and witness statements enclosed in the bundle.


             We again repeat the issue  need  to  resolve  is  whether  the
             sponsor was exercising treaty rights at the time of making  an
             application and in response the appellant  confirms  that  the
             sponsor was exercising treaty rights by working in the UK  and
             had produced wealth of evidences confirming the same, enclosed
             in the bundles."


Discussion



     5. The Tribunal had not agreed that the matter could be disposed of on
        the papers and it is for the appellant whether he wishes to  attend
        the hearing of which he has  received  adequate  notice  either  in
        person, with his representative, or with  only  his  representative
        attending.
     6. The Tribunal has available to it to the earlier bundle of  evidence
        which has been considered together  with  submissions  made  by  Mr
        Duffy.
     7. The first observation made by the Tribunal at this stage relates to
        the relevant date at which these issues are being  considered.  The
        representatives letter of the 24 January 2018 states that the issue
        to be resolved is whether the sponsor was exercising treaty  rights
        at the time of the  making  of  an  application.  This  is  legally
        incorrect. A residence card does not confer a right  to  reside  in
        the same way that a grant of an application  for  leave  under  the
        domestic Immigration Rules may, but merely confirms an  entitlement
        to a right to reside that arises under European law.
     8. The application made by the appellant was for a residence  card  on
        the basis that his wife is an EEA national exercising treaty rights
        in the United Kingdom.
     9. As noted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the  only  evidence
        initially provided were two payslips from a company  named  Ammoray
        Limited showing employment in February and March 2016 paid in cash.
        That company traded under the name "Pizza World".
    10. In the latest information provided by the  appellant  a  number  of
        other payslips have been disclosed for the appellant's EEA national
        spouse, but only covering the  period  February  2016  to  December
        2016.
    11. Even though the appellant applied  for  the  residence  card  on  6
        October 2016 and it appears  the  above  wage  slip  show  the  EEA
        national was exercising treaty rights at that  time,  the  relevant
        date in an EEA appeal is the date of the hearing. This is confirmed
        by a number of authorities of the Upper Tribunal including SGC  and
        others [2005] UKAIT 00179 in which the Tribunal said that in an EEA
        appeal under the 2002 Act the relevant date is the date of hearing.
        Although now overruled in relation to the burden of proof  finding,
        the date of  hearing  issue  was  confirmed  in  IS  (marriages  of
        convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031. A more recent  decision  is
        that of Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs:  relevant  evidence)  [2013]
        UKUT 00346 in which Mr Justice Blake held that neither section  85A
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 nor the guidance in DR
        (Morocco)* [2005] UKAIT 38 regarding a previous version of  section
        85(5)  of  that  Act  has  any  bearing  on  an  appeal  under  the
        Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. In  such  an
        appeal, a tribunal has power to  consider  any  evidence  which  it
        thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,  including
        evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the  date  of  the
        decision.
    12. The burden is therefore upon the appellant to  establish  that  his
        EEA national wife is exercising treaty  rights  within  the  United
        Kingdom at the date of this hearing, 25 January 2018. Even  if  she
        was exercising treaty rights at the date of application but shortly
        thereafter, for example in light of the evidence  the  company  who
        previously employed her may have ceased trading, she no longer  is,
        she may no longer be exercising treaty rights. The earlier evidence
        disclosed is therefore only relevant to the situation at  the  date
        to which it relates.  As this is the case, the appellant cannot  be
        said to have discharged the burden of proof to  show  that  at  the
        date of the hearing such treaty rights were being exercised by  the
        EEA national.
    13. As stated above, the only evidence provided is the wage slips  from
        February 2016 to December 2016 with no evidence having  been  filed
        for any later date and no attendance from either the  appellant  or
        the EEA national to provide any additional oral evidence to confirm
        the current situation.
    14. I do not consider this is a case in  which  it  is  appropriate  to
        adjourn the matter further for additional evidence to be sought  as
        the directions given in the Error of Law finding are very  specific
        in relation to the need to provide all evidence  the  appellant  is
        seeking to  rely  upon  for  the  purposes  of  this  hearing.  The
        appellant is represented by solicitors who should be fully aware of
        the relevant date at which matters are to be considered and of  the
        need to provide evidence to discharge the burden which  falls  upon
        the appellant.
    15. On the basis of the information that has  been  made  available;  I
        make a finding of fact that the appellant has failed  to  discharge
        the burden of proof upon him to the required standard to show  that
        at the date of hearing his EEA national wife was exercising  treaty
        rights in the United Kingdom sufficient to enable  him  to  succeed
        with his appeal. The appellant has not established entitlement to a
        residence card he seeks.
    16. If this is a matter in relation to which the  evidence  exists  but
        has not been disclosed, it is always open to the appellant to  make
        a fresh application supported by appropriate evidence that his wife
        is a qualified person which can be considered by the respondent  on
        its merits.


Decision

    17. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 25 January 2018












