
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/12009/2016
     EA/12012/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2019                            |On 25 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         Diana [O] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                          [L D] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    First appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are mother  and  son.  The  first  appellant,  Mrs  [O],
    appeared before me as a litigant-in-person, following earlier rejection
    of an application for an adjournment.  Mrs  [O]  was  assisted  by  her
    husband.   For  convenience  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the  first
    appellant as "the appellant".

2.   In a decision sent on 4 February 2019 I set aside  for  material  error
    of law the decision of Judge Law of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  sent
    on 28 August  2018  dismissing  the  appellants'  appeals  against  the
    decision made by the respondent on 20 September 2016 refusing to  issue
    permanent residence cards.

3.   I observed in my decision that there are a number of matters  that  are
    not in dispute. It is not in dispute that: Mrs [O]'s former husband, Mr
    AO, is an EEA national and that the couple married in July 2010;   that
    she was granted a five year EEA spouse visa valid from 4 April 2011 - 4
    April 2016;  that  following  the  breakdown  of  their  marriage   she
    initiated divorce  proceedings  on  24  June  2015;   that  the  decree
    absolute was dated 5 November 2015; and that if Mrs [O] could establish
    her ex-husband remained a worker on 24 June 2015, the appellants  would
    be entitled to succeed in their appeal, as her own work record makes up
    the necessary five year period.

4.   I further observed that as  a  result  of  clarification  of  Court  of
    Justice case law by  the  English  Court  of  Appeal  in  the  case  of
    Baigazieva [2018] EWCA Civ 1088 in particular, it is  now  settled  law
    that the relevant date for deciding whether the  appellants  derived  a
    retained right of residence was  the  date  of  initiation  of  divorce
    proceedings.   However,  what  has  to  be  established  is  that   the
    appellant's ex-husband remained a worker with the  meaning  of  the  EU
    Treaty at that date.  The issue was  whether  he  "remained"  a  worker
    because it is not now in dispute that:

    (i)  he was in continuous employment between 1 October 2010 -  28  July
         2014; and

    (ii) that his tax return for 2014/2015 showed substantial earnings; but
         that

    (iii)    since the appellant had only been able to produce payslips for
         that year up to February 2015,  it could not be  demonstrated  that
         he remained in employment beyond February 2015; and that therefore

    (v)  there was a four-month gap between evidence of  actual  employment
         in February 2015 to the date of initiation of  divorce  proceedings
         in June 2015.

5.   In finding a material error of law in the judge's  treatment  I  stated
    that the judge  failed  to  address  whether,  during  that  four-month
    period, the ex-husband was still a worker, even  if  not  employed  (or
    self-employed).  That question needed to be addressed because  where  a
    person has formed a significant connection with the labour  market  (as
    her ex-husband had undoubtedly  done  in  the  period  October  2010  -
    February 2015), it is necessary for the decision-maker to  ask  whether
    that can be said to have ceased even after a  relatively  short  period
    (in this case four months); see RP (EEA  Regs  -  worker  -  cessation)
    Italy [2006] UKIAT 00025.

6.   I stated that it was wrong of the judge to "freeze-frame" the issue  to
    the ex-husband's precise employment position at the date of  initiation
    of divorce proceedings.  In cases of this kind the temporal  scope  for
    deciding the issue of whether a  person  remains  a  worker  cannot  be
    confined to one moment in time.

7.   I then stated that:

         "I do not see any necessity for a further oral hearing. However,  I
         do see the necessity for me to obtain a fuller picture of  the  ex-
         husband's activities in the four-month period between February 2015
         and June 2015 and to this end I have decided not to proceed to make
         my decision until I have a  response  from  the  respondent  to  my
         following direction.

    Direction

    8.   That the  respondent  obtain  from  the  DWP  particulars  of  any
         recorded claim by the ex-husband as a job-seeker during the  period
         March 2015 to 24 June 2015 and produce the results of this  inquiry
         to the Tribunal (with copy to the appellant's  representatives)  by
         14 February 2019 (sent to Field House, correspondence email  marked
         FAO Dr Storey).

    9.   Whilst Mrs [O] said at the hearing  before  me  that  she  had  no
         information about what her ex-spouse had  been  doing  during  this
         aforementioned period (although she speculated  that  he  may  have
         worked 'cash in hand'), I do not exclude that if  she  is  able  to
         obtain  any  independent  evidence  of  his  ex-husband's  economic
         circumstances during the aforementioned period, she is entitled  to
         submit it to the Tribunal (with copy to the respondent) by the same
         time-limit as above (and utilising the same email address and  'FAO
         Dr Storey' notification)".

8.    In  response  to  my  directions,  Mr  Mills   submitted   copies   of
    correspondence between him and the DWP following his  request  to  them
    for information concerning the  first  appellant's  ex-husband  benefit
    history under s.40 of the 2007 Act. In a document sent to Mr  Mills  on
    15 March 2019, the DWP confirmed that  on  the  basis  of  a  check  of
    records held on the ex-husband since February  2013,  no  benefits  had
    been claimed by him. I received no further evidence of submissions from
    the appellants.

My assessment

9.   As identified in my error of law decision, the key  matter  I  have  to
    decide is whether at the date of initiation of the divorce  proceedings
    on 24 June 2015 the appellant's ex-husband was still a  worker.  It  is
    not in dispute that he had  been  employed  between  October  2010  and
    February 2015. That had been confirmed by HMRC records  made  available
    to the Tribunal.

10.  As already explained in my error of law decision, the fact that an  EEA
    national is not working at  the  precise  date  of  the  initiation  of
    divorce proceedings is not fatal, since what matters is rather  whether
    there is a continued connection with the labour market. It was for that
    reason that I sought further  information  in  respect  of  the  period
    between February 2015 (when HMCTS evidence confirmed he  was  still  in
    work)  and  24  June  2015  (when  the  appellant   initiated   divorce
    proceedings). As a result of the further information obtained by way of
    my Direction to the respondent, however, there is nothing  to  indicate
    that during the relevant period of approx. four months  the  ex-husband
    maintained a connection with the labour market. There  is  no  evidence
    that he made any claim as a job-seeker during this period - and that is
    despite the active steps taking by me to ascertain  whether  there  was
    any evidence of job-seeking activity by him during the relevant period.
    I appreciate that the appellant may not have had any ways or  means  of
    contacting her ex-husband in recent times, but since (at my  direction)
    the respondent has done all that could reasonably be expected to assist
    the appellant and the results  have  been  negative,  there  is  simply
    insufficient evidence for me to  find  that  the  ex-husband  had  kept
    connection with the labour market at the date of initiation of  divorce
    proceedings. Possibly, if there had been evidence that  the  ex-husband
    had established a significantly longer (and unbroken)  connection  with
    the labour market in the UK previously, it would have been feasible  to
    regard the four months involved as too short to constitute a cessation,
    but the evidence was that he  had  only  exercised  treaty  rights  for
    several months beyond four years (from October 2010 to February  2015).
    In all the circumstances I do not consider  he  can  be  said  to  have
    retained a connection with the labour  market  up  until  the  date  of
    initiation of divorce proceedings.

11.  Accordingly, the appellants cannot  qualify  for  permanent  residence.
    They have only been able to establish a period of qualifying  residence
    as family members for the period from October 2010-February 2015.  That
    residence came to an end on a date  prior  to  the  initiation  of  the
    divorce proceedings.

12.  For the above reasons the decision I must re-make  is  to  dismiss  the
    appellants' appeals.

13.  To conclude:

    I have already set aside the decision of the  FtT  judge  for  material
         error of  law.

    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellants'' appeals.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 19 April 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
