
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/12675/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th October 2018                  |On 10th October 2018                 |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                            PEKI FAIROUSE AMADOU
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. The appellant, a citizen of Togo, appealed the decision of  the
            respondent to refuse her a residence card  as  the  spouse  and
            family member of Mr Yacoubou, an EEA national from Sweden.  The
            respondent refused the application because  the  appellant  had
            failed, he said, to provide sufficient evidence to  demonstrate
            that her husband was a qualified person.


         2. In a decision promulgated on 22nd March  2018,  the  First-tier
            Tribunal judge  considered  the  evidence  before  him  in  the
            context of the regulations and the decision the subject of  the
            appeal and dismissed the appeal. Permission to  appeal  to  the
            Upper Tribunal was granted because it was arguable  the  First-
            tier Tribunal judge had considered the evidence as at the  date
            of the  respondent's  decision  rather  than  at  the  date  of
            hearing, and that he  had  considered  the  application  as  an
            application  for  permanent  residence  rather   than   as   an
            application for a residence card.

         3. The First-tier Tribunal hearing took place on 20th February and
            the decision was promulgated on 22nd March 2018.  Although  the
            First-tier Tribunal judge refers in [18]  of  his  decision  to
            being able to consider  evidence  relating  to  issues  arising
            after the date of the decision, he unfortunately fails to  have
            any regard to the fact that the appellant produced evidence  of
            her husband's employment  with  Mundo  Mobile  Holding  Limited
            since 4th July 2016 and then to his  employment  with  STM  and
            payslips for his employment up to February 2018.

         4. The appellant's husband was plainly  exercising  Treaty  rights
            such as to entitle the appellant to a residence card.  Ms  Kiss
            did not disagree.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


                                    Date 5th October 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
