
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
EA/12760/2016

                                                   EA/13107/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 March 2018                          |     On 14 March 2018               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                                   (1) AB
                                   (2) RSV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                 Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Zafar, Legal Representative, of Zafar Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

Anonymity

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellants.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Second Appellant is a minor.




Introduction

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellants against  the  decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Deni Mathews (hereafter "the judge"),  promulgated
      on 14 November 2017, dismissing their appeals. The appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal  had  been  against  a  refusal  by  the  Respondent  to
      recognise the Appellants entitlement to permanent residence  based  on
      their retained rights of residence contrary to regulation 10 and 15 of
      the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (hereafter
      "the EEA Regulations").

3.    On appeal, the judge concluded that the Appellants could not meet  the
      requirements of the EEA Regulations as he was not satisfied  that  the
      documentation bearing two different names asserted to prove  that  the
      former EEA  national  spouse  was  exercising  treaty  rights  at  the
      relevant time related to the same person. That,  the  judge  concluded
      was fatal to the appeal.

4.    The error that secured the Appellants permission  to  appeal  was  the
      impermissible approach adopted by the  judge  in  consequence  of  his
      reliance on the aforesaid, an issue neither raised by  the  Respondent
      in the refusal or at the hearing.

5.    The Respondent does not oppose the appeal and both parties agree  that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand. I agree with the
      position adopted by the parties. It is plain that the judge's approach
      was procedurally improper resulting in unfairness to the Appellants.

6.    In consequence, as invited to do so by the  parties,  the  appropriate
      course is to remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
      complete rehearing on all issues.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing  of  the  appeal
by a judge other than Judge D Mathews.



Signed                                             Date 9 March 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


