
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/12695/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|Centre                                 |                                    |
|On 16th April 2019                     |On 23rd April 2019                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                             SHARON AGBOR BATEY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dewa of Immigration Advisory Service
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Ms Batey is a citizen of Cameroon, date of birth 1st January  1990.
         Her father is a German citizen; she lived with him in Germany  from
         2005 until 2008 when he came to the UK. In 2010 she came to the UK,
         initially as a visitor and then (after a successful appeal in 2011)
         as a dependent family member of an EU  national  exercising  Treaty
         Rights. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was not  that  she
         had not been a dependant at some time in the past, but that she had
         ceased to be dependant prior to completing five years residence  in
         accordance with the regulations, in the UK.

      2. The respondent refused her application for permanent residence  for
         reasons set out in a letter dated 1st October 2016. The  respondent
         identified in that letter that  Ms  Batey  had  failed  to  provide
         evidence that she was dependant on her father and that she required
         financial support from him to meet her essential needs and that she
         had failed to provide evidence that her father had been  exercising
         Treaty Rights for five years. She appealed that decision.

      3. In support of  her  appeal,  Ms  Batey  relied  upon  a  bundle  of
         documents. That bundle of documents did not include a  schedule  of
         her income and expenditure.

      4. By a decision promulgated on 22nd January 2018, First-tier Tribunal
         judge Fox dismissed her appeal. He recorded the evidence before him
         including, inter alia, that the  appellant  had  provided  'random'
         sample  payslips;  that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence   to
         demonstrate a paper trail of funds from her father to  her  because
         he claimed to have provided her with cash; that she did not provide
         details  of  her  claimed  dependency  despite  being   given   the
         opportunity to do so; that she claimed her  father  subsidised  her
         living costs whilst  she  was  a  student  although  there  was  no
         documentary evidence (other than  witness  statements)  to  support
         this; that she claimed to be heavily in debt on the  conclusion  of
         her studies although no  documentary  evidence  of  liabilities  to
         creditors was provided; that the sponsor paid for  the  appellant's
         car although there was no  evidence  of  car  ownership;  that  the
         evidence provided of her father's income does not cover five  years
         continuous employment.

      5. Permission to appeal was granted on the submission that  the  judge
         had failed to have regard to  the  appellant's  membership  of  her
         father's household in Germany and in the UK before  commencing  her
         nursing training and that too little weight had  been  placed  upon
         her statement in an application form where she said  that  she  was
         independent.

      6. The appellant qualified as a nurse in 2014  and  has  been  working
         full time as a nurse since then. Although it is of course  possible
         that a person may remain a dependant for the  purpose  of  the  EEA
         Regulations even having completed studies or working, a  person  is
         still required to identify what level of dependency there  is.  The
         difficulty this  appellant  has,  is  that  she  did  not  identify
         dependency to the First-tier Tribunal Judge other than in vague and
         general terms. Although pressed, Mr Dewa could not point me to  any
         document  in  the  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that
         identified her rent, her living expenses or  what  her  debts  were
         either since she started working full time  or  whilst  she  was  a
         student. Nor could he identify  documents  which  showed  that  her
         father was exercising Treaty Rights (and able to pay  the  sums  he
         claimed he was paying in cash)  during  the  time  of  her  claimed
         dependency. Although there were  cash  withdrawals  (as  identified
         from  his  bank  statements  in  the  bundle),  those  withdrawals,
         although asserted to be made by the appellant, using  her  father's
         cash card, were in  London  whereas  the  appellant  lives  in  the
         Midlands. As said  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge,  the  cost
         involved in undertaking such travel would negate the benefit of the
         cash.

      7. It cannot be said that, absent a detailed explanation,  payment  of
         car expenses is a necessity.

      8. There was simply inadequate evidence  to  support  the  appellant's
         claim that she was dependant on her  father,  not  only  after  she
         qualified as a nurse but also during her studies.  Had  there  been
         more disclosure of documents  both  in  relation  to  her  and  her
         father, the outcome may have been  different,  but  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge can only take  a  decision  based  on  the  evidence
         before him. It is correct that the judge did not make a finding  on
         her residence with her father in Germany - but apart from the  fact
         that there was no evidence other than witness statements  and  oral
         evidence as to that, she claimed to be independent  when  she  made
         her visa application and the evidence as to  dependency  after  she
         started her nursing training  was  simply  inadequate  as  was  the
         evidence of her father's exercise of Treaty Rights.

      9. The judge looked at  the  documentary  evidence,  took  fully  into
         account the oral evidence and reached conclusions that were plainly
         open to him, namely that the appellant had failed to prove  on  the
         balance of probabilities that she was dependent for  the  requisite
         period of time.

     10. Mr Dewa  submitted  that  the  Regulations  should  be  interpreted
         purposively, and that consideration should be  given  to  the  fact
         that having qualified as a  nurse,  the  appellant  should  not  be
         required not to work in order to  retain  any  possible  dependency
         status. This seems to be a  misunderstanding  of  the  Regulations.
         They do not exist in order for a dependant family member to achieve
         some sort of settled status but to enable an  EU  citizen  to  move
         around the EU exercising Treaty Rights. The inability of individual
         family members who are dependant to move with that person may  well
         be a hindrance on the free movement of labour. This  appellant  has
         not shown that she is dependant.  There  is  no  hindrance  on  his
         freedom of movement if she does not get a residence permit  -  even
         assuming that he has been exercising Treaty Rights for the  periods
         he claims, which was not apparent from the evidence that was before
         the First-tier Tribunal.

     11. The decision by the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error
         of law such that the decision is set aside to be remade.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision. The appeal is dismissed.


     Date 16th April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
