
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/12352/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House on the papers                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2018                          |On 17 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                            MUHAMMAD AKMAL MUGHAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                           DIRECTIONS AND DECISION

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15 April 1978.  He  made
    an application to the Secretary of State for  an  EEA  residence  card.
    The application was refused in a decision dated 15 September 2016,  for
    reasons that I need not set out herein.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant lodged an appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  That
    appeal came before FtT Judge S Taylor, who concluded in a decision sent
    on 26 September  2017,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to determine the appeal. No findings were made in relation
    to the substance of his appeal. The Judge's conclusion was informed  by
    the guidance given by this Tribunal in Sala [2016] UKUT 00411.

 3. The appellant appealed such decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  FtT
    Judge Lambert granted permission in a decision sent on 15 August  2018.
    Thus, the matter comes before me.

Discussion and Decision

 4. In the light of Khan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1755, the Court concluded that the Upper  Tribunal  had
    been wrong in its conclusion and rationale  in  Sala.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that the effect of the decision in Khan,  if  applied  to  this
    case, is that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to conclude that it did
    not have jurisdiction in these appeals.


 5. The Upper Tribunal is minded to find an error of  law,  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the case  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 6. A party who is opposed to this course is directed to inform  the  Upper
    Tribunal in writing (giving reasons), not later than 7  days  from  the
    date this decision is sent by the Upper Tribunal.


 7. If no party files any objections within this period,  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal will be set aside and the appeal remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.


Signed:                                               Dated: 18 September
2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor






