

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: EA/12798/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision & Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 20 November 2017                   |              On 28 November 2017     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                               Mr Masood Amin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Counsel, instructed by Aston Bond Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and his date of birth  is  19
    December 1985.  He applied for permanent residence under the  2006  EEA
    Regulations as  the  non-EEA  family  member  of  his  spouse,  Mujghan
    Sekandan, a Danish national, on the basis that she has been  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK for a continuous period of five years.

2.   The Respondent refused the  application  on  29  September  2016.   The
    matter was dismissed under the 2006 EEA  Regulation  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Kempton in a decision that was  promulgated  on  16
    February 2017, following a hearing at North Shields on 7 February 2017.
     The matter was  determined  on  the  papers  at  the  request  of  the
    Appellant.  The judge had before her an Appellant's bundle.  Permission
    was granted to the Appellant.

3.   The judge made salient findings as follows:

         "11. The appellant referred in his statement  to  the  decision  of
             Texeira which states that there is no requirement of a  parent
             to have comprehensive insurance cover in  the  UK  to  benefit
             from the right of residence in  the  UK.   In  any  event,  he
             states that  there  is  correspondence  enclosed  which  shows
             insurance cover from 2009 from the European  Health  Insurance
             organisation.   The  sponsor  refers  to  this  as  Udbetaling
             Denmark in her statement and that this is a  health  insurance
             company which provides health insurance under cover of  Danish
             health Legislation.  She says she had cover from 18  May  2009
             to 18 May 2014 and this insurance also covered her dependents.


         12.  The document at page  6  from  Udbetaling  Denmark  refers  to
             people living  in  Denmark  being  covered  by  Danish  health
             Legislation.  However, this does  not  appear  to  be  private
             health insurance.  In addition, the appellant and sponsor  are
             not living in Denmark; they have been living  in  the  UK  for
             several years since 17 November 2010.


         13.  According to the Home Office Guidance on the Immigration (EEA)
             Regulations 2016, now in force, as opposed to the  Regulations
             referred to in the decision, the guidance ensures that the  UK
             complies with its duties under the Free  Movement  of  Persons
             Directive 2004/38/EC.  From page 30 onwards there is  guidance
             in relation to comprehensive sickness cover, who  requires  it
             and what  documents  are  required.   According  to  page  31,
             Regulation 4 states that nationals living in the UK  as  self-
             sufficient  people  or  students   must   have   comprehensive
             insurance cover.  It must be for all family members  including
             primary carers and children.   This  cover  could  be  met  by
             having a valid EHIC card issued by an EEA member  state.   The
             letter from the Danish Authorities does not state that  it  is
             an EHIC card, however, it  would  seem  logical  that  if  the
             sponsor is covered by the Danish Authorities for health  care,
             then she should also be  covered  in  the  UK.   However,  the
             sponsor should be able to produce specifically an S2 form.  In
             addition, it must be assumed that for the previous five  years
             this  type  of  insurance  from  the  Danish  Authorities  was
             accepted for the purpose of the previous residence permits for
             the appellant and sponsor.


         14.  However, the regulations were changed on 6 April 2015 and with
             effect from 22 June 2015, for  applications  made  after  that
             date, (as in this application, the date of application being 3
             April  2016),  evidence  must  be  provided  of  comprehensive
             insurance cover for the EEA national and their family  member.
             Accordingly, the  letter  from  the  Danish  authorities  only
             relates to the sponsor and does not mention the  appellant  or
             the children or their marriage.  In addition, it  only  covers
             the period up to 15 May 2014.  Accordingly, there  appears  to
             be no insurance cover from that date and certainly not at  the
             dates of application, decision or hearing.


         15.  In all the circumstances, this lack of evidence  of  insurance
             is a fatal flaw in  the  application.   It  may  be  that  the
             sponsor can obtain a further letter from  the  authorities  in
             Denmark in order to confirm the issue of insurance so that the
             appellant can make a fresh application.


         16.  The birth certificates for the children S born on  25  January
             2012 and A born 8 July 2013, indicate that  the  children  are
             very young and accordingly, any education they  may  currently
             be enjoying, will be at a very early stage and  will  unlikely
             to be disrupted if they  have  to  leave  the  UK.   They  are
             certainly not at a crucial stage of their education.   Indeed,
             according to the  letter  at  page  four  of  the  appellant's
             bundle,  they  both  attend  for  fifteen  hours  a  week,   [
                                  ] (page 5.)  The appellant suggests  that
             Baumbast and Ibrahim provide him with a golden ticket  despite
             the lack of insurance.  However, this is  an  EEA  application
             and the appellant has not claimed under  Article  8  of  ECHR.
             The respondent has not been required to consider that  matter,
             particularly s the documents produced with the application did
             not appear to contain much information about private or family
             life.  The respondent has not been given  adequate  notice  of
             that matter.  The correct course of action, if  the  appellant
             cannot produce adequate comprehensive sickness cover, is for a
             different application to  be  made  taking  into  account  the
             matter of private and family life in the UK.  I can only guess
             at the ties that the family  have  in  the  UK,  but  have  no
             concrete evidence upon which to make a decision on that matter
             of family and private life.  This is particularly the case  as
             this is a paper appeal without the benefit  of  the  witnesses
             attending and giving  oral  evidence,  when  they  could  have
             provided more information about the strengths of their ties in
             the UK.


         18.  I do note that the sponsor has been a  student  and  has  been
             working, then she was unable to  continue  due  to  pregnancy.
             She was a  jobseeker,  but  has  now  found  employment.   The
             appellant maintains that she has always worked.   The  gap  in
             the sponsor's study period/work experience is as a  result  of
             pregnancy, which was a matter outwith her control,  and  which
             could arguably be covered  by  Regulation  6(2)(a).   However,
             that is a matter for a further application taking into account
             the right to family/private life in  the  UK.   Alternatively,
             the appellant and the  sponsor  could  simply  obtain  private
             health insurance cover and then remake the application.   They
             should seek legal advice on the matter.


         19.  Returning to the issue of Texeira, that decision  was  on  the
             basis of the children of the EEA citizen being 'in education'.
              In this case, I am not satisfied that the young  children  of
             the appellant and sponsor are  in  'education'  at  the  level
             contemplated in Texeira.  They attend pre-school  for  fifteen
             hours a week, accordingly approximately three hours  per  day.
             It is clearly not formal education and sounds more as if it is
             a nursery placement.  However, that  is  a  matter  which  the
             appellant can address in any new application, which  he  might
             make."


4.   The grounds assert  that  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the
    insurance document is ambiguous. It is argued that the judge  erred  in
    relation  to  her  findings  about  the  sponsor's  pregnancy  and  her
    inability  to  work  with  reference  to  Regulation  6(2)(a)  of   the
    Regulations.  It is also asserted that the judge erred in  relation  to
    Article 8.

5.   At the hearing before me Mr Khan, on behalf of the Appellant,  conceded
    that, in the event, that there is ambiguity in relation to the  judge's
    findings about health insurance it is immaterial because  the  document
    (at page 6 of the Appellant's bundle) does not meet  the  requirements.
    He conceded that it does not establish that members of the  family  had
    comprehensive insurance whilst the Sponsor was studying. I agree.

6.    I  raised  with  Mr  Khan  whether  the  evidence  before  the   judge
    established, in his view, that the  Sponsor  had  been  working  for  a
    continuous period  of  five  years  which  would  not  necessitate  the
    Appellant to have comprehensive insurance cover.  Mr Khan conceded that
    the evidence before the judge did not establish this.  He  stated  that
    the Appellant's appeal was advanced on the basis that the Sponsor was a
    qualified person from 2009 (whilst  she  was  a  student  when  it  was
    conceded that she did not have the requisite insurance cover)  and  the
    evidence did not establish that she has been a worker for the  purposes
    of the 2006 Regulations for a five-year period, which would entitle the
    Appellant to permanent residence.  He did  not  pursue  the  ground  of
    appeal in respect of the Sponsor's pregnancy.  He did  not  argue  that
    the Appellant's Sponsor retained continuity of residence with reference
    to Weldemichael and another (St Prix  [2014]  EUECJ  C-507/12;  effect)
    [2015] UKUT 00540 (IAC) or that she  was  a  jobseeker  throughout  any
    relevant period.  The application was made under the  2006  Regulations
    and it was not incumbent on the judge  to  consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8. This ground was also not pursued by Mr  Khan.   He  conceded
    that the judge had not, in his view, made a material error of law.

7.   There was no  l  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The decision to dismiss the appeal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                        Date 27 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
