
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/12236/2016
                                                               EA/12238/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 29 January 2018                  |On: 26 February 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                    entry clearance officer: UK Sheffield
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [L M]
                                    [Y M]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms H Gore, counsel (instructed by R Spio & Co)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the entry clearance  officer  and  to
    the respondents as the claimants.

 2. The claimants are nationals of Ghana, born on [ ] 2002 and [ ] 2000.

 3. The  entry  clearance  officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Page who allowed  the  claimants'
    appeals against the decision of the ECO refusing to grant them  an  EEA
    family permit to join their stepfather, a French national,  married  to
    their  mother  in  the  UK.  Their  applications  were  refused   under
    Regulation 6 and 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 4. Judge Page has set out the relevant requirements of Regulation 7 of the
    2006 Regulations relating to  "family  members."   He  noted  that  the
    burden of proof is upon the claimant to demonstrate on the  balance  of
    probability that the respondent's decision  has  "interfered  with  her
    protected right to family life under Article 8 ECHR." He stated at  [2]
    that their grounds of appeal are restricted  to  human  rights  grounds
    under s.82 of the 2002 Act, as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

 5. He referred to the reasons for the refusal:  First,  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the claimants and their mother in the UK were related as
    claimed. However, DNA evidence had been provided confirming  that  "the
    appellant and her mother are related as mother  and  child"  [6].  That
    evidence pre-dated the decision to refuse and was available to the ECO.
    The reports were dated 6 June 2016 and  confirmed  the  probability  of
    maternity as 99.9999%.

 6. Secondly, Home Office records showed that  the  claimants'  mother  had
    applied for a visa in 2005 and had stated that  her  spouse  was  [FM],
    born on [ ] 1951. He was  named  as  the  claimants'  father  in  their
    application.

 7. Further, the ECO  noted  that  the  claimants'  mother  was  previously
    customarily  married  in  October  2003  as  stated  in  the  order  of
    dissolution of marriage dated 13 December 2010. That document  referred
    to the mother's previous marriage to [NW]. The ECO  viewed  this  as  a
    discrepancy and was not satisfied that the previous marriage  to  their
    father had been dissolved prior  to  their  mother's  marriage  to  her
    current EEA sponsor.

 8. Judge Page found that that this was not a discrepancy as  the  evidence
    before him was explained. The first name is the tribal name of [FM]. He
    accepted that the issue relating to the relationship between mother and
    children had been resolved in the claimants' favour [6].

 9. The two names relating to their mother's previous  spouse  referred  to
    the same  person  and  not  to  two  different  people.  The  statutory
    declaration exhibited in the claimants' bundle referred to this [7].

10. The claimants' mother produced at the hearing her  permanent  residence
    card issued by the Home Office on 2 June 2017. Ms Gore, who represented
    the claimants before the First-tier Tribunal, argued that  this  proved
    that the Home Office accepted that she was properly married to  an  EEA
    national and must be legally  divorced  from  her  first  husband,  the
    claimants' father. Therefore at the  date  of  the  ECO's  decision  to
    refuse the application on 20 September 2016, the Home Office had issued
    their mother with a permanent residence card  on  the  basis  that  her
    marriage to [CD] was valid [8].

11. He accepted that evidence. He found  that  the  claimants'  mother  was
    credible. It followed that the two issues in the refusal decision  have
    been resolved in the claimants' favour [9].

12. The Judge then proceeded to consider their appeals under Article  8  of
    the Human Rights Convention. He found that  human  rights  grounds  are
    engaged because the claimants wish to pursue  family  life  with  their
    mother and stepfather in the UK. There were no  countervailing  reasons
    for refusing other than those given in the 2016 decision. He  therefore
    allowed the appeal.

13. On 30 November 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted the ECO
    permission  to  appeal.  It  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in
    apparently  allowing  the   appeals   under   the   Immigration   Rules
    notwithstanding  that  the  applications  were  made  under  the   2006
    Regulations.

14. Ms Holmes relied on the  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.  She
    submitted that the Judge misdirected himself; it was incumbent  on  him
    to consider the appeal with reference  to  the  2006  Regulations.  She
    relied on the decision of Amirteymour and Others  (EEA  Appeals:  Human
    Rights) [201]UKUT 00466 (IAC): Where no notice under s.120 of the  2002
    Act has been served and where no EEA decision to remove has been  made,
    an appellant cannot bring a human rights challenge to a removal  in  an
    appeal under the EEA Regulations.

15. Further, the sponsor was now divorced from the EEA national and as such
    her children could  not  benefit  from  the  provisions  of  Regulation
    7(1)(b)(i) at the point of divorce, namely 30 November 2016.

16. On behalf of the claimants, Ms Gore submitted that whilst it is correct
    that the appeals should not have been considered under the  Immigration
    Rules on Article 8 grounds, this did not constitute a material error in
    the circumstances.




    Assessment

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal on the basis of  human
    rights. It was accepted by Ms Gore that this constituted  an  error  of
    law as the decision in Amirteymour applied.

18. However, at the commencement of his decision, the Judge set out in full
    the relevant provisions of Regulation 7  of  the  2006  Regulations.  A
    person is to be treated as the family member of another person  who  is
    the direct descendant of his, his spouse or civil partner, who is under
    21.

19. The Judge accepted that the evidence which was available at the date of
    the application demonstrated  beyond  doubt  that  the  claimants  were
    related as claimed [6].

20. Further, the claimants' mother produced her  permanent  residence  card
    issued in June 2017. That showed that the Home Office had accepted that
    she was properly married to an  EU  national  and  had  therefore  been
    divorced from her first husband, the claimants' father. Accordingly, at
    the date of the ECO's decision to refuse the  claimants'  applications,
    the Home Office had issued their mother with a permanent residence card
    on the basis that her marriage to [CD] was  valid.  The  claimants  had
    applied for an EEA family  permit  to  join  [CD]  in  the  UK  as  his
    stepchildren.

21. As at the date of application on 15 August 2016, their mother was still
    married to [CD].

22. As noted by the Judge, there were only two issues  raised  by  the  ECO
    refusing the application on 20 September 2016. Those  two  issues  were
    resolved in the claimants' favour.

23. In  the  circumstances,  the  evidence  showed  that  at  the  date  of
    application the  claimants  were  the  direct  descendants  of  an  EEA
    national's spouse. Both were under 21 at the time.

24. Judge Page upheld the appeal on human rights grounds. That  constituted
    an error in the making of the decision for the reasons already given.

25. I accordingly set aside the decision and re-make  it.  I  preserve  the
    findings.

26. I find that the claimants are the children of their mother. Further,  I
    find for the reasons given by Judge Page  at  [7]  that  there  was  no
    discrepancy as to the identity of their father.

27. I accordingly find that the claimants have  shown  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that they were direct descendants of the spouse of an EEA
    national.

28. There was no other basis upon which the ECO contended that the relevant
    requirements under Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations  had  not  been
    met.

29. I accordingly find that the  claimants  were  family  members  for  the
    purpose of the 2006 Regulations. The ECO is obliged to issue them  with
    EEA family permits as family members of an EEA national.




    Notice of Decision

    Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I re-make  it
    and dismiss the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.

    Anonymity direction not made.





    Signed   Date: 20 February 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer


