
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/12512/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated           |
|On 26 July 2017                            |On 01 August 2017              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between


|           |Marcin Jankowski                               |Appellant      |
|           |(ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)                 |               |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|           |Secretary of State for the Home Department     |Respondent     |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr. L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a national of Poland born on 4 February 1979,  has  been
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  K.  Henderson  who  dismissed  his
    appeal against the respondent's decision of 23 September 2016 to refuse
    to issue him with a  registration  document  confirming  his  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (the  "Regulations").   The
    judge's decision was promulgated on 13 December 2016.

 2. The appellant's appeal was considered by the judge  together  with  the
    appeal of his wife, Marta Milena Jankowska, also a national of  Poland,
    born on 8 May 1981. The judge allowed her appeal, finding that she  had
    submitted documentary evidence that established that she had  exercised
    Treaty rights  for  a  continuous  period  of  5  years.  However,  she
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant because she considered that there
    was insufficient evidence to show that he had been  resident  with  his
    wife  for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years  and  that  the  only
    information submitted which relates to him was the marriage certificate
    and one tenancy offer dated 25 February 2013.

 3. It is plain from the judge's comments about the documents submitted  in
    relation to the appellant that she had limited herself  to  considering
    only the documents that were in Mrs Jankowska's appeal file  and  which
    were submitted with her Notice of appeal dated 7 October 2016.    There
    was a separate appeal file for the appellant which contained a separate
    bundle of documents submitted with his Notice of appeal, also  dated  7
    October 2016. They were sent to the First-tier Tribunal in an  envelope
    which bears a postmark dated 8 October 2016.   The  appellant's  bundle
    contained documents establishing that  he  had  worked  in  the  United
    Kingdom since at least 2007.  There  was  also  evidence  that  he  was
    registered on  16  February  2007  under  the  Accession  State  Worker
    Registration Scheme.

 4. At the hearing, Mr  Tarlow  accepted  that  the  judge  had  overlooked
    considering the documents attached to the appellant's Notice of appeal.
    He accepted that the documents were material to the issue, i.e. whether
    the appellant had been exercising  Treaty  rights  continuously  for  a
    period of 5 years. He accepted that the judge's decision should be  set
    aside.

 5. I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  had  materially  erred  in  law  by
    overlooking material evidence in relation to the appellant's appeal.  I
    therefore set aside her decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

 6. I proceeded to re-make the decision on the appellant's  appeal  at  the
    hearing. Mr  Tarlow  had  a  sufficient  opportunity  to  consider  the
    documents attached to the appellant's Notice of appeal. Although  there
    were no payslips, Mr Tarlow accepted that the appellant  had  submitted
    P60s for the tax years  2006-2007  until  2014-2015.  There  were  also
    letters from Furniture Village. Mr Tarlow  confirmed  that  he  had  no
    difficulty accepting that all  of  these  documents  were  genuine.  He
    therefore asked me to write a decision accordingly.

 7. In effect, Mr Tarlow  accepted  that  the  documents  attached  to  the
    appellant's bundle establish that  the  appellant  has  been  a  worker
    exercising Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom  continuously  for  a
    period of at least 5 years.  I have examined the documents myself and I
    am satisfied that they are reliable. I am satisfied that the  appellant
    has been exercising Treaty rights as a worker continuously for a period
    of at least 5 years.  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of regulation 15.

 8. I therefore allow his appeal against the respondent's decision.

Decision

The decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Henderson  involved  the
making of an error on a  point of law such that it fell  to  be  set  aside.
The decision in relation to appellant's appeal  was  set  aside.  The  Upper
Tribunal proceeded to re-make the decision. The Upper Tribunal  allowed  the
appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision.




[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                    Date: 1 August 2017
