
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
EA/13958/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 November 2017                        |On 20 February 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                    Appellant

                                     And

                      GABRIELA ESPASANDIN PONCE DE LEON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Caswell (hereinafter "the FtTJ"), who  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 February  2017  allowed  the  appeal  of  Ms
    Gabriela Espasandin Ponce De Leon, against her decision of 22  November
    2016 to refuse to grant a Permanent Residence Card. I shall refer below
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    The appellant is a national of Spain who claims that she  entered  the
    UK in 2010 with an intention to establish herself  in  employment.  She
    was granted Jobseeker's  Allowance  (JSA)  from  May  2010,  which  she
    received for a continuous period of five years and five months and this
    continued following her self-employment from 7 October 2015, as she was
    working for less than sixteen hours per week. On 5 September  2016  she
    started   working   full-time   as   a   Teaching   Assistant   at    [
    ].

3.    On 22 July 2016 the appellant applied for a Permanent  Residence  Card
    on the basis of her having  completed  five  years'  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations"). Her application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a
    decision letter dated 22 November 2016  and  a  Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision was issued on the same date.

4.    The appellant appealed to the IAC.  The appeal was determined  on  the
    papers on the appellant's request and allowed by the FtTJ  for  reasons
    set out in her decision. Essentially, the FtTJ noted with reference  to
    regulation 6(4) that in order to rely on her status as a jobseeker, the
    appellant was required to show that she entered the United  Kingdom  in
    order to seek employment; could provide  evidence  that  she  had  been
    seeking  employment  and  had  a  genuine  chance  of  being   engaged.
    Essentially, the FtTJ found that the award of JSA demonstrated that the
    Department for Work and  Pensions  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    intended to work and had  "a  genuine  prospect"  of  working  [8].  In
    consequence, the FtTJ found that as the appellant received JSA  without
    interruption for a continuous period of five and a half  years  from  1
    May 2010, in addition  to  the  translation  work  she  undertook  from
    October 2015,  which  led  her  to  securing  full-time  employment  in
    September 2016,  she  was  entitled  to  a  Permanent  Residence  Card.
    Accordingly, the FtTJ allowed the appeal.

5.    The Secretary of State now seeks to challenge the conclusions  of  the
    FtTJ with permission granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 4  September
    2017.

6.    The Respondent  contends  that  the  FtTJ  erred  in  respect  of  the
    application of regulation 6(4) of  the  EEA  Regulations  in  that  she
    misconstrued the regulations by failing to consider  adequately  or  at
    all the requirements therein in accordance with the  two-fold  test  in
    Antonissen; EC Commission v Belgium Case C-344/95 [1997] 2 CMLR 187.

7.    At the hearing, there was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. A Notice of Hearing informing the parties of the date,  time
    and venue of the hearing was effectively served on the parties. I  thus
    proceeded to hear the appeal in the appellant's absence. I heard  brief
    submissions from Mr Walker who, in reliance on the  grounds,  submitted
    that the FtTJ failed to adequately apply the  Antonissen  (supra)  test
    and, in particular, the second limb thereof.



Consideration

8.    The key issue before the FtTJ was whether or  not  the  appellant  had
    been a qualified person within the meaning of regulation 6 of  the  EEA
    Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

9.    The FtTJ received no oral evidence from the appellant  as  the  appeal
    was heard on the papers. The FtTJ summarised the  evidential  materials
    in her decision at  [5]  to  [6]  and  the  contra  case  at  [7].  The
    determinative reasoning and findings of the FtTJ are set out at [8]  to
    [10]. The FtTJ identified that the appellant was seeking to principally
    rely on her  status  as  a  jobseeker  to  meet  the  requirements  for
    permanent residence and she summarised  the  provisions  of  regulation
    6(4) of the EEA Regulations at [7].

10.   Regulation 6(4) provides:

         "For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), a 'jobseeker' is a person who
         satisfies conditions A and B and where relevant C."

11.   There appears to be no dispute that condition C is not relevant.  What
    is put in issue is condition A and B. Condition A and B is  defined  in
    Regulation 6(5) and 6(6) in the following terms respectively:

      "Condition A is that the person - (a) entered the  United  Kingdom  in
    order to seek employment; or

      (b) is present in the United Kingdom seeking  employment,  immediately
    after enjoying a right to reside pursuant to paragraph  (1)(b)  to  (e)
    (disregarding any  period  during  which  worker  status  was  retained
    pursuant to paragraph (2)(b) or (ba))."

      "Condition B is that the  person  can  provide  evidence  that  he  is
    seeking employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged."

12.   In this context the focus necessarily was on the period of time  prior
    to the appellant's employment in October 2015 and, in  particular,  she
    would need to demonstrate a period of being a jobseeker from  May  2010
    and meet the definition of the same as set out above.

13.   Essentially, while the FtTJ did not expressly say so, it  is  apparent
    that she was satisfied that Condition A and  B  were  met  because  she
    found that the award of JSA over a five-year period  showed  that  "she
    was willing to work  and  had  a  genuine  prospect  of  working"  [8].
    Accordingly, the FtTJ was satisfied that the appellant was entitled  to
    permanent residence in the United Kingdom.

14.   The Secretary of State argues: firstly, that  there  was  no  adequate
    evidential basis for the FtTJ to conclude that the appellant  satisfied
    Condition A and B and, in particular, that the FtTJ did not  adequately
    engage with the second limb of regulation  6(6),  that  of  "a  genuine
    chance of being engaged" in accordance  with  the  test  laid  down  in
    Antonissen.

15.   I consider that the FtTJ materially  erred  in  law  for  the  central
    reasons advanced by the Respondent in the grounds.

16.   Essentially, the FtTJ found that the award of JSA  was  sufficient  to
    meet Condition A and B. That, in my view, does  not  adequately  engage
    with the requirements of the EEA Regulations or the  test  set  out  in
    Antonissen. In particular, the FtTJ does not engage with  or  make  any
    findings on the appellant's claim that she entered the  United  Kingdom
    intending to work and could provide evidence that she has been  seeking
    employment, and there is no analysis of the facts and how  they  fulfil
    the second limb of the test in Antonissen for the relevant  period.  It
    is plain from the tribunal's decision in  Shabani  (EEA  -  jobseekers;
    nursery education) [2013] UKUT 00315 (IAC) that an award of JSA is  not
    sufficient without more to meet the applicable requirements of the  EEA
    Regulations. I thus find an error of law in this regard and  set  aside
    the decision of the FtTJ.

Remaking the Decision

17.   As this appeal was heard on the papers,  there  is  no  reason  why  I
    should not proceed to remake the decision on the evidence before me.  I
    have borne in mind that the burden is on the appellant  to  prove  that
    she meets the  requirements  for  permanent  residence  under  the  EEA
    Regulations on a balance of probabilities at the date of hearing.

18.   There is little detail and  supportive  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    background. In the grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    appellant asserts that she entered the UK in  2010  as  she  wished  to
    enrol on an "NLP course to help children with  different  abilities  in
    their learning skills. For this purpose I came two or  three  times  to
    London to check on the labour  market  opportunities  and  to  have  an
    interview with the Director of the centre where I was going  to  attend
    the course. I considered that I had plenty  of  opportunities  to  find
    work at that time, and I thought my  previous  success  as  a  language
    teacher was going to be  beneficial  for  this.  Unfortunately,  I  was
    unable to find work at that time as soon as I needed and I had to  stop
    attending the course. I was rejected for a few jobs, but the  truth  is
    that most of the jobs I applied for did not even respond. Therefore,  I
    kept on requesting help for training at the Jobcentre but I was sent to
    workshops that were of no use or benefit to me."

19.   The limited evidence filed by the appellant does not  relate  to  this
    background. There is no supportive  evidence  of  the  appellant's  JSA
    record of her searches for employment or  of  her  making  regular  and
    frequent attempts to find a job. While she states that she entered  the
    United Kingdom in order to seek employment and had a genuine chance  of
    being engaged throughout the time she was in receipt of JSA,  there  is
    insufficient evidence to support such  a  contention.  I  am  thus  not
    satisfied that the appellant meets  Condition  A  and  I  am  also  not
    persuaded that she can be said to meet Condition B or the  second  limb
    of regulation 6(4) (the Antonissen test), which requires  an  applicant
    to still have a genuine chance of finding employment.

20.   What might be meant by a 'genuine chance  of  being  engaged'  is  not
    defined but it seems to me that  'a  genuine  chance'  means  that  the
    prospects  of  employment  must  be  more  than  merely   fanciful   or
    theoretical, but must in some way be reasonable or realistic.

21.   Further to this, some contextual assistance is, in my judgement to  be
    gleaned from the case of AG and others (EEA job seeker  self-sufficient
    person - proof) Germany [2007] UKAIT 00075 at paragraph 28 :

         "We are aware  that  some  commentators  have  seen  the  court  in
         Antonissen as having settled  definitively  that  there  is  a  six
         months' time limit after which a jobseeker ceases to be  a  worker.
         We think that goes too far: there is no  specific  timeframe.   The
         court in Antonissen only settled that a member state is entitled to
         treat such a time limit as a  being  generally  a  reasonable  one.
         Furthermore, it is clear that the court considers that  what  is  a
         reasonable  period  will  depend  ultimately  on   the   particular
         circumstances of the person concerned."

22.   In my judgement the evaluation of a 'reasonable period of  time'  will
    generally necessitate inclusion  of  consideration  of  the  particular
    circumstance of the concerned person's prospect of being engaged. There
    is an interrelationship between the concept of having a genuine  chance
    of finding employment and the reasonableness of the period of time  for
    which an individual is looking.

23.   The appellant was in receipt of JSA in excess of five years.  This  is
    a considerable period. There is insufficient evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's account of her search for work. It is  not  entirely  clear
    why she was unsuccessful in securing employment over a period  of  five
    years; her explanation is lacking in detail and her claims are  in  any
    event unsupported. I find that the evidence is insufficient to  support
    a conclusion that there was a realistic prospect of finding  employment
    and that a reasonable  period  had  not  been  surpassed  or  that  the
    reasonable period  extended  throughout  the  period  of  searching.  I
    conclude that the appellant has not established on  the  evidence  that
    she was indeed a person with a genuine chance of being engaged relevant
    to the period in question.

24.   Accordingly, I find in all the circumstances that  the  appellant  has
    not established that she did not exceed a reasonable period in  seeking
    employment or that  there  was  a  realistic  chance  of  finding  such
    employment during that search throughout the relevant period.

25.   I find therefore that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  essential
    requirements  of  regulation  6(1)(a)  and  6(4).  In  reaching   these
    conclusions I have borne in mind that the appellant found employment in
    October 2015, but this is not material given my findings above and,  in
    any event, the appellant relies on her status as a  jobseeker  to  meet
    the requirements of permanent residence.  The  fact  that  she  is  now
    working, as Mr Walker rightly submits, should be the subject of another
    application.



Notice of Decision

26.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of
    law and is set aside.

27.   The appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  allowed.  I  remake  the
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal under the EEA Regulations.



No anonymity order is sought or made.



Signed                                                    Date  20   January
    2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
