
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/13661/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th October 2018                        |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                            |                              |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                OLUBUKOLA [A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. A. Chakmakjian of counsel instructed by Mondair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria and  on  14  November  2016  the
    Respondent refused to issue her with a derivative residence card as the
    primary carer of an EEA national who is currently in education  in  the
    United Kingdom. The EEA national in question is her daughter,  who  was
    born in 2010, and who was issued with a derivative  residence  card  on
    the basis that she was attending St Matthew's Church of England Primary
    School during the time that her father was exercising his Treaty rights
    to take up employment in the United Kingdom.

2..  The Appellant appealed on 28  November  2017  but  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lodge dismissed her appeal in a decision promulgated on  17  July
    2018. She appealed against this decision and on 20 August  2018  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted her permission to appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   Counsel for the Appellant  made  his  oral  submissions  and  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer simply stated that he would not  be  opposing
    the appeal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   Regulation 15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 states that:

         "(1) A person ('P') who is not an exempt person and  who  satisfies
             the criteria in paragraph  (2),  (3),  (4A)  or  (5)  of  this
             regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in  the
             United Kingdom  for  as  long  as  P  satisfies  the  relevant
             criteria.

         (2)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a)  P is the primary carer of an EEA national...; and

             (b)  the relevant EEA national-

                  (i)  is under the age of 18;

                  (ii)  is  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                      sufficient person; and

                  (iii)    would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
                      if P were required to leave.

         (3)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a)  P is the chid of an EEA national

             (b)  P resided in the United Kingdom at a time  when  the  EEA
                  national parents was residing in the United Kingdom  as  a
                  worker;

             (c)  P is in education  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  was  in
                  education there at a time when the EEA national parent was
                  in the United Kingdom.

         (4)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a)  P is the primary carer of a person meeting  the  criteria
                  in paragraph (3) ... and

             (b)  the relevant person would be unable  to  continue  to  be
                  educated in the United  Kingdom  if  P  were  required  to
                  leave".

5.   It is not disputed that the Appellant's daughter meets the criteria  of
    Regulation 15A (3). Her birth certificate confirms  her  paternity  and
    the Respondent's own records state that her father is an EEA  national.
    Her birth certificate also confirms that she is under 18. In  addition,
    the evidence confirms that she was attending  St  Matthew's  Church  of
    England Primary School during the time that her father  was  exercising
    his Treaty rights to take up employment in the United Kingdom.

6.   In relation to whether the Appellant is her primary  carer.  Regulation
    15A (7) states that:

         "P is to be regarded as a 'primary carer' of another person if

         (a)  P is a direct relative ... and

         (b)  P is

             (i)  the person who has the primary  responsibility  for  that
                  person's care"

7.   It is accepted that the Appellant's daughter  lives  with  her  and  in
    paragraph 22 of the Appellant's daughter's father's statement, dated 19
    December 2017, he confirmed that the Appellant is her primary carer. In
    paragraph 6 of his statement, dated 11 October  2015,  he  also  stated
    that his daughter had "always been living with her mother  since  birth
    and her mother always been the one meeting her needs in terms  of  care
    (personal) ... Because I have 4 other children and  my  wife  I  cannot
    take care [of my daughter] and my wife will not allow this  to  happen.
    The only support I give my only daughter  is  financial  and  emotional
    supports". On the basis of this evidence, I find that the Appellant  is
    her daughter's primary carer.

8.   For the purposes of Regulation 15A(40(b)  the  Appellant  also  had  to
    show that her daughter would be unable to remain in  education  in  the
    United Kingdom if she had to leave the United Kingdom.

9.   In  paragraph  32  of  her  statement,  dated  19  February  2018,  the
    Appellant stated that:

         "Unfortunately, although [T] is understanding and agrees  that  [A]
         and the boys spend time with [O] and see her, she is  not  prepared
         to let [O] live with her and [A], so if I am required to leave  the
         UK I will have to take [O] with me, which would be devastating  for
         everyone and most certainly would not  be  in  my  daughter's  best
         interests".

10.  Nevertheless, in paragraph 20  of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lodge found that:

         "Looking at the evidence I am satisfied that if the  appellant  had
         to leave the European Economic Area the  child  would  be  able  to
         remain in the UK with the sponsor. The sponsor's protestations that
         D could not live with him because  his  wife  objects  are,  in  my
         opinion,  half-hearted   as   demonstrated   by   the   appellant's
         equivocation in paragraph 44 of her witness statement".

11.  In paragraph 44 of the Appellant stated:

         "If, for example, I was to leave the UK alone and somehow  persuade
         [T] to allow [my daughter] to move in with [her father] and her,  I
         still know that [my daughter] will suffer a lot from this,  as  she
         has never lived with anyone else apart from me  and  I  was  always
         responsible for her day in, day out".

12.  This did not provide any evidence that her daughter would be  permitted
    to move in with her father and had to be viewed in the round  with  the
    Appellant  and  her  daughter's  father's  statements  which   strongly
    indicated that his wife would not let her move in.  In  addition,  this
    evidence had not been seriously challenged during  the  appeal  hearing
    and no adverse credibility findings had been made against the Appellant
    and her daughter's father.  At best the conclusion  reached  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lodge was speculative.

13.  For all of these reasons I find that it is  arguable  that  there  were
    errors of law in First-tier Tribunal Lodge's decision.

Decision on error of law

(1)  The appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is retained in the Upper Tribunal and is re-made below.





RE-MADE DECISION ON THE SUBSTANTIVE APPEAL

1.   For all of the reasons given above, I find  that  the  Appellant  meets
    the  criteria  contained  in  Regulation  15A(4)  of  the   Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   The Appellant is the primary carer of the child of an EEA national  who
    is in education in the United Kingdom and the child would be unable  to
    continue to be educated here, if the Appellant were required  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

3.   Taking the evidence in the round and applying the necessary balance  of
    probabilities the child's father is not in a position to care  for  her
    on a full-time basis as his wife will not permit her to live with them.
    There is also no suggestion that there is any  other  adult  who  could
    care for her here.

4.   In addition, the child has lived with her mother for all  of  her  life
    and the evidence of the Appellant and the child's father  is  that  she
    would suffer emotional harm if she  had  to  remain  here  without  her
    mother. For  example,  the  Appellant  said  in  paragraph  45  of  her
    statement the child would not understand why her mother  had  abandoned
    her here and left for Nigeria.

5.   I have noted that on page 4 of 6 of the  Respondent's  refusal  letter,
    he stated that:

         "Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009
         places a duty on the Secretary of State to have regard to the  need
         to safeguard and promote the welfare of children  in  the  UK  when
         carrying  out  immigration  functions.  In  the  context  of   your
         application for a Derivative Residence Card under  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, this duty  requires  the
         Secretary of State to  deal  with  your  application  in  a  timely
         manner.  Where an EEA documentation application is refused, section
         55 also requires the Secretary of State to  take  special  care  to
         explain the reasons why the application has been rejected,  and  to
         make sure the consequences of the refusal  decision  are  explained
         clearly...

         Section 55 does not affect the Secretary of  State's  consideration
         of whether the criteria in order to enjoy  a  derivative  right  to
         reside under the 2006 Regulations are met. The  criteria  contained
         in regulations 15A and 18A of the 2006  Regulations  are  objective
         and do not depend upon an exercise of discretion by  the  Secretary
         of State. Section 55 does not require the  Secretary  of  State  to
         apply  different  criteria  to  those   contained   in   the   2006
         Regulations".

6.   However, in paragraph 23 of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 Lady Hale found that Article 3(1) of  the
    United Nations Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  is  a  binding
    obligation in international law, and the spirit,  if  not  the  precise
    language, had also been translated in to national law and that  one  of
    these pieces of national law was section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.

7.   Furthermore, the Home Office's own  policy  on  Free  Movement  Rights:
    derivative rights of residence states that:

         "The best interests of the child

         -    The duty  in  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009 to have regard to the need  to  safeguard
             and promote the welfare of children who are in  the  UK  means
             that consideration of the child's best interests is a  primary
             consideration in immigration cases.

         -    You  must  carefully  consider  all  of  the  information  and
             evidence provided concerning the best interests of a child  in
             the UK when assessing whether a relevant child would be unable
             to remain, or to continue to be educated, in the  UK,  if  the
             applicant left the UK for an indefinite period".

8.   In addition,  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    transposed and implemented Council Directive 2004/38/EC on  the  rights
    of citizens of the Union and their family members to  move  and  reside
    freely within the territory of the Member States.

9.   Therefore,  even  if  the  EEA  Regulations  themselves  do  not  refer
    directly to the concept of best interests, I must take into account the
    EU  legislation  applicable  to  the  rights  protected  in   the   EEA
    Regulations. When taking into account any piece of EU legislation it is
    also necessary to take into account the provisions of  the  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union 2000/C 364/01.

10.  Article 24 of that Charter states that:

         "2.  In all actions relating to children, whether taken  by  public
         authorities or private institutions,  the  child's  best  interests
         must be a primary consideration."

11.  Taking all of the evidence into account, it  indicates  that  it  would
    not be in the child's best interests to suggest that she could continue
    to be educated here in the absence of her mother, who  is  her  primary
    carer.

Decision

(1)  The Appellant's substantive appeal is allowed.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 16 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
