

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: Ea/13167/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On    11.10.2018                                  |On 23.11.2018                  |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                Kamran SAQIB
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Arif Rehman, solicitor, Mayfair, Hounslow
For the respondent: Mr Steven Walker

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Designated Judge Paul Shaerf), sitting at Taylor House on  19
    February, on an EEA appeal by a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  1982.  The
    judge had before him two appeals, which he heard together, against  two
    decisions to refuse a residence card:

      a)      on 22 October 2016, on the basis of the  appellant's  retained
         right, following his divorce from a Polish citizen on 13 April that
         year; and

      b)      on 10 May 2017, on the basis of a permanent  right,  following
         five years' qualifying residence

 2. Both decisions under appeal included an allegation  by  the  respondent
    that the appellant's marriage had been one of convenience.  After  some
    discussion between the representatives, they came  back  and  told  the
    judge that the primary issue on both appeals was  on  that  allegation.
    The judge found it not made out, and allowed the appeal on (a); but  he
    dismissed the appeal on  (b),  which  was  not  cross-appealed  by  the
    appellant.

 3. The reasons  for  decision  (a)  had  included  a  statement  that  the
    appellant had failed to show his ex-wife was a  'qualified  person'  at
    the date of their divorce. On (b), that point was  taken,  and  it  was
    also  pointed  out  that  under  reg.  10  (5)  of  the  relevant   EEA
    Regulations, the appellant needed to show evidence that he  would  have
    been a 'qualified person' himself if he had been an  EEA  citizen.  The
    judge dismissed the permanent right of residence  appeal  (b),  on  the
    basis that the appellant had not shown that he had been in work since 9
    February 2015.

 4. The judge gave detailed reasons at 32 for this  decision,  which  could
    not be challenged on the  evidence  reviewed  there.  The  Home  Office
    appealed his decision on the retained right appeal (a),  on  the  basis
    that the appellant had not shown that he would have been  a  'qualified
    person' himself. This was a point raised in the notice of decision (b);
    but not in (a). However, the judge had had the point before him on  the
    appeal, and found in favour of the  respondent,  who  argued  that  his
    findings on (b) should have been carried over to (a).

 5. Mr Rehman complained that, because of the course the hearing had  taken
    before the judge  (see  2),  the  appellant's  representative  (another
    member of his firm) had not had a proper opportunity to deal with  this
    point. Mr Walker accepted that this had  been  so,  and  both  of  them
    invited me to consider it for myself. As it turned out,  this  was  not
    necessary: Mr Walker had  had  an  opportunity  to  do  so  before  the
    hearing, and was prepared to accept that the evidence did show that the
    appellant would have been a 'qualified  person'  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing. It follows that the Home Office  appeal  against  the  judge's
    decision on (a), retained right of residence, is dismissed by consent.

 6. Mr Rehman went on, however, to argue that, on that evidence, the  judge
    should have allowed the appeal on (b) permanent right of residence. The
    difficulty with that is that the appellant  did  not  cross-appeal  his
    decision on that. The point was first  raised  in  Mr  Rehman's  r.  24
    response, only provided on the date of the hearing; and its success was
    dependent on the necessary evidence being accepted by  me  (or,  as  it
    turned out, Mr Walker).

 7. On the evidence considered by the judge, this was not an obvious point,
    in terms of Robinson [1997]  EWCA  Civ  3090,  or  one  with  a  strong
    prospect of success (see AZ (error of law: jurisdiction; PTA  practice)
    [2018] UKUT 245 (IAC)). Nor should advocates be encouraged to expect to
    be able to overturn a judicial decision on the basis of a point  raised
    only at this stage. For these reasons, the  judge's  decision  on  (b),
    permanent right of residence, also stands.


 8. I should not leave this case without saying that the  very  experienced
    judge  was  clearly  doing  his  best  to  resolve  issues  which  were
    complicated by the existence of two separate decisions,  to  which  the
    advocates before him had not given enough thought. The  result  in  any
    case is that his decision on both (a) and (b) stands, if  for  slightly
    different reasons.

Home Office appeal on (a)  :: first-tier decision stands  on  both  (a)  and
    (b)
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
