
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
EA/13392/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2018                     | On 20 December 2018               |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                          mr Mohammad Masum Mridha
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhutyan, Legal Representative, Haque & Hausman
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the renewed hearing of Mr Mridha's appeal against  the  refusal
    by the Secretary of  State  to  grant  him  permanent  residence  under
    Regulation 15 of the Immigration, European Economic Area Regulations of
    2006.  That decision was made on 1 November 2016.

2.   There was an earlier hearing before me in August of this  year  when  I
    found errors of law in the judge's decision on the basis  that  he  had
    erred  about  the  earnings  of  the  appellant's  former  partner   in
    concluding that it had not been shown that  he  was  exercising  treaty
    rights at the date of dissolution  of  the  marriage.   There  are  two
    points, as I noted there, one that it had been held  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Baigazieva that it is the date of instigation of proceedings,
    rather than the dissolution of the marriage that is the key  date,  but
    also there was evidence in the bundle before the judge from HMRC  going
    to show employment  and  more  latterly  also  self-employment  of  the
    partner going into the tax year 2016 to 2017.

3.   I had helpful submissions from both sides  today  and  also  have  been
    taken  to  the  relevant  documentation  in   the   bundle   and   also
    documentation that was, I am told, shown to the judge but  was  not  in
    the bundle.  It was produced I think perhaps on the day of the  hearing
    and I am satisfied that the evidence does show that Mr Mridha's  former
    partner was exercising treaty rights at the date of the instigation  of
    the divorce proceedings, the documentation on that is clear and in fact
    there is documentation to show that  he  himself  was  also  exercising
    community rights at the relevant dates.

4.   As a consequence therefore, I  have  already  found  that  the  judge's
    decision fell to be overturned for errors of law.  This is the remaking
    of the decision and it seems to me  clear  on  the  evidence  that  the
    requirements of  the  Regulations  are  met  in  this  case  and  as  a
    consequence the appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    is allowed.

5.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 7 December 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
