
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/13735/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 February 2018                  |On 26 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                 JOSEPH KONE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khosla, D J Webb & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 19 May 2017 dismissing his appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 9 September 2016 refusing his application  for
    permanent  residence  pursuant  to  reg.  10  (5)  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of  Mali  born  on  12  December  1982.  He
    entered the UK in August 2009 and on 5 January 2011 he  applied  for  a
    residence card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights. A residence  card  was  duly  issued  on  21  March  2011.  The
    appellant married on 18 July 2009 but the marriage came to an end  when
    he was granted a divorce decree absolute on 10 July 2015. On  14  March
    2016 he applied for permanent residence. His application was refused as
    the respondent was not satisfied on the evidence produced that  he  was
    able to show that he had resided in accordance with the Regulations for
    a  continuous  five  year  period  and  that  his  former  spouse   had
    continuously exercised free movement rights up to the point of divorce.



3.    The appellant appealed against this decision. He elected to  have  his
    appeal decided without a  hearing  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary
    evidence. He submitted in support of his appeal a bundle of documentary
    evidence including a P45, a P60, a number of pay slips from Brakena Ltd
    for the months of April - August 2015 and a  letter  from  Brakena  Ltd
    dated 24 November 2016 to confirm his wife's employment with them.

4.    In his decision the judge referred to this letter  and  said  that  it
    was stated that the appellant's former wife was employed by  them  from
    December 2015 to September 2016 whereas the pay slips were dated April-
    August 2015, not within the period stated in the letter. He  said  that
    when he considered the information provided by the respondent  and  the
    inconsistency between  the  letter  and  the  wage  slips  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's ex-wife was employed as claimed  and  he
    dismissed the appeal.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had misread the letter from Brakena  Ltd  and  that  his
    erroneous reading formed the basis of an incorrect refusal.

6.    At the hearing before me Mr Avery accepted that the judge had  misread
    that letter, which in fact stated that the appellant's former wife  had
    been employed from 15 December  2014,  her  employment  ceasing  on  14
    September 2015. It followed that there was no inconsistency between the
    wage slips submitted and a letter from the employer.

7.    I am satisfied in these  circumstances  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    proceeding on a misapprehension of the evidence before him so taking an
    inaccurate and irrelevant matter into account when making his  findings
    of fact.

8.    Both representatives accepted that in these circumstances  the  proper
    course was for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a full rehearing. By  letter  dated  20  February  2018  the  appellant
    applied for permission to amend his grounds of appeal but there was  no
    need for me to consider that application in the light of the concession
    that the judge had erred in law.  The  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal will be a full rehearing and it  will  be  open  to  both  the
    appellant and the respondent to  raise  any  matters  relevant  to  the
    issues in the appeal.



Decision

9.    The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
    cross for reconsideration by  a  different  judge  by  way  of  a  full
    rehearing.


Signed:     H J E Latter     Dated: 22 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
