
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/13136/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 7 December 2018                            |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                               Bijoya Rani Das
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse her a residence card under the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as the  extended  family  member  of  a
    British citizen.  The  appellant  is  the  unmarried  partner  of  that
    British citizen.

 2. The grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  indeed  the
    covering letter to the respondent argued both that  the  family  member
    provisions in regulation 7, together  with  regulation  9  of  the  EEA
    Regulations  were  engaged  (the  latter  being  the   Surinder   Singh
    provisions  for  family  members)  and  also  that  the  regulation   8
    provisions dealing with extended  family  members  were  engaged.   The
    Secretary of State made no decision on regulation 8 and neither did the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Whilst regulation 9  expressly  only  applies  to
    family members and not extended family members  (unless  recognised  as
    such by the issue of a residence  permit  by  the  authorities  in  the
    United Kingdom), for the reasons set out below, it was an error of  law
    for the First-tier Tribunal  not  to  have  considered  and  determined
    whether the Surinder Singh provisions could extend to a  family  member
    such as the Appellant in this case.

 3. In Article 3(2)(b) of Directive  2004/38,  the  host  Member  State  is
    required, in accordance with its national legislation,  to  'facilitate
    entry and residence for' the following persons:

         "3   (2)...   (a) Any other family members, irrespective  of  their
                  nationality, not falling under the definition in  point  2
                  of Article 2 who, in the  country  from  which  they  have
                  come, are dependants or members of the  household  of  the
                  Union citizen having the primary right of residence;


                  (b)  the partner with whom the Union citizen has a durable
                  relationship, duly attested."


 4. Subsequent to the decision  of  the  First-tier  Judge,  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union handed down on 12 July 2018 its  decision
    in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Banger (Citizenship  of
    the European Union - Right of Union citizens to move and reside  freely
    within the territory of the European Union - Judgment) [2018] EUECJ  C-
    89/17, concerning the Surinder Singh free  movement  right  to  include
    partners with  whom  a  Union  citizen  has  a  duly  attested  durable
    relationship, as in Article 3(2)(b) set out above.

 5. The  Secretary  of  State  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    considered whether the Banger extension also extended as far as Article
    3(2)(a) other family members (in the UK  Regulations,  extended  family
    members).  We are satisfied, in the light of Banger that requires to be
    considered now.

 6. The complete failure to engage with the ground of appeal in relation to
    regulation 8 is an error of law and in the light of Banger arguably  at
    least that it may be material.

 7. Accordingly the decision of the First-tier Judge is set aside  and  the
    decision will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be
    fixed.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:      3 January 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
