
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/13587/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 October 2017                   |On 02 November 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 TAHIA AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

   1. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.  I  have  not
      been asked to make one and see no reason to do so.

Background

   2. The Appellant appeals against the decision, promulgated on 31  January
      2017, of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Duff (hereafter "the FtTJ"),
      allowing her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  of
      11 November 2016 refusing to issue a Permanent Residence Card contrary
      to  regulation  15  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006 (as they then applied).

   3. The Appellant is a national of Belgium  born  on  4  March  2005.  She
      applied for a permanent residence card as a family member of  her  EEA
      national sponsor,  namely,  her  father  Mr  Thohur  Uddin  Ahmed  who
      attended today before the Upper Tribunal. The application was  refused
      by the Secretary of State because  the  Appellant  failed  to  provide
      evidence that she was related to Mr Ahmed.

   4. The Appellant duly appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC She waived
      her right to an oral hearing and opted for the appeal to be decided on
      the papers.

   5. The FtTJ considered the evidence and found the relationship proved. He
      accordingly found that the Appellant  was  entitled  to  a  "residence
      card" and allowed the appeal under the "EEA Regulations". No reference
      was made to  the  specific  regulation  about  which  the  appeal  was
      concerned. The issue that has led to these proceedings is that  it  is
      unclear whether the FtTJ intended  to  find  that  the  Appellant  was
      entitled to a document certifying her right to permanent residence  in
      the UK, as opposed to a residence  card.  The  omission  of  the  word
      "permanent" or to regulation 15 in the Decision  is  unfortunate.  The
      FtTJ was likely to have been misled by the Respondent's refusal letter
      which does not refer to permanent residence or to regulation 15, but I
      note that the application form clearly  indicates  the  Appellant  was
      applying for a permanent residence card. It can thus be inferred  that
      the FtTJ intended to find that she was entitled to  that  document  if
      the relationship was proved. Matters have now moved on and  since  the
      FtTJ promulgated his Decision, the Appellant has been  issued  with  a
      permanent residence card. These proceedings are now academic.

  6.  In the circumstances, I do not set aside the FtTJ's decision, but for
      the avoidance of doubt, the appeal stands allowed under regulation  15
      of the EEA Regulations.

Decision

The FtTJ did not materially err in law.  The  decision  of  the  FtTJ  shall
stand.


Signed      Dated 1 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

