

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ea/13723/2016
                                                               ea/13725/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 December 2018                  |On 08 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                  ALEX [B]
                                  JATTU [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A. Alhadi, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing on 3  August  2018
    which resulted in my setting  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT") for error  of  law  in  relation  to  the  appellants'
    appeals against  the  respondent's  decisions  to  refuse  them  family
    permits under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 2. I quote in full from my decision made after that hearing and from which
    the further background to the appeal can be seen.

                          "DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


          1. Although the appellant  in  these  proceedings  is  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer, I continue to refer to the parties as  they
             were before the First-tier Tribunal.


          2. The appellants are citizens of Sierra Leone and were born on 8
             January 1999 and 3 July 2000, respectively.  On  23  September
             2016 they  applied  for  family  permits  as  extended  family
             members of their uncle in the UK,  Salia  [B],  a  citizen  of
             Norway.  The applications were refused because, amongst  other
             things, the respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellants
             had established that they  were  related  to  the  sponsor  as
             claimed.


          3. The appellants appealed  against  those  decisions  and  their
             appeals came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malone  ("the
             FtJ") on 20 April 2018 whereby he allowed the appeals.


          4. In relation to his conclusions in terms of relevant  financial
             dependence by the appellants  on  the  sponsor,  there  is  no
             challenge on behalf of the respondent.  He concluded that they
             are, and by inference and looking  at  his  conclusions,  were
             dependent on the sponsor for their essential needs.


          5. The aspect of the FtJ's decision that  is  challenged  is  his
             conclusion in relation to  the  asserted  family  relationship
             between them.


          6. The  respondent's  decision  said  in  respect  of  the  first
             appellant that he had provided a copy of his birth certificate
             showing his date of birth but it was noted that the birth  was
             registered on 8 April 2009, 10 years after his date of  birth.
             It was concluded that no  satisfactory  explanation  had  been
             given as to why the birth  was  not  registered  earlier.   In
             addition,  although  he  had  provided  the  sponsor's   birth
             certificate, the sponsor's birth was not registered  until  15
             February 2009, over 40 years after his birth.  The  respondent
             concluded that the appellant had not  provided  evidence  that
             would demonstrate the parentage of his  biological  father  or
             that the sponsor is the brother of the appellant's father.  In
             relation to the second appellant,  the  respondent  said  that
             that appellant had provided no documents relating to the  time
             of her birth or  any  documents  that  would  demonstrate  her
             parentage.  The  same  point  was  made  in  relation  to  the
             sponsor's birth certificate.


          7. In his conclusions the FtJ referred to the sponsor's assertion
             that he was the appellants' paternal uncle.  He said that  the
             sponsor was one of four siblings and he has two sisters living
             in Sierra Leone.  His elder brother, Mohamed, the  appellants'
             father, was born on 20 August 1966 and  died  on  20  December
             2004. The sponsor was said to have been born  on  15  November
             1968 and his brother died when the appellants were very young,
             aged 5 and 3 years, respectively.  That was the  evidence  put
             before the FtJ.


          8. At [12], very properly concluding  that  he  needed  first  to
             decide whether the appellants had established that  they  were
             related to the sponsor, he referred to copy birth certificates
             for the appellants and the sponsor, as  well  as  for  Mohamed
             [B], said to be their father, as well as  the  latter's  death
             certificate.  He said that the death certificate confirmed his
             date of birth and his date of death.


          9. He then said as follows:


             "13. Mr. [Salia B]'s birth certificate  names  his  mother  as
                  Jattu [C] and his father as Alhji  Karamoh  [B].   Mohamed
                  [B]'s birth certificate  has  been  enlarged  to  such  an
                  extent that it is too large for A4  paper.   Some  of  the
                  document is missing.  However, it shows his date of  birth
                  as 20 August 1966 and his mother as Fudie  Jattu  [B]  and
                  his father as Kuromoh [B].  As will be apparent, the names
                  on Mr. [Salia B]'s birth certificate do not exactly  match
                  those of Mohamed [B]'s.


             14.  However, on occasion, one has to use  common  sense  when
                  deciding appeals of  this  nature.   I  consider,  on  the
                  balance of probabilities, that the  individuals  named  on
                  those two birth certificates are the same.   The  original
                  birth  certificates   would   have   been   completed   by
                  individuals who might well  have  spelt  the  names  given
                  differently.   If  the  birth  certificates  provided  are
                  forgeries, I would have expected the entries to have  been
                  matched perfectly.


             15.  Mr. [Salia B]  stated  that  he  instructed  one  of  his
                  sisters  to  attend  the  Registry  to  have   the   birth
                  certificates re-issued.  He states they were issued on the
                  same day by the same registrar.  I do not know  when  they
                  were re-issued.  All the birth certificates bear different
                  dates.  Mr. [Salia B]'s is dated 15 February 2009,  Alex's
                  8 April 2009, Jattu's 4 August 2009 and Mohamed  [B]'s  20
                  August 2009.  I cannot explain why the birth  certificates
                  bear different dates.  Mr. [Salia  B]  told  me  that  the
                  originals had been lost.  Sierra Leoneans had to apply for
                  their certificates to be re-issued after the war,  because
                  many buildings were badly bombed and documents  were  lost
                  on a large scale.


             16.  As I understand it, Mr. [Salia B]  asked  his  sister  to
                  obtain  birth  certificates  for  the   purpose   of   the
                  Appellants' family permit applications.   The  dates  they
                  bear might have been the dates when they  were  originally
                  re-issued.  I would  have  expected  the  sister  to  have
                  obtained the copies before me in 2016.  I reiterate,  that
                  if the birth certificates  before  me  were  forgeries,  I
                  would have expected them to have tallied perfectly."


         10. The respondent's complaint about the FtJ's  decision  in  this
             respect, and upon which permission to appeal was granted,  was
             what the FtJ said at [14] and [16] to the effect that  if  the
             birth certificates were forgeries he would have  expected  the
             entries to have matched perfectly.  Relying on A  v  Secretary
             of State for the  Home  Department  (Pakistan)*  [2002]  UKIAT
             00439, it is contended that the sponsor had not shown that the
             birth certificates could be relied  upon  and  the  issues  in
             relation to  those  documents  remained  unexplained.   It  is
             argued that it  was  perverse  of  the  FtJ  to  accept  those
             documents on the basis that because they do not tally they are
             not forged.


         11. In submissions on behalf of the respondent Ms  Everett  relied
             on the grounds.  She  pointed  out  that  there  were  various
             issues in relation to the birth certificates but the  FtJ  did
             not resolve those issues.  It could not be a sufficient  basis
             to accept the documents that there were discrepancies in  them
             which meant that they could not be forgeries.


         12. Mr [B], the sponsor, who appeared on behalf of the appellants,
             said that all the evidence he had given to the FtJ  was  true.
             He had been asked a lot of questions and he had  answered  all
             of them.  He said that he  was  getting  old  and  needed  his
             children around him.


             Conclusions


         13. There is no doubt, and the FtJ found as much, that there  were
             inconsistencies between the birth certificates of Mohamed [B],
             said to be the appellant's father, and  that  of  the  sponsor
             Salia [B].  The obvious inconsistency was in the names of  the
             mother and father of Mohamed [B] and  the  sponsor.   The  FtJ
             said that the names do not exactly match.  However, as far  as
             one can tell from the FtJ's  decision  there  was  no  obvious
             basis upon which he could have based his conclusion  that  the
             original birth  certificates  would  have  been  completed  by
             individuals  who  might  well  have  spelt  the  names   given
             differently.  Furthermore, stating that he would have expected
             the  entries  to  have  matched   perfectly   if   the   birth
             certificates were forgeries, does in my  view  border  on  the
             perverse. There is no rational basis for the conclusion that a
             set of forged documents would match perfectly; they  might  or
             they might not.


         14. Furthermore, at [15] it is recorded that the  evidence  before
             him,  and  indeed  as  reflected  in  the  sponsor's   witness
             statement, was that the re-issued certificates were issued  on
             the same day by the  same  registrar.   However,  as  the  FtJ
             pointed out at [15], all the birth certificates bore different
             dates of reissue and the FtJ said that he  could  not  explain
             why the birth certificates bore those different dates.


         15. Whilst the FtJ accepted, and  was  entitled  to  accept,  that
             there may have been a need for  certificates  to  be  reissued
             after the war because of damage to buildings and the  loss  of
             documents and so forth, he did not express any view about  the
             inconsistency between what he was  told  about  the  dates  of
             reissue of the certificates and the dates that in fact  appear
             on them.  He said at [16] that the dates they bear might  have
             been the dates that they were originally reissued.   But  even
             if that is the case, and I cannot  see  in  the  evidence  any
             support for that conclusion, that does still not  explain  the
             inconsistency.  He  reiterated  at  [16]  that  if  the  birth
             certificates before him were forgeries he would have  expected
             them to have tallied perfectly.  That in my  judgement  is  an
             unsustainable  conclusion,  at  least  on  the  basis  of  the
             evidence that was before him.


         16. Furthermore,  the  documents  did  not  in  fact  have  to  be
             forgeries as such.  The respondent did not need to, and as far
             as one can tell did not, make that assertion.   All  that  the
             FtJ had to decide was whether the documents were reliable when
             seen in the context of the evidence overall.  The  reliability
             of the documents was plainly relevant in terms of establishing
             the relationship between the sponsor and the appellants.   The
             documents need  not  have  been  forged  if  they  were  birth
             certificates that related to persons other than relatives  and
             were simply put forward in an attempt to  persuade  the  entry
             clearance officer that the sponsor  and  the  appellants  were
             relatives.


         17. I bear in mind that the FtJ found the sponsor  to  have  given
             credible evidence.  However, given the  unsustainable  reasons
             given by the FtJ in terms of his assessment of the documentary
             evidence and  its  direct  connection  to  the  issue  of  the
             relationship between the  parties,  his  positive  credibility
             assessment is  no  basis  for  concluding  that  his  decision
             contains no, or no material, error of law.


         18. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law
             in his assessment of the relationship between  the  appellants
             and the sponsor in the light of his reasoning in accepting the
             reliability of the documentary evidence.


         19. Accordingly, his decision must be set aside because the  error
             of law is material.  I do not consider that it is  appropriate
             for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
             circumstances where a number of findings made by the FtJ which
             are not infected by the error of law, in terms of  dependency,
             can be preserved.  Accordingly, the appeal will  be  re-listed
             before the Upper Tribunal for further hearing.


         20. It is important that the appellants and the sponsor take  into
             account what I next say about the documentary  evidence.   The
             FtJ pointed out that Mohamed [B]'s birth certificate had  been
             enlarged to such an extent that it was too large for A4  paper
             and that some of that document was missing.  A  complete  copy
             of that birth certificate needs to be provided for the resumed
             hearing before the Upper Tribunal so that all  aspects  of  it
             can be seen.  That document is at page A7 of  the  appellants'
             bundle.  It is reasonable to conclude that the reissued  birth
             certificate can be photocopied in a way such that  all  of  it
             can be seen.


         21. At the resumed hearing, it seems to me that the only matter in
             issue will be the relationship between the appellants and  the
             sponsor.  All other matters appear to have  been  resolved  in
             the appellants' favour.  As I have  indicated,  there  was  no
             challenge to those other aspects of the FtJ's decision and any
             findings that are not infected by the error of law can stand."


 3. As is apparent from my earlier decision at [21] the focus for  the  re-
    making of the decision is the relationship between the  appellants  and
    the sponsor. At the hearing  today,  17  December,  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants DNA evidence was provided. In summary, that establishes that
    the first appellant, Alex, is related to the  sponsor,  Salia  [B],  as
    uncle and nephew  or  grandfather  and  grandchild.  However,  the  DNA
    evidence establishes that there is  no  close  biological  relationship
    between the second appellant,  Jattu,  and  the  sponsor.  The  claimed
    relationship as between the first appellant and the sponsor is as uncle
    and nephew.

 4.  In  the  circumstances,  the  parties  were  in  agreement  that   the
    appropriate course was for the appeal of  the  first  appellant  to  be
    allowed and the appeal of the  second  appellant  to  be  dismissed.  I
    agree.

 5. It was confirmed on behalf of the appellants that there  was  no  other
    ground of appeal before  me  other  than  that  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

    Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision in relation to both appellants  having
    been set aside, I re-make the decision by allowing the  appeal  of  the
    first appellant and dismissing the appeal of the second appellant.

 7. The appeal of the first appellant is allowed.

 8. The appeal of the second appellant is dismissed.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  17/12/18


