
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: EA/14283/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated following typing         |
|On 24th October 2017                 |On 22nd February 2018                |
|Decision & Reasons Delivered orally at|                                     |
|the hearing.                          |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                           Stephanie Monika Mangal
                       (anonymity direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Acting as. Litigant in Person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Beg following an appeal on the papers considered at
    Taylor House.  The Appellant's appeal had been against the Secretary of
    State's decision to reject  her  application  for  permanent  residence
    under the EEA Regulations.  The  Appellant's  husband  is  Mr  Mohammad
    Mangal he was born in Afghanistan  but  is  a  German  national.   When
    granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup said as
    follows at paragraph 2

         "It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misunderstood
         the nature of the  application.   The  Appellant  sought  permanent
         residence on the basis of being the family member  of  a  qualified
         person exercising treaty rights for a  continuous  period  of  five
         years.  The Appellant's husband and Sponsor is  a  German  national
         not Afghan as the judge believed.  The judge failed to address  the
         evidence before the Tribunal dealing with the husband's five  years
         qualification and mistakenly thought that the  relevant  issue  was
         the Appellant's own job record."

2.    The judge at paragraph 2 of her  decision  had  said  "the  Respondent
    considered whether the Appellant's husband Mohammad  Mangal  an  Afghan
    national exercising treaty rights for a five year period."

3.    The judge was wrong because Mr Mangal is not an  Afghan  national.  He
    is a German national.  Then at paragraph 6 the judge said as follows.


         "However what is required to meet the Regulations is evidence  that
         the Appellant who is an EU national and whose appeal is  before  me
         has exercised treaty rights for a continuous period of five years."

    And then he said at 7


         "The Appellant submitted a letter from HMRC dated  30th  June  2015
         showing that she paid class 2 national insurance contributions from
         24th August 2014  to  11th  April  2015.   I  find  that  there  is
         sufficient evidence to show that she  has  been  exercising  treaty
         rights for a continuous period of five years.  Her husband's rights
         of  residence  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
         Regulation  2006  stem  from  the  Appellant's  rights  as  an  EEA
         national.  She cannot rely on his  employment  to  meet  Regulation
         15(1)(a) of the 2006 Regulations."

4.    Mrs Mangal appears in person before me this morning and she said  that
    she relied on her grounds of appeal and that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had made an error of law.  She said  her  husband  was  a  German
    national and that she should be issued with a permanent residence card.
     Mr McVeety in his submissions said that it was "pretty  obvious"  that
    the judge  had  misunderstood  the  basis  of  the  case  and  he  also
    considered a new bundle which the Appellant had submitted  under  cover
    of a letter of 16th October.  Mr McVeety said he also had a  number  of
    documents within his file as well.  He said the issue  was  whether  or
    not a five-year period could be shown for  the  purposes  of  permanent
    residence.  He said he was content to  agree  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided sufficient evidence. There was such evidence.  He said that  I
    should set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  I  should  remake
    the decision and allow the  appeal  which  would  grant  the  Appellant
    permanent residence.

5.    Having considered the matter, it does appear quite clear  to  me  that
    the judge made errors at paragraphs 2, 6 and 7 of her  decision  namely
    the paragraphs which I have cited.  It is quite clear additionally from
    the voluminous documents submitted  with  the  application  which  were
    before the judge and the additional documents which had been  submitted
    now (and which the Home Office Presenting  Officer  has  been  able  to
    consider) that indeed the evidential requirements  have  been  met  and
    therefore Mr McVeety quite properly makes the concessions that he does.
    In the circumstances I find that there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of  the  judge.   I  remake  the  decision  and  I  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal so that permanent residence will, in due course,  be
    granted.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law. It is  set
aside.

I remake the decision and I  allow  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis
referred to above.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      A Mahmood                        Date; 24 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

