
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: EA/14292/2016
                                                               EA/14301/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|8 November 2018                               |On 23 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 HINA ARSHAD
                                 HIRA ARSHAD
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss S Alban, instructed by Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellants  are  nationals  of  Pakistan.   They   appeal,   with
    permission, against the decision of Judge  Kempton  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing their appeals against decisions of  the  respondent
    (by his agent the entry clearance officer) on 25 November 2016 refusing
    them EEA family permits as the dependent  children  over  21  of  their
    father, a Spanish national residing in the United Kingdom.   We  should
    say that the  second  appellant  was  under  21  at  the  date  of  her
    application, but over 21 by the date of the decision, and it is  common
    ground that any challenge to the decision has to be on the basis of her
    age at the date of the decision.  Two appeals by other  family  members
    were originally listed before Judge Kempton together  with  these,  but
    the adverse decisions were withdrawn in those cases and so she was  and
    we are concerned only  with  the  two  present  appellants.   The  only
    remaining issue is dependence.

 2. Judge Kempton set out an extract from Lim v ECO Manila [2015] EWCA  Civ
    1383 at [32] as follows:

         "the critical question is whether the claimant  is  in  fact  in  a
         position to support himself or not, and Reyes now makes that  clear
         beyond doubt... If he can support himself, there is no  dependency,
         even if he is given financial material support by the  EU  citizen.
         Those additional resources are not necessary to enable him to  meet
         his basic needs.  If, on the other hand, he cannot support  himself
         from his own resources, the court will not  ask  why  that  is  the
         case.... The fact that he chooses not to get a job and becomes self-
         supporting is irrelevant.  It follows that on  the  facts  of  this
         case there is no  dependency.   The  appellant  had  the  funds  to
         support herself.  She was financially independent and did not  need
         the additional resources."

 3. She then continued:

         "In the circumstances of this case, the two appellants concerned in
         this appeal, Hina and Hira appear to have no assets  of  their  own
         whatsoever and have always been reliant upon  their  father,  their
         EEA family members for support.

         They are  both  still  studying.   The  elder  is  paying  for  her
         education to become a lawyer  and  the  younger  has  just  started
         medical studies.  They have never been employed.   At  the  end  of
         their studies they might reasonably expect to be in a  position  to
         work and earn their own keep.  At present they cannot  do  that  in
         their chosen careers.  However, there  is  no  evidence  that  they
         could  not  find  other  work  to  support  themselves  instead  of
         studying.  There is also the issue of the cost of studying  in  the
         UK which the sponsor said that they could do instead of doing so in
         Pakistan.  It would cost a considerable sum per annum for  each  of
         the appellants to study at University in the UK and it depends upon
         them gaining admission to study in their chosen fields.

         The issue is that of dependency.  The  appellants  each  receive  a
         lump sum each month from their father for all their needs and  they
         decide how to spend that money paying for tuition fees  and  rental
         as well  as  food.   Accommodation  and  food  would  be  essential
         matters.  However, I see no breakdown of those  heads  of  payment.
         There is also no consideration given as to whether  the  appellants
         could in fact find employment in order  to  become  self-sufficient
         and not be reliant upon their father.  That is a matter  which  has
         not been considered."

 4. As it appears to us, and as Mr Howells on behalf of  the  Secretary  of
    State agreed, the facts found by the Judge should have led her to allow
    these appeals rather than dismissing them.  This is not  a  case  where
    the appellants have access to funds other than those  provided  by  the
    relative upon whom they claim dependence.  The appellants have no other
    resources.  In those circumstances the question why they have no  other
    resources is one which to quote Lim again, "the court will not ask".

 5. Judge Kempton erred by asking this question and, in effect,  dismissing
    the appeals because it was not satisfactorily answered.  We  set  aside
    her decision.  We substitute decisions allowing  the  appeals  of  both
    appellants.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 12 November 2018.

