
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
EA/14215/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 20 December 2017                       |    On 29 January 2018           |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                             Alain Tanke Tsayem
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Otchie of Counsel instructed by JBP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McGavin promulgated  on  3  April  2017  in  which  she  dismissed  the
    Appellant's  appeal  without  a  hearing  against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 2 December 2016 refusing  a  EEA  permanent  residence
    card or a residence card based on  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  a
    retained right of residence following separation and divorce  from  his
    spouse.



2.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Cameroon  born  on  24  May  1981.   He
    married Ms Valerie Judith Diane Veilleur, a French national born on  23
    May 1990, on 20 June 2011.  Pursuant to that relationship he was issued
    with an EEA residence card on  16  September  2011.   The  relationship
    between the Appellant and his wife broke down in or  around  July  2014
    and in due course they were divorced - the Decree Absolute being  dated
    10 March 2016.  The Appellant applied for a permanent residence card on
    the basis of a retained right of residence, but  this  application  was
    refused by the Respondent pursuant to regulations 10(5) and  (15)(1)(f)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


3.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  his  Notice  of
    Appeal he indicated that he wanted his appeal decided without a hearing
    'on the papers', and it was in such circumstances that  the  case  came
    before Judge McGavin.


4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in the Decision promulgated on 3 April 2017.


5.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman sitting as a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge on 16 October 2017.  The  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal does not reflect the basis of the grounds submitted  in  support
    of the application for permission to appeal but identifies a matter not
    pleaded.  Judge Chapman referenced the Respondent's policy  in  respect
    of  EEA  applicants  who  had  difficulties  in  obtaining   supporting
    documents from former partners or spouses.  In material part the  grant
    of permission is in these terms

         "It is clear from  the  Home  Office  guidance  on  'Free  movement
         rights: retained rights of residence' 7 February 2017,  that  where
         an applicant's relationship has ended under difficult circumstances
         but they have provided evidence to show that they have  made  every
         effort to provide the required documents the Respondent 'must  take
         a pragmatic approach and ... if you  are  satisfied  the  applicant
         cannot get the evidence themselves, make enquiries on their  behalf
         where possible'.  The Judge appears to have been  unaware  of  this
         guidance and the fact that it would have been open to him to direct
         HMRC to provide evidence of the tax and NI paid by the  Appellant's
         former wife".


6.   The relevant policy document has been provided to me by Mr  Otchie  who
    represents the Appellant today.  It is not for  a  moment  disputed  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State by Mr Bramble that the policy  exists,
    or that its contents are not in part as quoted above.  The document  is
    titled 'Free movement rights: retained rights  of  residence'  (Version
    3.0) and is, as Judge Chapman  identified,  dated  as  published  on  7
    February 2017.



7.   In a section headed 'Applicants who  are  unable  to  provide  all  the
    evidence of their EEA sponsor',  amongst  other  things  the  following
    passage appears:

         "Where a relationship has broken down due to domestic  violence  or
         other difficult circumstances it may not always be possible for the
         applicant to provide all of the necessary documents about  the  EEA
         national sponsor.  In such  circumstances,  you  can  make  further
         enquiries about the EEA national sponsor's status  but  only  where
         the applicant has shown they have made every effort to provide  the
         necessary evidence.


         Regulations  17,  18  and  19  of  the  2016  regulations  put  the
         responsibility on the applicant to provide the necessary proof that
         they are  eligible  for  a  document  to  confirm  their  right  of
         residence in the UK".


8.   Later, under a sub-heading of  the  same  heading,  there  appears  the
    quotation that Judge Chapman has identified in the grant of  permission
    to appeal.  In fuller context it is in the following terms.

         "No Evidence of EEA Sponsor


          In cases where there has been  a  breakdown  in  the  relationship
         between the applicant and their EEA national  sponsor  it  may  not
         always be possible for them to get the documents that are needed to
         support their application.


         An example of this could be where the applicant was the  victim  of
         domestic violence and could not provide evidence relating to  their
         EEA national sponsor's nationality or free movement rights (to  ask
         them to do so could put them at risk). ..."

         Another example would be where  the  applicant's  relationship  has
         ended under difficult circumstances but they have provided evidence
         to show that they have made every effort to  provide  the  required
         documents. Such  as,  attempting  to  make  contact  with  the  EEA
         national sponsor during divorce proceedings.

         When dealing with these cases you must take  a  pragmatic  approach
and:

       . consider each case on its merits


       . if  you  are  satisfied  the  applicant  cannot  get  the  evidence
         themselves, make enquiries on their behalf where possible,  getting
         agreement from your senior caseworker before doing so."



9.   In the context of the grant of permission to appeal and  the  facts  of
    this particular case, the focus during the course of submissions before
    me has been on paragraphs 13 and 14 of the decision of  Judge  McGavin.
    Those paragraphs are in these terms:

         "13. It is submitted for the Appellant that he was the  "victim  of
             infidelity and degrading treatment by his  former  wife  which
             led to their relationship to be deteriorated beyond repair and
             this was one of the reasons why he could not provide  all  the
             documents to show that he qualified for permanent  residence'"
             (skeleton argument para 3). Even so it is stated he managed to
             "gather from their storage copies of payslips and  proof  that
             his former wife exercised her treaty right [as  a]  part  time
             worker and student during the 5 years relevant period'"  (also
             para 3).

         "14. The witness statement which the appellant  has  provided  does
             not show, nor is there other evidence (such as police reports)
             to show, that  the  appellant  was  the  victim  of  degrading
             treatment or that  he  was  prevented  by  violence  or  other
             behaviour on his wife's part from obtaining the  documentation
             which he needed to prove his claim.  There is no  evidence  to
             show that he has attempted to make any  contact  with  his  ex
             wife at all,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  the  documentation
             necessary, or has been prevented from doing so.  From what  is
             stated in the skeleton argument,  the  couple  had  belongings
             stored in a storage facility to which the appellant had access
             and he did obtain documents which  his  agents  consider  show
             that his ex-wife had been exercising her treaty  rights  "part
             time" and "during the 5 years relevant period".  However, what
             is required is evidence that she was a qualified  person,  not
             part time, but continuously up to and at the date  of  divorce
             and there is no evidence to show that she has been a qualified
             person for any continuous period,  and  not  at  the  date  of
             divorce."


10.  The witness statement that the Appellant had provided, referred  to  at
    the beginning of paragraph 14 of the Judge's Decision, was in fact  not
    a witness statement from the Appellant himself. Under cover  of  letter
    dated 31  January  2017  in  addition  to  the  Skeleton  Argument  the
    Appellant's representatives submitted only one further document - being
    the witness statement of a Mr George Adolina.  This  witness  statement
    gives evidence as to the fact of the relationship between the Appellant
    and  his  ex-wife,  and  also  says  something  to  confirm  that   the
    relationship broke down.  Mr Adolina identifies  that  he  remained  in
    touch  with  both  parties  to  the  marriage,  but  characterises  the
    relationship as being such that the Appellant and  his  former  partner
    "are not the best friends as they do no longer  speak  to  each  other"
    (paragraph 9).


11.  Mr  Bramble  argues  for  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  Judge's
    considerations at paragraph  14  in  respect  of  the  absence  of  any
    evidence that the Appellant "has attempted to make any contact with his
    ex wife at all" in respect of documentation  demonstrates  that  it  is
    more likely than not that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  aware  of
    the policy. In particular Mr Bramble identifies that the references  to
    "degrading treatment or... violence or other behaviour  on  his  wife's
    part" clearly echo some of the wording in the policy document. Further,
    it is submitted that the scheme of the Judge's fact-finding  is  almost
    congruent with the requirements of the policy  document.   Even  if  it
    were otherwise, Mr Bramble argues, that the Judge has in substance made
    findings which indicate that the 'trigger' within the  policy  document
    for the Respondent contacting the HMRC is quite simply not made out  on
    the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


12.  In contrast, Mr Otchie urges me to consider  that  the  fact  that  the
    relationship had broken  down  in  circumstances  of  the  ex-partner's
    infidelity, together with the supporting evidence of the witness to the
    effect that the couple no longer spoke, was such as  to  indicate  that
    the Appellant need not be required to make any more  effort  to  obtain
    documents than he did -  which  in  substance  was  essentially  to  go
    through the materials to which he had access to in the couple's storage
    facility.


13.  In my judgment it is abundantly clear that  the  materials  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge supported the findings at paragraph 14 of her
    Decision.  Indeed, I do not understand in terms that  it  is  suggested
    that the Judge fell into material error of law  with  regard  to  those
    findings of fact, or that it is  argued  that  the  Judge  in  any  way
    misunderstood the evidence.  I do not accept the  submission  that  the
    evidence of Mr Adolina was sufficient to demonstrate that the Appellant
    need not  make  any  more  effort  to  provide  documentation  and  was
    entitled, in effect, to allow the agencies of the state to do his  work
    for him.  In this context I remind myself that  the  policy  emphasises
    that in the ordinary course of events the responsibility  on  providing
    necessary proof rests with the applicant.  Moreover it seems to me that
    in circumstances  where  there  is  absolutely  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant took any steps to contact his former partner in  relation  to
    obtaining documentation - not even through the offices of their  mutual
    friend - it cannot be said that the policy is engaged.


14.  In all such circumstances I do not accept that  there  was  any  error,
    far less material error, on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    in failing to direct that  the  HMRC  should  be  required  to  provide
    documents in relation to the partner's financial circumstances.


15.   One  further  matter  has  been  emphasised  during  the   course   of
    submissions, rooted in paragraph 5 of the grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal.  There were  documents  filed  in
    support of the Appellant's application indicating that  his  ex-partner
    had been a student at the London  Guildhall  College  on  courses  from
    September 2014 to July 2015 and September 2015 to  July  2016.   It  is
    argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge appears  to  have  overlooked
    this evidence.  I acknowledge that there is no finding  in  respect  of
    these documents, and it may well be that in the circumstances the Judge
    was in factual error to suggest that there was  no  evidence  that  the
    partner had been a 'qualified person' at the date of  divorce  -  which
    being 10 March 2016 would have fallen within the period of the academic
    year 2015/2016.  However it seems to me that that is not sufficient  to
    avail the Appellant in the proceedings before me.  Study at these times
    does not fill all of the relevant gaps in the evidence  in  respect  of
    the Appellant's ex-partner's exercise of Treaty rights.   Moreover,  as
    the  Respondent  identifies  in  the  Rule  24  response,   there   was
    additionally a lack of any supporting evidence as to  the  presence  of
    comprehensive  sickness  insurance  during  such  periods.   In   those
    circumstances I am not persuaded that any oversight in respect  of  the
    documents relating to study amount to a material error on the  part  of
    the Judge.


16.  The Appellant is perhaps not without remedy because it is  always  open
    to him to reapply for a  permanent  residence  card  on  the  basis  of
    retained right of residence.  In this context whilst I note that  Judge
    Chapman expressed the tentative view that perhaps  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McGavin was unaware of the policy,  it  seems  to  me  abundantly
    clear that the Appellant and his then  advisors  were  unaware  of  the
    policy.  There is absolutely nothing in the materials presented to  the
    Respondent in the course of the application to  indicate  that  he  was
    aware that any possible difficulties he might claim to be  experiencing
    could be remedied with the assistance of the Respondent.  Nor  was  any
    reference to the policy made in the grounds to the First-tier Tribunal,
    or in any of the materials before the First-tier Tribunal  -  including
    the Skeleton Argument.  Yet further, no reference  to  the  policy  was
    made in the application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     It was only upon Judge Chapman's involvement that the policy became  a
    matter relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  at  all.  Moreover,  there  is
    substance to Mr Bramble's submission that the  Judge  appears  to  have
    been alert to the terms of the policy even if  she  did  not  expressly
    identify the policy in her Decision.  Be that as it may, on its face it
    seems to me more likely than not that the Appellant  and  his  advisors
    were unaware of the policy, and necessarily therefore did not  consider
    preparing and presenting the application and appeal with  reference  to
    the requirements of the policy.  The Appellant  now  is  aware  of  the
    policy.  It is a matter for him and his advisors as to  what  he  might
    wish to do with that knowledge going forwards and I say no  further  on
    it.


Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
    of law and accordingly stands.


18.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


19.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 26 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

