
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: EA/14060/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2018                           |On 16 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Blessing Ekwutos Nwankwo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent did not appear and was not
represented.
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent  (hereinafter
    "the claimant") against the decision of the Secretary of State refusing
    her a residence card as the wife of an EEA national.   The  appeal  was
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal but the Secretary of State was given
    permission to appeal by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of
    State alleges, in effect, that there were procedural irregularities  by
    the First-tier Tribunal. Particularly the First-tier Tribunal, wrongly,
    according to the Secretary of State, refused to allow the Secretary  of
    State to raise other matters in addition to those already raised before
    the hearing, including concerns about the alleged  relationship  relied
    upon in the application for the residence card.

 2. The day before the hearing  the  claimant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
    Tribunal (copy to the Presenting Officers  Unit)  and  said  they  were
    instructed to "request for a withdrawal  of  the  appeal".  The  letter
    continued that the reason for the application  was  that  the  claimant
    "has now decided to re-submit a fresh application for the UK  residence
    card".     Given this letter it is not surprising that the claimant did
    not attend before me.  She plainly knows  about  the  hearing  and  has
    instructed  solicitors  about  it.   It  is  therefore  appropriate  to
    continue in her absence and make the obvious comment  that  the  appeal
    before me is not one in which she is in any position to withdraw.   The
    appeal is brought by the Secretary of State.

 3. The Tribunal Procedure Rules under "Rule 17" are slightly novel in that
    they do not provide for a litigant to be able to  withdraw  an  appeal,
    but the litigant can with the permission of  the  Tribunal  withdraw  a
    case.  I interpret this letter as a request to withdraw the case.   The
    claimant clearly does not wish to advance anything,  neither  does  she
    wish to defend the decision because she wants it out of the way to make
    a fresh application.  I permit her to withdraw  her  case  which  means
    that the  Secretary  of  State's  case  before  me  is  unopposed.   On
    reflection this is probably the position she would be in if she had not
    written a letter, but I may have been confused about her absence.

 4. In the circumstances I have no hesitation in saying that the First-tier
    Tribunal erred  in  law.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  should  not  have
    prevented  the  Secretary  of  State  from  raising  further   grounds.
    Possibly the First-tier Tribunal  should  have  adjourned  to  let  the
    claimant deal with them, but it is basic immigration law going back  as
    far as the decision in R v IAT and another ex parte Kwok On Tong [1981]
    Imm AR 214 that appeal under the rules cannot  be  allowed  unless  the
    Tribunal is satisfied that  all  of  the  points  necessary  have  been
    resolved in the  appellant's  (or  claimant's)  favour.  Even  if  that
    decision is not strictly relevant in a case under the EEA Regulations I
    am satisfied that on  these  facts  the  Respondent  should  have  been
    allowed to introduce a potentially highly pertinent new point.

 5. In short the Secretary of State's grounds, which are not  opposed,  are
    made out.

 6. I think it is right that I make it plain that  the  criticisms  of  the
    decision do not go to the credit of the claimant but to the conduct  of
    the hearing. No findings are preserved and there  is  nothing  in  this
    decision that illuminates any subsequent application that the  claimant
    might make.

 7. Nevertheless I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.  I set aside the decision  and  I  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
    State.







 8. Notice of Decision

    The First-tier Tribunal should not have  allowed  the  appeal.   I  set
    aside its decision and I substitute a decision  dismissing  the  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 8 January 2019                 |

