
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: EA/14413/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 November 2017                  |On 20 December 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                MIKDAM JASIM
                         (anonymity order not made)

                                                                Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondents:   Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Myers  (hereinafter  "the  judge")  promulgated  on  23
    February 2017, brought with the permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Alis granted on 12 September 2017.

2.    The appellant is a citizen  of  Denmark  born  on  27  July  1969.  He
    entered the United Kingdom on 7 October 2010. On 3  September  2015  he
    applied for permanent residence on the basis of having  completed  five
    years' residence in the United  Kingdom  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006 (as they then were). The application was  refused  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  7
    December 2016, and a Notice of Immigration Decision was issued  on  the
    same date.

3.    The appellant appealed to the IAC. The appeal  was  dismissed  by  the
    judge for reasons set out in her decision.

4.    The appellant now seeks to challenge the conclusions of the judge.

Consideration

5.    The  key  issue  before  the  judge  was  whether  the  appellant  has
    established that he has been exercising treaty rights for a  continuous
    period of five-years. The judge determined the  appeal  on  the  papers
    upon the appellant's request. The judge referred to the guidance  notes
    (unspecified)  for  persons  applying  for  permanent  residence  which
    identified the documents that "must" be submitted with the application.
    The judge observed the documents should take the form of an  employment
    letter, wage slips, bank statements and  P60's.  The  judge  noted  the
    appellant provided a P45 and P60 for Aya UK Ltd, payslips  for  M  &  J
    Autos, a schedule of his employment from HMRC  showing  his  employment
    from 2010 to 2016 and a letter from M & J Autos  stating  that  he  has
    been in employment with them since 1 July 2013 to  present.  While  the
    judge found this evidence was sufficient to cover the period from  2013
    to 2016, she was not satisfied that the HMRC printout was sufficient to
    cover the period from 1 May 2012 to 30 June 2013,  essentially  because
    the appellant had not submitted all the required evidence in accordance
    with guidance. Accordingly, she dismissed the appeal.

6.    The appellant  obtained  permission  to  appeal  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to properly consider the  evidence  from  HMRC  confirming  his
    employment.

7.    The matter thus comes before me to determine whether the  judge  erred
    in law. At the hearing  the  appellant  did  not  appear  and  was  not
    represented. A Notice of Hearing informing the appellant of  the  date,
    time and venue of the hearing was effectively served and so I proceeded
    to hear the appeal in his absence. After some  discussion  between  the
    Tribunal and Mr Jarvis, he acknowledged that the judge was not bound by
    the guidance and I announced by decision that  I  considered  that  the
    judge erred in law by  setting  too  high  a  test  in  requiring  bank
    statements and  wage  slips  to  be  submitted  as  stipulated  in  the
    guidance, which was not binding on her. That error in her approach  led
    to a failure to properly consider the letter from HMRC of  15  December
    2016 identifying the appellant's sources of income between year  ending
    April 2011 and April 2016. While I do not say that the decision reached
    by the judge is ultimately wrong, it is the manner and route  by  which
    that conclusion has been reached which is flawed.

8.    Mr Jarvis invited me to remake the  decision  on  the  evidence  filed
    with the Tribunal and there was no reason not to do so.

9.    In remaking the decision, I remind myself that the burden of proof  is
    on  the  appellant  to  establish  that  he  is,  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities, entitled to a permanent residence card as at the date of
    hearing.

10.   The appellant says that he qualifies  for  permanent  residence  as  a
    worker. In his application form the period that he relies upon is  from
    15 March 2011 to the present date.  There  is  no  evidence  before  me
    demonstrating how the Appellant  satisfies  regulation  6  of  the  EEA
    Regulations post April 2016. The evidence  is  limited  to  the  period
    April 2011 to April 2016 and is the period that I  have  assessed.  The
    appellant relies on the letter from HMRC which identifies  his  sources
    of income between the year ending April 2011 to April 2016. While  that
    evidence  is  sufficient   to   show   that   the   appellant   was   a
    jobseeker/worker for the year ending April 2011 and  2013  to  2016,  I
    agree with Mr Jarvis that there are difficulties with the evidence  for
    the year ending April 2012. The HMRC letter does not show  any  sources
    of income for the 2011 to 2012 tax year and this evidence does not  sit
    comfortably with a P60 for the  same  period  which  purports  to  show
    earnings from employment.

11.   In the circumstances,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  I  can  place  any
    reliance on the P60 as evidence of the  Appellant's  economic  activity
    for that period and there thus remains a lacuna  in  the  evidence  and
    thereby a gap in the five-year period  that  remains  unaccounted  for.
    Accordingly, the appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  he  has  been
    exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years and  the
    appeal is therefore bound to fail.

Notice of Decision

12.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and is set aside.

13.   I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal.

No anonymity order is sought or made.


Signed:          Date: 10 December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


