
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/00579/2020 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 August 2020                  |On 26 August 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                            ALBA DAVID OGUNSAKIN

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)


1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria with date of birth given  as  8.3.58,
   has appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission against  the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  24.3.20,  dismissing  his  appeal
   against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 24.12.19, to refuse
   his application for leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

2. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals'  Practice
   Direction, Pilot Practice  Direction:  Contingency  Arrangements  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal,  to  the  UTIAC  Presidential
   Guidance Note No 1 of 2020, Arrangements during  the  COVID-19  pandemic,
   and to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (as
   amended).

3. Permission was  granted  on  24.4.20.  The  Upper  Tribunal  subsequently
   issued directions proposing that  the  error  of  law  issue  be  decided
   without a hearing, providing for written submissions. These were sent  to
   the parties by email on 17.6.20, to the addresses provided, warning  that
   on expiry of the deadline the matter would be referred back to  an  Upper
   Tribunal Judge, whether  or  not  the  parties  have  complied  with  the
   directions. On 6.7.20 the appellant's representatives emailed, confirming
   receipt of the directions but stating that they had not received  a  copy
   of the decision granting  permission.  This  was  forwarded  to  them  by
   response within a few minutes. There has been no further response  either
   within the deadline or in fact at all from either Aminu Aminu Solicitors,
   the appellant's listed representatives, and no response at all  from  the
   Home  Office.  The  matter  has,  therefore,  been  referred  to  me  for
   consideration.

4. I have taken account of any view expressed by the parties as  to  whether
   to hold a hearing and the form of such a hearing. In fact, neither  party
   has opposed the error of law issue being resolved on the papers without a
   hearing. In the circumstances I am satisfied the the  parties  have  each
   had ample opportunity to make any relevant submissions and conclude  that
   it is consistent with the Tribunal's overriding duty to deal  with  cases
   fairly and justly to proceed to  determine  this  appeal  on  the  papers
   without a hearing.

5. I have carefully considered the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   dismissing the appeal in the light of  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission, the grant of permission, and the original grounds  of  appeal
   to the First-tier Tribunal.

6. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out below, I find  no  error
   of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

7. The appellant relied on private and family life in the UK. He arrived  in
   the UK as a student in 2004, with leave subsequently  extended  to  2010.
   Since then, he has made three out of time applications for further  leave
   to remain, once in 2015, and twice  in  2019,  all  of  which  have  been
   refused. It follows that he is an illegal overstayer. He has  no  partner
   or child in the UK but relied on private life developed  in  the  UK,  to
   include family life with his second  cousin,  with  whom  he  lives.  His
   health is deteriorating and he  is  partially  sighted,  relying  on  his
   cousin's support.  He has  a  complex  eye  condition  and  asserts  that
   treatment would not be accessible to him in Nigeria. With  poor  eyesight
   and aged over 60, he fears he would be unlikely to find employment.

8. From [11] of the decision it appears that the appellant's  representative
   at the appeal hearing argued that there were insurmountable obstacles  to
   his return to Nigeria, given the poor standard of health  care  available
   in Nigeria and  that  his  cousin  would  not  be  able  to  continue  to
   financially assist him there. It was submitted that the case fell  within
   article 3 ECHR and the appeal should be allowed.

9. As is clear from [12] of the  decision,  there  was  nothing  within  the
   evidence put before the First-tier Tribunal to demonstrate that, although
   accommodation and financial support  was  provided  by  his  cousin,  the
   appellant's relationship with  her  amounted  to  more  than  the  normal
   emotional ties to be expected between adult relatives.  It  follows  that
   article 8 ECHR could not be engaged in respect of family life.

10. The judge went on to address private life from  [13]  onwards,  pointing
   out the appellant's unlawful immigration status for  over  10  years.  At
   [14] the judge found, for the reasons cogently set out, that he could not
   meet the  requirement  of  very  significant  obstacles  under  paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

11. As the judge noted at [15] of  the  decision,  the  main  focus  of  the
   appeal and the submissions on the appellant's behalf  was  on  article  3
   ECHR and the appellant's medical condition. Despite the adoption  of  the
   Paposhvili threshold by the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe),  [2020]  UKSC
   17, it is beyond argument that the appellant's  condition  comes  nowhere
   near the high threshold required for a medical article 3 claim. The judge
   found at [16] that even  though  access  to  healthcare  in  Nigeria  was
   inferior to that available in the UK, the appellant had not shown that he
   was in imminent danger of a serious decline in his health  on  return  to
   Nigeria. The respondent had demonstrated that medical treatment  for  the
   appellant's condition was available in Nigeria.

12.  The  grounds  complain  that  the   judge   failed   to   address   the
   proportionality of the refusal decision by  applying  the  R  (Razgar)  v
   Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  UKHKL  27  stepped
   approach. It is correct that the judge concentrated on article 3 but that
   was because article 3 was the main focus of the appellant's case. As  the
   judge found that there was no family life sufficient to engage article  8
   ECHR, it follows that the appeal would necessarily  have  failed  at  the
   first Razgar test.

13. In relation to private life, the appellant failed  to  demonstrate  that
   he met the requirements of the Rules to show very  significant  obstacles
   to his integration in Nigeria, and adequate  reasoning  is  provided  for
   this conclusion. Even if the judge had gone on to consider  private  life
   outside the Rules pursuant to article 8 ECHR, I  am  satisfied  that  the
   appeal would inevitably still have been dismissed. As the  judge  pointed
   out, the appellant's  immigration  status  is  unlawful.  It  follows  by
   section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  that
   little weight is to be given to such private life in the  proportionality
   balancing exercise. Given that the appellant could not meet the Rules, it
   would only be  where  there  were  compelling  circumstances  sufficient,
   exceptionally, to justify granting leave to remain outside the  Rules  on
   the basis that otherwise the decision would be  unjustifiably  harsh.  It
   would be a rare case where article 8 could  succeed  on  medical  grounds
   where it failed on article 3 grounds; this is not such a  rare  case.  In
   reality, even taking the appellant's case  at  its  highest,  there  were
   insufficient compelling  reasons  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
   enforcing immigration control.

14. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA  Civ  522  at  [12],  LJ  McCombe  stated,
   "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when
   a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining  why  he  has
   reached a particular decision, of seeking  to  burrow  out  industriously
   areas of evidence that have been less fully dealt with  than  others  and
   then to use this as a basis for saying the judge's  decision  is  legally
   flawed because it did not deal with a particular matter more fully. In my
   judgment, with respect, that is no basis on which  to  sustain  a  proper
   challenge to a judge's finding of fact." This is such  a  case.  Although
   the appellant's case was focused on article  3,  the  grounds  of  appeal
   attempt to challenge the decision on  an  issue  that  was  not  actively
   addressed because it was not actively pursued. In  this  regard,  I  note
   that the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal are  of  a  generic
   and entirely unparticularised type often  seen  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.
   Other than a bare pleading of reliance on articles 3 and 8 ECHR, there is
   no detail of the claim. The  appellant's  witness  statement  of  21.2.20
   focused on his medical condition and also argued  that  there  were  very
   significant  obstacles  to  integration  and  that  these   amounted   to
   exceptional circumstances. Outside of  those  issues,  the  statement  is
   virtually silent on any private life circumstances.

15. In the circumstances, whilst  I  accept  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   should have formally addressed the article 8 balancing exercise,  on  the
   particular facts of this case there are  no  factors  relied  on  by  the
   appellant that were not in fact considered and addressed  by  the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge in relation to the article 8 family  life  claim  and
   the very significant obstacles to integration claim in respect of private
   life. It follows that any error was not material to the  outcome  of  the
   appeal. Even if I had found an error and set the decision  aside,  it  is
   inevitable that it would have been remade by dismissing the appeal.



Decision

      There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal;

      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed;

      It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the
      appellant's appeal must stand as made.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       24 August 2020



        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




