
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00087/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 9 February 2018           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MISS JANELLE TAJUANNA ELLIS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Rahman, Counsel for Redfern Legal, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born  on  1  October  1997.   She
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 4 December  2015,
    refusing to grant her leave to enter the United Kingdom with a view  to
    settlement here as the minor dependent daughter of  Jannet  Gilling,  a
    person present in the United Kingdom with limited leave to remain  with
    a view to settlement, who the appellant  states  is  her  mother.   The
    appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Malone  on  27
    September 2017 and was allowed on human rights grounds  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 11 October 2017.


 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Boyes on 7  November  2017.
    The permission states that the grounds assert that the Judge  erred  in
    not following the principles and dictat of Devaseelan  and  that  these
    grounds are arguable.  Permission was granted on all grounds raised.


 4. There is a Rule 24 response.  This makes reference to a previous appeal
    relating to this appellant which was heard in the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    on 10 February 2015 by Immigration Judge Abebrese and was dismissed  on
    5 March 2015.  It was dismissed as it was found that  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules had not been met and that the refusal did  not
    amount to a breach of Article 8 of  ECHR.   The  response  states  that
    there is no material error of law as the Judge's findings were made  in
    accordance with the Devaseelan principles and were open to  the  First-
    Tier Judge, based on the evidence that was  before  him.   The  grounds
    state that it was open to  the  Judge  to  depart  from  IJ  Abebrese's
    findings relating to Ms Gilling's evidence about the abuse suffered  by
    the appellant at the hands of Mr Ellis, the lack of interest  shown  by
    Mr Ellis to the appellant, the condition of  the  accommodation  at  68
    Hanover Street, Kingston and Ms Gilling's sole responsibility  for  the
    appellant.  The response states that clear reasons are  given  for  the
    Judge's findings.  The response states that the guidance in  Devaseelan
    is that the first Judge's decision should always be the starting  point
    but is not binding on the second Judge.  The issues will differ because
    of the passage of time and the presentation of arguments  and  evidence
    that were not before the first Judge.  The Upper  Tribunal  has  stated
    that compelling new evidence may provide a good reason for  the  second
    Judge departing from an earlier finding  and  that  the  obligation  of
    every Judge is to independently assess each new application on its  own
    individual merits and that the first decision  should  not  impose  any
    unacceptable restrictions on the second Judge's  ability  to  make  the
    findings which he consciously believes to be right.

 5. The response states that the  material  facts  are  the  same  in  both
    appeals.  The response states that the second Judge had  a  significant
    amount of evidence before him that was not before the first  Judge  and
    which was material to his findings, including the appellant's statement
    of 24 May 2017, the witness statement of Stacey Wedderburn dated 26 May
    2017, objective country information, email correspondence  between  the
    appellant and her mother and  copies  of  information  relating  to  US
    Immigration  applications,  photographs  of  the  accommodation  at  68
    Hanover Street, Kingston and letters from the appellant's school.   The
    response states that it was not incumbent on the second Judge  to  seek
    an explanation as to why this evidence was not before the first  Judge.
    In any case some of it would not  have  been  available  as  the  first
    decision was dated 6 March 2015.  The response states that  the  second
    Judge made findings of fact that were supported  by  the  evidence  and
    provided sufficient reasons for showing why he accepted this  evidence.
    It states that the first Judge drew adverse inferences due to the  lack
    of evidence.  The second Judge found that he was able  to  depart  from
    the first Judge's finding relating to the abuse of the appellant by her
    father as he had vastly more  material  before  him,  allowing  him  to
    better assess the claim that the appellant was abused  by  her  father.
    The second Judge accepts the lack of interest in the appellant  by  her
    father because of the updated statement of Stacey  Wedderburn  and  the
    evidence about the domestic abuse. There are also  photographs  of  the
    property the appellant is staying in, in Kingston.  Additional evidence
    was also supplied relating to  sole  responsibility  and  the  response
    states that if the second Judge's decision is read as a whole there are
    a number of good reasons for departing from the first Judge's  findings
    and accepting the sponsor's evidence.

 6. I was asked to find that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision.


The Hearing


 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is relying on the  grounds  of
    appeal and the grant of permission.  I was referred to paragraph 61  of
    the decision in which the Judge states that much of the evidence before
    him had not been before the first Judge.  In this paragraph  the  Judge
    also states that the appellant's  circumstances  in  Jamaica  have  not
    changed since the date of the first decision.  He states  that  because
    much of the evidence was not before the first Judge this has led him to
    conclude that he can depart from the first Judge's  findings  and  that
    there are serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which
    make the appellant's exclusion from  the  United  Kingdom  undesirable.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge does not ask  why  this
    evidence was not before the first Judge,  as  much  of  the  additional
    evidence before him was available at the date of the first hearing.  He
    submitted that as this evidence was available but not before the  first
    Judge, this diminishes the weight that  should  be  given  to  it.   He
    submitted that the Judge has not given sufficient reasons as to why  he
    is departing from the first Judge's decision.

 8. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the second Judge has  analysed
    all the evidence before him and has made an assessment  based  on  this
    evidence.  She  submitted  that  at  the  first  hearing  before  Judge
    Abebrese, the appellant had not had proper legal advice.


 9. She submitted that the sponsor, after seeing the refusal of  the  first
    application,  addressed  the  shortcomings  in  it  when   the   second
    application was made.  She submitted that the first Judge did not  find
    in the appellant's favour because of a lack  of  evidence.  Because  of
    this the appellant had not proven her case to  the  standard  required,
    being the balance of probabilities, but with  the  additional  evidence
    the appellant has proven her case on the balance of probabilities.


10. I was asked to find that there is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    second Judge's decision and that adequate reasons have  been  given  by
    him for going against the first Judge's decision.

Decision and Reasons

11. I have carefully considered Judge  Abebrese's  decision.   Counsel  has
    stated that the reason the application was refused the first  time  was
    that there was a lack of evidence before the Judge.   The  first  Judge
    points out that  financial  support  alone  does  not  constitute  sole
    responsibility. He makes reference to the sponsor believing that it  is
    in the appellant's best interests to live in the UK but he  finds  that
    personal  choice  does  not  constitute  a   serious   and   compelling
    consideration.  He makes reference to witness statements and  a  letter
    of  support  from  Stacey  Wedderburn,  letters  from  the  school  the
    appellant attends and evidence relating to  accommodation.   The  first
    Judge also notes that paragraph 301 of the Rules cannot be satisfied as
    the sponsor only has discretionary leave.  He refers to the  fact  that
    the appellant is now living with a relative who is going to America and
    that she has been subjected to abuse by  her  father.   He  also  makes
    reference to the current conditions the  appellant  is  living  in  and
    notes that she will have no one to look after  her  except  her  father
    who, it is stated, has abused her.  He also refers  to  emails  between
    the appellant and her mother and telephone calls.  He refers  to  there
    being no evidence of any kind of abuse by her father and no evidence of
    the appellant's relatives making an application to reside  in  America.
    Judge Abebrese has given full reasons for why he does  not  find  there
    would be grave consequences if  this  application  is  refused.   Judge
    Abebrese finds that he has not been provided  with  evidence  that  the
    most important decisions in this appellant's life have  been  taken  by
    the sponsor.  In reaching his decision he has noted that  there  is  no
    evidence about this from the school and that  financial  assistance  on
    its own is not sufficient.

12. Judge Abebrese finds that the sponsor's immigration history is relevant
    when  considering  public  interest.  The  sponsor  has  a   precarious
    immigration history. He also finds that the fact that the terms of  the
    Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied is an important consideration.


13. Judge Abebrese also took into consideration Section  55  and  the  best
    interests of children.  He finds  that  the  appellant  is  settled  in
    Jamaica and there are people there she can rely on.  He makes reference
    to her adult sister who can support her. He therefore finds that  there
    is no credible evidence that there are compelling  circumstances  which
    would render the appellant to be vulnerable as a child.  He also  notes
    that the sponsor is in a position to visit the appellant and  does  not
    have the status to support her  as  a  settled  person  in  the  United
    Kingdom.


14. Judge Abebrese has given proper reasons for his decision.

15. I have then carefully  considered  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    Malone's decision and the evidence before him.


16. At paragraph 9 of his decision he states "I found Ms Gilling to  be  an
    honest and reliable witness.  I accept her oral and written evidence as
    I do the written evidence of the appellant and Ms  Wedderburn".  First-
    Tier Judge Malone refers to Judge Abebrese's decision and  states  that
    he is taking this as his starting point and to depart from his decision
    he will require good reasons.  He does not  seem  to  have  taken  into
    account Ms Gilling's precarious immigration history.

17. It is clear that the sponsor has made  much  more  of  the  appellant's
    father's character than she did at the hearing before  Judge  Abebrese.
    Counsel submitted to me that when the sponsor saw  the  first  decision
    she put together additional evidence but it seems  that  she  may  have
    exaggerated the situation because  of  what  is  stated  in  the  first
    decision. If her father's character and behaviour were so  abusive  why
    was this not made more of at the first  hearing?  It  should  not  have
    taken the decision in the appellant's appeal before this  was  properly
    explained.

18. The sponsor came to the United Kingdom in November 2001.  At  paragraph
    19 of Judge Malone's decision he states that she  left  Jamaica  on  23
    November 2011. This is not the case.  At paragraph 20 of Judge Malone's
    decision he states that Ms Gilling's mother became unable to look after
    the children and travelled to the USA so in October 2004 Ms Gilling let
    the children go to stay with their father, Mr Kenneth Ellis.  This begs
    the question of why Ms Gilling allowed the appellant to  move  in  with
    her  father  given  her  evidence  about  his  abusive  behaviour.  The
    additional evidence before Judge Malone  appears  to  consist  of  some
    photographs,  a  further  statement  from  the  appellant,  a   further
    statement from  Stacey  Wedderburn,  some  emails  and  some  objective
    evidence. What Judge Malone has done is accept this additional evidence
    on its face. I have to decide if the evidence was of such a  compelling
    nature that Judge Malone had to depart from Judge Abebrese's decision.

19. The sponsor states that she sends money to Jamaica  for  the  appellant
    and that is accepted by both Judges although Judge  Abebrese  finds  it
    not to be credible that Mr Ellis could not be bothered picking  up  the
    money.


20. Photographs have been supplied supposedly of 68  Hanover  Street  which
    Judge Malone has accepted.  At paragraph 46 of Judge Malone's  decision
    he states that the accommodation at 68 Hanover Street is  shocking  and
    it is unsuitable  for  human  occupation.  He  has  however  stated  at
    paragraph 61 that the appellant's circumstances have not changed  since
    the date of the first decision. It is true that Judge Abebrese had  not
    seen the photographs but  he  clearly  did  not  find  that  where  the
    appellant was living was unsuitable for human habitation. Judge  Malone
    has at paragraph 61 stated that the appellant's circumstances have  not
    changed since the date of the first decision. It  is  true  that  Judge
    Abebrese had not seen the photographs but he clearly did not find  that
    where the appellant was living was unsuitable for human habitation.


21. Based on what is before me I do not find that there was compelling  new
    evidence before Judge Malone.  I find that  he  has  not  given  proper
    weight to Judge Abebrese's decision. He refers to the wealth  of  other
    evidence before him compared to the  evidence  before  Judge  Abebrese.
    Much of the new evidence could have been produced at the first  hearing
    and no reasons have been given  for  why  it  was  not  produced.  This
    diminishes the weight it can be given. The evidence of the abuse is not
    based on medical reports but is based  on  statements  of  friends  and
    family of the appellant and could be said to be self serving and may be
    exaggerated. There was nothing before Judge  Malone  to  indicate  that
    there are compelling circumstances which  make  it  difficult  for  the
    appellant to remain in Jamaica where she has spent her whole  life  and
    has family and friends. The only significant evidence is the photograph
    of the house and the appellant has an older sister in Jamaica  she  can
    stay with.

22. I find that  there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  Judge  Malone's
    decision. Because of this his decision should be set  aside.   None  of
    his findings are to stand other than as a record of what  was  said  on
    that occasion.  The nature of the case is such that it  is  appropriate
    in terms of Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and  of  Practice
    Statement 7.2 to remit the case  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  for  an
    entirely fresh hearing.


23. The members of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are
    not to include Judge Malone or judge Abebrese.


24. No anonymity direction has been made.


Signed                                  Date 08 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
