
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: hu/00056/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2016                   |On 10 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     CM
                        (ANOMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni      (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J W H Law  hereinafter  "the Judge")
dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision   of
1 April 2015 which amounted to a refusal of a human rights claim.

2.    I have decided to continue an anonymity order previously made  by  the
First-tier Tribunal.  That is because the appellant has two minor  children
and it is not appropriate for any information about them to fall within  the
public domain.  Ms Rutherford sought  the  continuation  of  the  anonymity
order and Mrs Aboni did not oppose it.

3.    The facts of this case are a little unusual.  By  way  of  background,
the appellant is a national of Jamaica and he was born in  that  country  on
18 September 1970.  I am not entirely sure as to when he first came to the
UK or on what basis.  Perhaps that is something which,  in  due  course,  it
might be appropriate to clarify.  In any event, on  20 March 1998  he  was
sentenced, in the UK, to a period of four years of imprisonment having  been
convicted of possession of a Class A drug (Crack Cocaine) with  intent  to
supply.  According to the Home Office it is not clear whether the appellant
was actually deported from  the  UK  at  that  time  (though  presumably  he
himself knows) but there is no doubt that, one way or the other, he  did  go
back to Jamaica because on 22 November 2004 he applied for a visit visa to
come to the UK which was granted after an initial refusal and  a  successful
appeal.  He must have  returned  to  Jamaica  once  again  because  he  made
another entry clearance application from that country, as a family  visitor,
which was refused on 5 June 2006.  Again, however, he  was  successful  on
appeal.  He then embarked upon a relationship with a person I  shall  simply
refer to as JC and, on 8 September 2006, she gave birth to their daughter.
He married JC on 24 May 2007 and an application for leave to remain, on the
basis of that marriage, was made and refused.  However, once again,  he  was
successful on appeal.  A son was born  to  the  couple  on  10 April 2010.
Since his last successful appeal had resulted in a  grant  of  only  limited
leave to remain he made an extension for further leave  on  14 March 2011.
However, it appears that, at that point, the Secretary of State realised  he
had previously offended as noted above. A grant of  discretionary  leave  to
take him up to 24 August 2014 was given.  That would  seem  to  have  been
given on the basis of the relationship with JC and the children.  It  is  to
be noted that the decision maker who granted leave did not make  a  referral
to the "Criminal Casework team".

4.    The relationship with JC  ran  into  difficulties  and  it  would  now
appear to be at an end.  Nevertheless, shortly prior to the  expiry  of  the
discretionary leave, the appellant made an application for further leave  on
human rights grounds.  In the written application it was  asserted  that  he
continued to play an active role in the lives of his  children  despite  his
separation from JC.  Prior to the respondent dealing with that  application,
though, it was decided to make a deportation order in respect  of  him  such
decision being taken on 30 January 2015.  That was on  the  basis  of  the
above offending.  The Secretary of State then went on to make  the  decision
of 1 April 2015 in which heavy reliance was placed upon the offending.  It
was the appellant's appeal against that decision which led  to  the Judge's
dismissal of his appeal.  The central issues  at  the  appeal  hearing  were
those relating to  his  relationship  to  the  children  and  his  offending
history.  The Judge had regard to the relevant Immigration Rules concerning
deportation and identified the issues in this way:

           "26.  Notwithstanding that he has two children who  are  British
           citizens under the age of 18, the appellant cannot succeed under
           paragraph 399(a)  since  his  1998  conviction  resulted  in  a
           sentence  of  four  years  imprisonment.   Likewise,  I   cannot
           consider a private life claim under paragraph 399A for the same
           reason, although in any event the appellant  could  not  satisfy
           that paragraph as he has not been lawfully resident  in  the  UK
           for 'most of his life'.  The issues are therefore whether he can
           succeed:  under  paragraph 398,  by  showing  that  the  public
           interest in deportation is outweighed by  factors  amounting  to
           'very compelling circumstances over and above those described in
           paragraphs 399 and 399A'.

           Under the amended section 117 of the 2002 Act, again by showing
           that there are 'very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
           those described in Exceptions 1 and 2'.

           27.   The requirement in both cases is therefore  to  show  very
           compelling circumstances 'over and above' the factors  on  which
           an appellant whose sentence was less than four years  can  rely,
           namely to show very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
           having a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  British
           citizen child under the age of 18 where it would be unduly harsh
           for that child to go with the appellant to the  foreign  country
           and also unduly harsh for that child to remain in the UK without
           the appellant."

5.    In considering the best interests  of  the  children  the  judge  said
this:

           "28.   The  appellant  has  said  in  his  statement  that   his
           relationship with the mother of his children finished two  years
           ago, i.e. in 2013.  I have therefore  considered  what  evidence
           there is of the appellant maintaining contact with his  children
           since that time.  Page 326 of the bundle is a letter  from  the
           children's  school  dated  17 April 2015,  stating  that  the
           appellant is 'known to the school.  He has permission to see the
           children after school and he attends many activities and  events
           that include the children such as football, meetings with  staff
           and after-school clubs'.

           29.   The next item in the bundle is  a  printout  of  the  text
           messages from the appellant's phone recording  his  requests  to
           the mother to see the children.  These cover the period  January
           to June 2015.  Judging from the number and tone of the messages
           sent by the appellant between 14 January and  16 January  that
           request to see the children was refused.  There is then  a  text
           from him on 24 February which begins 'why you don't want me  to
           see my kids ...'.  The mother replied at 1.34pm on 28 February
           stating that the appellant could pick the children up  the  same
           day, but he had to return  them  by  5pm.   Subsequent  messages
           appear to show a greater measure of agreement to  the  appellant
           seeing his children.

           30.   At page 334 is an  unverified  list  of  dates  when  the
           appellant states that he has had contact with his children.   It
           refers to four school visits in  January 2015  and  eight  home
           visits between February and April 2015.  There  are  then  five
           receipts  for  items  which  appear  to  be   children's   toys,
           presumably presents bought for the children.  These are followed
           by greetings cards and then photographs of the children, in some
           of which the appellant is also present."

6.    As to his conclusions drawn from the evidence before  him,  the Judge
went on to say this:

           "33.  In view of the evidence  relating  to  this  issue,  I  am
           satisfied on balance that the appellant does have a genuine  and
           subsisting relationship with his children."

and then:

           "35.  I find that the best interests of the appellant's children
           lie in remaining in the UK with their mother  as  their  primary
           carer.  On the available evidence, which covers  only  the  last
           six months and is unsupported by the  views  of  the  children's
           mother or an independent social worker, I am not satisfied  that
           it is necessarily in their best interests for the  appellant  to
           continue seeing them under  haphazard  and  irregular  basis  of
           recent months, which may only  be  unsettling  for  them.   With
           regard to the financial position, I have incomplete  information
           as to how their financial needs are currently met, so it has not
           been established that if the money being paid by the  appellants
           were to stop that they would be disadvantaged by that."

7.    The Judge then went on to  deal  with  the  fact  that,  despite  the
previous offending history, the respondent  had  nevertheless  seen  fit  to
grant him discretionary leave in the past. As to that, he said:

           "41.  The remaining  issue  is  the  respondent's  failure  when
           considering the application made in March 2011 to identify that
           the applicant was someone whose case should be referred  to  the
           Criminal Casework team.  As Ms Rutherford put it, it  might  be
           said that it is hard to  see  why  the  public  interest  should
           require his deportation now, when  it  seems  that  it  was  not
           required in 2011.  However, the fact that  his  application  was
           not referred to the Criminal Casework team was a  mistake,  with
           the result that no consideration was given to whether the public
           interest required deportation or not.  That is very different in
           my view from the position which the appellant would now be in if
           a conscious assessment of all the facts of  the  case  had  been
           made by the respondent in 2011 and a decision had  been  reached
           that the public interest did not require deportation."

8.    The Judge went on to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

9.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  sought,  essentially,
on the basis that the Judge had erred in failing to adequately consider and
reason the section 55 issues and  had  also  erred  in  characterising  the
decision to grant discretionary leave as a "mistake" bearing  in  mind  that
the decision had been taken in knowledge of the previous offending  history.


10.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  a  deputy Judge  of   the
Upper Tribunal in these terms:

           "It is arguable that the Judge erred by not taking into account
           when considering the public interest  in  deportation  that  the
           respondent in 2011 chose to take no action to deport him and  in
           fact granted him discretionary leave to remain on the  basis  of
           his family life in the UK.  This may accordingly not have been a
           mistaken failure by the  respondent  to  act  in  that  she  had
           arguably granted him  discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  full
           knowledge of the facts.

           Moreover, having found that there is a  genuine  and  subsisting
           parental relationship there was  arguably  no  evidence  to  the
           contrary that it remained in the children's  best  interests  to
           continue to have contact  with  their  father.   The Judge  had
           arguably not been precluded  from  making  a  finding  that  the
           appellant's removal would be unduly  harsh  on  the  basis  that
           neither  his  former  partner  nor  the  children  had  provided
           evidence."

11.   Permission having  been  granted,  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that consideration  could  be  given  to  the
issue of whether the Judge had, indeed, erred  in  law  and,  if  so,  what
should follow.  Representation at that hearing was as stated above and I  am
grateful to each representative.  Both made oral submissions  which  I  have
fully taken into account.

12.   I have decided (as I indicated to the representatives at the  hearing)
that the decision of the Judge, careful and thorough  as  it  was  in  many
ways, did contain material errors of law such that it has to be  set  aside.
In that context, whilst it certainly does not follow that the  Secretary  of
State having decided to  grant  discretionary  leave  in  2011  was  somehow
obligated to make a further a grant (and I do not think Ms Rutherford  even
attempted to go that far) I have decided that  it  was  not  sufficient  for
the Judge to say, as in effect  he  did,  that  since  there  had  been  an
apparent mistake on the part of the decision maker in 2011  in  failing  to
refer the case to the Criminal Casework team the  previous  grant,  on  that
account alone, was of no potential  significance.   The  position  seems  to
have been, as noted above, that the decision maker  who  had  granted  that
period of discretionary leave had been  aware  of  the  appellant's  serious
criminality (and it certainly was serious) but had nevertheless gone  on  to
grant leave despite it.  There is nothing to suggest that the appellant  has
subsequently reoffended.  It might be argued that as a  consequence  of  the
grant he has put down further roots in the UK.  It seems to me that, in  the
circumstances, the grant of discretionary leave  in  the  knowledge  of  the
offending was a matter which could not be completely discounted in  the  way
it was at least without further explanation.  It was something which had  at
least a degree of relevance to  the  balancing  exercise  which  had  to  be
undertaken under paragraph 398 of the Rules.   Accordingly,  there  was  an
error of law on the part of the Judge.

13.   As to the question of the  interests  of  the  children,  the Judge's
conclusion,  as  already  noted,  is  set  out  at  paragraph 35  of   the
determination.  Ms Rutherford attacks that passage  as  being  inadequately
reasoned bearing in  mind  that  there  was  some  evidence  of  his  having
maintained contact with his children and bearing in mind  the  finding  that
he does have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  them.   In  my
judgment the Judge was in error in simply relying upon what he described as
the "haphazard and irregular"  contact  in  recent  months  and  effectively
treating that as being decisive without  undertaking  a  broader  assessment
encompassing whether, in the long-term, it would be better for the  children
to have their father with them in the UK.  Of course, the Judge might  have
decided that even on such a broad  assessment  it  was  not  in  their  best
interests or that, even if it was, it did not avail  the  appellant  bearing
in mind, in particular, the "very compelling circumstances over  and  above"
requirement as contained within paragraph 398 of the Rules and section 117
of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.   Nevertheless,  it
seems to me right that there should have been a fuller assessment as to  the
interests of the children before  a  proper  decision  under  paragraph  398
could be made.

14.   It was in light of the above, therefore, that I decided to  set  aside
the Judge's decision.  Having heard from the representatives I also decided
that the proper course  in  this  case  would  be  remittal  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal bearing in mind that there will be  a  requirement  for  some
further fact-finding with respect to the interests of the children. I  have,
below, set out  some  directions  which  will  hopefully  aid  the  remaking
process.



Directions

A.    This appeal is remitted to the  First-tier Tribunal  for  a  complete
      rehearing.    Nothing   shall   be   preserved   from   the   previous
      determination.  The rehearing  shall  take  place  at  the  Birmingham
      Hearing Centre with a time estimate of  three  hours.   There  are  no
      interpreter requirements.

B.    The rehearing shall not be before Judge J W H Law.

C.    If either party wishes to  rely  upon  any  documentary  evidence  not
      previously filed with the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper Tribunal
      then such documentation should be lodged with the First-tier Tribunal
      at least five working days prior to the date which will be  fixed  for
      the hearing with copies simultaneously sent to the  other  party.   It
      should not be assumed that any documentation not filed  in  accordance
      with these directions will be admitted by the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  That decision is set aside.   The  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for the remaking of  the  decision  in  accordance  with  the
directions set out above.



Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RERSPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee award is paid or payable there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
