
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00086/2020 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Microsoft Teams            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th July 2021                            |On 28th July 2021             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                           GBENEKANU LEDORNU MPIGI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Mughal, instructed by Envoy Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)


    1. The hearing before me on 13th July 2021 took the form of a remote
       hearing using Microsoft Teams. Neither party objected.  The appellant
       joined the hearing remotely and was with his solicitor throughout.  I
       sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was addressed by the
       representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been if the
       parties had attended the hearing together.  I was satisfied: that no
       party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
       restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
       proportionate.  I was satisfied that it is in the interests of
       justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed
       with a remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions
       against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied
       that a remote hearing will ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and
       justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case,
       the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs
       and resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was
       satisfied that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
       proceedings.


    2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He first arrived in  the  UK
       on 27th September 2009, with leave to enter as a student  until  30th
       March 2011.  He has made a  number  of  successful  applications  for
       further leave to remain.  On 9th December 2018 he  applied  for,  and
       was granted, further leave to remain as a  student  valid  until  9th
       December 2019.  On 25th September 2019,  he  applied  for  indefinite
       leave to remain on the basis of long residence and  on  private  life
       grounds.  The application was refused by the respondent  for  reasons
       set out in a decision  dated  11th  December  2019.   The  respondent
       accepted the appellant  had  lawful  leave  to  remain  between  27th
       September 2009 and 11th December 2019.  The respondent said:


         "However during your 10 year period it is noted  that  you  had  an
         absence from the UK totalling 360 days. To  be  able  to  meet  the
         requirements of indefinite leave to remain  under  the  immigration
         rules for long residency, an applicant should not be out of the  UK
         for a single period of more than 180 days or a total  of  540  days
         over the period of 10 years. It is therefore decided  that  you  do
         not meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  detailed  in
         paragraph 276B.


         Where an applicant's absences exceed  that  of  the  required  days
         consideration is given to the reasoning. You have stated that  your
         extensive period outside of the UK was  for  research  purposes,  a
         research location that you had chosen and  therefore  this  is  not
         considered to be an exceptional circumstance."


    3. The appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Bagral  for  reasons  set  out  in  her  decision
       promulgated on 9th October 2020.


    4. The appellant relies upon  two  grounds  of  appeal.   The  appellant
       refers to paragraphs [33] and [36] of the decision  of  Judge  Bagral
       and claims the appellant's absence from the UK  was  consistent  with
       the terms of his Visa, (i.e. for the  completion  of  his  PhD).   At
       paragraph [5] of the Grounds for Review, reference is  made  to  'The
       Home Office Guidance on Long Residence  (Published  for  Home  Office
       Staff on 4 June 2020 version 2.0)' which is said to state:


         "Allowable absences


         Absences must be for a reason consistent with the original  purpose
         of entry to the UK, or for a serious or compelling reason,  in  the
         following categories....(none of which apply here)


         For all other categories, absences  must  be  consistent  with,  or
         connected to, the applicant sponsored or permitted  employment,  or
         the permitted economic activity being carried out in the UK  -  for
         example, business trips or short secondments."


    5. The appellant claims in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the  reasons
       provided by Judge Bagral are contrary to the guidance and  the  judge
       failed to fairly apply the guidance to the appellant's circumstances.




    6. Second, the appellant claims  Judge  Bagral  failed  to  have  proper
       regard to the policy statement of the then Chancellor  that  overseas
       research activity will count as residence in the UK for the  purposes
       of applying for settlement meaning  researchers  will  no  longer  be
       unfairly  penalised  for  time  spent   overseas   conducting   vital
       fieldwork.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on
       13th January 2021.  He said:


         "The judge correctly concluded that the appellant could not succeed
         under para 276B but in not taking into account this was a period of
         fieldwork, the judge arguably unreasonably discounted this  on  the
         basis that the appellant had chosen  his  research  topic  and  so,
         despite it being part of that topic, it had not been necessary  for
         him to undertake fieldwork abroad. The judges reasoning in para  33
         is arguably irrational and arguably fails to take into account  the
         substance of the respondent's policy set  out  at  para  5  of  the
         grounds. Ground 1 is, on that basis, arguable.


         Ground 2 is, perhaps, less persuasive based, as it is, upon a brief
         statement by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. I would not, however,
         exclude consideration of it."










The appeal before me


    8. Before me Mr Mughal referred to  paragraph  [5]  of  the  grounds  of
       appeal and the policy referred to.  He candidly accepts that was  not
       the guidance that was before the First-tier  Tribunal  (the  guidance
       that was before the Tribunal is listed at paragraph [11(vi)]  of  the
       decision) and that he and those that instruct him, have  been  unable
       to locate and provide a copy of  the  guidance  referred  to  in  the
       Grounds of Appeal for me to consider.  He submits  the  grounds  were
       settled by counsel, and counsel that settled the grounds has not been
       available to provide a copy of  the  policy  that  was  referred  to.
       Nevertheless, Mr Mughal provided the Tribunal with a  link  to  other
       guidance; 'Indefinite leave to remain: calculating continuous  period
       in UK, version  22.0  published  on  1st  December  2020'.   That  is
       guidance published for Home Office staff regarding the calculation of
       the continuous lawful period requirement for applicants applying  for
       settlement under various routes.  He referred to page  [10]  of  that
       guidance,  which  is  in  very  similar  terms,  under  the   heading
       'Allowable absences', to the guidance referred to in the  grounds  of
       appeal.  Mr Mughal submits the respondent's published guidance  makes
       provision for allowable absences where the absence is  for  a  reason
       consistent with the original purpose of entry to the UK, or for  some
       other serious or compelling reason.


    9. Mr Mughal submits the appellant  came  to  the  UK  to  commence  and
       conclude his education,  and  the  completion  of  his  PhD  required
       fieldwork abroad.  He candidly accepts that  the  published  guidance
       that he has drawn  my  attention  to,  expressly  provides  that  the
       guidance does not apply to the continuous period requirement in  long
       residence cases, but he  submits,  similar  principles  ought  to  be
       applied.  He submits  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  before  it  the
       documents from the University confirming the appellant  had  approval
       to undertake fieldwork in Nigeria.  I invited Mr Mughal  to  draw  my
       attention to the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal  to
       establish that the appellant had to  remain  in  Nigeria  throughout,
       uninterrupted, for the 360-day period between 31st May 2015  to  26th
       May 2016, to complete that fieldwork.  Initially, Mr Mughal submitted
       that his recollection  of  the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  the
       appellant claimed it was significantly expensive for the appellant to
       travel back and forth.  I turned to the Judge's record of proceedings
       which notes the following

         Q.   Did you have to be in Nigeria for fieldwork?

         A.   Yes

         Q.   Why?

         A.   I was using humans as part of my research. When you  apply  to
         the Ethics Committee of UCL  they  look  at  your  application  and
         factor in the time you applied for and approve it. It was  approved
         for 12 months.

         ...

         Q.   Could you have returned to the UK?

         A.   I had to be absent as it was  approved,  and  the  letter  was
         approved. The volume of my research requires me to be absent and if
         I returned without studying each piece of research I would miss out
         on the results expected

         ...

         Cross-Examination

         Q.   You chose to complete in Nigeria?

         A.   Yes. They look  at  your  application.  You  pass  through  an
         application. They approve it

         ...

         Q.   What evidence is there that you had to be there for a year?

         A.   The letter from UCL, the outcome of  my  PhD  which  Dr  Colin
         being the programme director.... wrote confirming that I had passed
         my PhD"


   10. Mr Mughal submits that at  paragraph  [33]  of  her  decision,  Judge
       Bagral irrationally concluded that the evidence does not sufficiently
       indicate that it was necessary for the appellant to  be  outside  the
       jurisdiction for 12  months  in  order  to  complete  his  PhD.   The
       appellant's perception was that it was necessary for the appellant to
       be outside the UK for a period of 12 months.   The  appellant  relied
       upon his oral evidence.  Mr  Mughal  accepts  that  beyond  the  oral
       evidence of the appellant, there was nothing before the  Tribunal  to
       establish that the appellant had to remain outside  the  UK,  for  an
       uninterrupted period between 31st May 2015 and 26th May 2016.


   11. In reply, Mrs Aboni relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response  dated  1st
       February 2021 that has  been  filed  and  served  on  behalf  of  the
       respondent.  The  respondent  states  that  it  is  not  clear  which
       guidance is relied upon by the appellant  in  paragraph  [5]  of  the
       grounds of appeal.  The respondent refers to the  guidance  that  was
       before the FtT and listed at paragraph [11(vi)] of the decision.  The
       guidance refers to events that break continuous residence,  and  time
       spent outside the UK.  The guidance provides:


         "If the applicant has been absent from  the  UK  for  more  than  6
         months in  one  period  or  more  than  18  months  in  total,  the
         application  should  normally  be  refused.  However,  it  may   be
         appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  over  excess   absences   in
         compelling or compassionate circumstances, for  example  where  the
         applicant  was  prevented  from  returning  to   the   UK   through
         unavoidable circumstances.


         This must be decided at senior executive officer (SEO) level with a
         grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules being the  appropriate
         outcome."


   12. The guidance goes on to refer to factors that  should  be  considered
       when  assessing  whether  the   absence   was   for   compelling   or
       compassionate circumstances.  Mrs Aboni submits Upper Tribunal  Judge
       Grubb was misled into granting permission by  reference  to  guidance
       that the appellant now accepts, did not apply  because  the  guidance
       relied upon by the appellant expressly states, at  page  4,  that  it
       does not apply to a long residence cases.  Mrs Aboni  submits  it  is
       common ground that the appellant had been out of the UK for a  period
       of 360 days.  She submits when considering whether it is  appropriate
       to exercise discretion in respect of excess  absences  the  appellant
       would have to establish that he was prevented from returning  to  the
       UK through unavoidable circumstances such that there  are  compelling
       or compassionate circumstances.  She submits Judge Bagral referred to
       the respondent's guidance at paragraph [35] of her decision,  and  it
       was in the end, open to the Judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  for  the
       reasons given in her decision.


Discussion


   13. The parties agreed at the outset that the issue in the appeal  before
       me is a narrow one.  It is whether the conclusion  reached  by  Judge
       Bagral, at paragraph [33], is irrational.   It  is  now  accepted  on
       behalf of the appellant that the judge did not err in failing to take
       into account the substance of the  respondent's  policy  set  out  in
       paragraph [5] of the grounds of appeal, albeit Mr  Mughal  submits  a
       similar approach should nevertheless be adopted.  It is useful to set
       out paragraph [33] of the decision:


         "As part of his PHD studies there is no (sic)  that  the  appellant
         was required to undertake the field research.  I  agree  with  Miss
         Swindells that there is insufficient evidence that  that  generally
         could not have been conducted in the United Kingdom. The  appellant
         chose to undertake his research into the "social network  of  urban
         and peri-urban agriculture and the transformation of livelihoods in
         Port Harcourt City, Nigeria between 1999-2014".  I  agree  with  Mr
         Mughal that it was entirely proper for the appellant to be able  to
         choose his research topic and location. The appellant chose  to  go
         to Nigeria and the opening paragraph of the letter  from  Professor
         John Foreman approving the project, suggests that the  duration  of
         the project was one that was put forward by the  appellant  through
         Dr Simmonds for approval. The evidence seems to indicate therefore,
         that the appellant choose (sic) the subject  matter,  location  and
         duration of his project which was approved by the Ethics  Committee
         at UCL.  I agree with Miss Swindells, therefore, that the  evidence
         does not sufficiently  indicate  that  it  was  necessary  for  the
         appellant to be outside the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom  for
         12 months in order to undertake his research. Even  if  he  was,  a
         fact of the matter remains, it was the  appellant's  choice  to  be
         so."


   14. The decision must be read as a whole.  At paragraphs [17] to [22]  of
       her decision, Judge Bagral sets out  the  appellant's  evidence.   In
       particular, at paragraph [19], she refers  to  the  appellant's  oral
       evidence in which he confirmed  that  it  was  necessary  to  conduct
       fieldwork in Nigeria that was integral to his PhD. She also  referred
       to his evidence that he was required to remain  in  Nigeria  for  the
       research in order to collate the results. Having carefully considered
       the record of proceedings, I am quite satisfied that the evidence  is
       accurately recorded by Judge Bagral.  In fact, the appellant does not
       claim to the contrary.   Judge  Bagral  sets  out  her  findings  and
       conclusions at paragraphs [28] to [45] of her decision.  In  reaching
       her decision as to whether the requirements of paragraph 276B of  the
       immigration rules are met, Judge Bagral clearly  had  regard  to  the
       evidence relied upon by the appellant regarding the fieldwork that he
       was undertaking and the appellant's evidence regarding  his  absences
       from the UK.  It was in my judgement open to Judge Bagral to find  as
       she did at paragraph [33], that the evidence  does  not  sufficiently
       indicate that it was necessary for the appellant to  be  outside  the
       jurisdiction of  the  United  Kingdom  for  12  months  in  order  to
       undertake his research.  That is a finding that is  in  my  judgement
       neither unreasonable nor irrational.  In reaching her decision, Judge
       Bagral also considered, at [35], whether the  appellant's  choice  to
       pursue fieldwork in Nigeria for the duration, can  be  considered  an
       exceptional or compassionate circumstance. In reaching  her  decision
       she had due regard to the respondent's guidance that the Tribunal was
       referred to.


   15. It was in my judgement open to Judge  Bagral  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant is unable to satisfy the requirements for indefinite  leave
       to remain on the grounds of long residence for the reasons set out in
       her decision.


   16. Mr Mughal did not make any submissions before me regarding the second
       ground of appeal. That relates to the Chancellor of  the  Exchequer's
       spring statement of 2019.  That is addressed at paragraph [37] of the
       decision, and I am quite satisfied that it was open to  Judge  Bagral
       to  conclude  that  the  appellant  gains  no  assistance  from  that
       statement for the reasons she gave.


   17. The only ground of appeal available to the  appellant  was  that  the
       respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
       1998.


   18. In my judgement, read as a whole,  Judge  Bagri  reached  conclusions
       that were properly open to her on the evidence before  the  Tribunal.
       The Judge referred to the explanations given by the appellant for his
       absence from the UK. The findings made by  the  judge  were  findings
       that were properly open to the judge on the evidence  and  cannot  be
       said to be perverse, irrational or findings that were  not  supported
       by the evidence. The judgment of the Supreme  Court  in Agyarko  -v-
       SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 confirms that the ultimate issue  is  whether  a
       fair balance has  been  struck  between  the  individual  and  public
       interest, giving due weight to the provisions of  the  rules.    That
       was plainly the approach adopted by Judge Bagral at  paragraphs  [28]
       to [47] of her decision.


   19. At paragraph [45] of her decision Judge Bagral acknowledged that  her
       decision will come as a considerable disappointment to the appellant,
       and it is not a decision that she made lightly. She  noted  that  the
       appellant's desire to remain in the United Kingdom is  understandable
       and there is no  doubt  that  he  is  a  hard-working  and  assiduous
       individual whose efforts are to be commended.


   20. I entirely agree with the sentiments expressed by Judge Bagral.   The
       Court of Appeal in UT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 and  AA
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 urge restraint and confirm  the
       Upper Tribunal in the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by the
       Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, is not entitled  to  find
       an error of law or seek to remake the  decision  of  the  FtT  simply
       because it does not agree with  it,  or  because  it  thinks  it  can
       produce a better decision.  It forms no part of the Upper  Tribunal's
       function to seek to restrict the range of reasonable views which  may
       be reached by Judges of the FtT in the  value  judgements  they  must
       make, by substituting the views of  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  to  the
       outcome.


   21. It follows that in my judgement there is no material error of law  in
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bagri, and  I  dismiss  the
       appeal.


Notice of Decision


   22. The appeal is dismissed.


      V. Mandalia


      Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia                   14th July 2021



