
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
HU/00702/2018

                                                    HU/00698/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Bradford                         |Decision Promulgated            |
|On: 26th September 2018                    |On: 11th October 2018           |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     JM
                                     MT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Williams, Andrew Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:                Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are both nationals of India.  They  are  respectively  a
    husband and wife, who appeal against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge O'Hanlon) to dismiss their linked human rights appeals.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns minors who are subject to a Care Order by the Family
    Court. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellants  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The basis of the Appellants' linked human rights appeals was that  they
    have a family life in the United Kingdom with their  two  children,  C1
    born in 2000, and C2 born in 2006. Both of  these  children  have  been
    under the care of the local authority since 2013 when they were removed
    from the family home after their mother  was  convicted  of  assaulting
    them.  At the date of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellants' evidence was that they  enjoy  direct  contact  with  their
    daughters once a month, with the children being permitted  unsupervised
    overnight stay at their home.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal proceeded to assess  the  linked  human  rights
    appeals of the Appellants on the  basis  that  the  children  would  be
    remaining in the United Kingdom. The determination notes  at  paragraph
    35 that the children are subject a Care Order, and finds  at  paragraph
    36 that it would be in their best interests to remain in this  country.
    Although the Tribunal appears to accept (at end of paragraph  35)  that
    the Appellants have  a  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  their
    daughters, it did not accept  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove them from the jurisdiction and return them to  India.    Contact
    could  be  continued  via  'modern  means  of  communication'  such  as
    telephone.   On that basis the appeals are dismissed.

 5. The Appellants now challenge that decision on three related grounds:

              i) At the date of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
                 the Respondent was actively considering  whether  to  grant
                 the children leave to remain. The  Appellants  had  applied
                 for an adjournment, arguing that the Tribunal would not  be
                 able to make a reasoned Article 8 decision  in  respect  of
                 the parents if the fate of the children was unknown. It  is
                 submitted that the Tribunal erred in failing to grant  that
                 adjournment: reliance is  placed  on  the  decision  in  RS
                 (immigration and family  court  proceedings)  India  [2012]
                 UKUT 00218 (IAC)


             ii) The Judge erred in failing to have regard to the  terms  of
                 the Care Order which states that the children  should  have
                 some direct contact[1]  with  the  Appellants.  The  Family
                 Court had decided that this amount of direct contact was in
                 the girls' best  interests,  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                 failed in having regard to that;

            iii) The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to have regard  to
                 the procedural rights inherent in Article 8, ie  the  right
                 to  meaningfully  participate  in  care  proceedings.   The
                 argument had been put to the First-tier Tribunal and it  is
                 not addressed at all in the determination.

      Discussion and Findings

      Ground (i) : the application to adjourn

 6. Before me Mr Williams suggested a number reasons why it had been in the
    interests of justice for the First-tier Tribunal to adjourn.   He began
    with this.  The  background  to  his  application  had  been  that  the
    Appellants and their children had originally applied to the Home Office
    for leave to remain together. Leave had been refused at the  same  time
    and appeals lodged; the appeals were proceeding before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when the Respondent had withdrawn the decision in  respect  of
    the children. The position at the  date  of  the  appeal  before  Judge
    O'Hanlon was that the fresh decisions in respect of the  children  were
    outstanding. With this in mind Mr Williams had submitted that it  would
    be sensible - and fair - to  await  the  outcome  of  the  Respondent's
    review until proceeding to consider the position of the  children.   Mr
    Williams placed reliance on  the  decision  in  RS  (immigration/family
    court liason: outcome) [2013] UKUT 00082 (IAC).


 7.  Judge  O'Hanlon  refused  the  adjournment  for  reasons  set  out  at
    paragraphs 14-18 of  the  determination.  In  essence,  Judge  O'Hanlon
    considered that there was sufficient information before the Tribunal to
    justly determine the appeal.   In  making  its  findings  the  Tribunal
    proceeded on the basis that the children  would  be  remaining  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 8. I am unable to understand why the approach of the  Tribunal  prejudiced
    the Appellants.   Had the Tribunal proceeded on the assumption that the
    children would be removed with their parents  the  prejudice  would  be
    immediately obvious, and the error in such speculation clear. But  here
    the Judge has assumed the most favourable outcome for  the  Appellants,
    and it was an assumption that has proven well-founded, since I am  told
    the children have since been granted leave to remain.  I  can  find  no
    support for the Appellants' position  in  RS.  The  court  in  RS  were
    concerned not with adjourning proceedings awaiting a  decision  by  the
    Respondent, but with ensuring that there has been a final judgement  by
    the family court before proceeding to make decisions about the parents'
    immigration status.

 9. That  brings  me  to  Mr  Williams'  second  submission  regarding  the
    adjournment request.  That was that the  refusal  was  unfair  for  the
    following reason: once the  Respondent  had  made  a  decision,  social
    services and/or the family court would have revisited  their  decisions
    about the children, raising  the  possibility  that  contact  with  the
    Appellants would be increased. Mr Williams was quite unable to identify
    any evidential support for this submission. There  was  nothing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, or indeed this Tribunal, that  suggested  that
    the decision of the  Respondent  would  prompt  further  assessment  by
    social  services  or  further  hearing  by  the  family   court.     An
    adjournment on these grounds could potentially  have  been  indefinite,
    and since there has,  apparently,  been  no  further  movement  in  the
    position of the family court since the Respondent took his decision, it
    would seem that the Appellants' hopes  in  this  regard  were  entirely
    speculative.

    Ground (ii):  the children's best interests

10. There was before the First-tier Tribunal a large  number  of  documents
    relating to the family court proceedings. I am unable to  find  in  the
    file any  indication  that  the  Family  Court  Protocol  (Protocol  on
    communications between judges of the Family Court and  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal)  was
    adhered to, to enable these documents to be lawfully disclosed to Judge
    O'Hanlon.  The Protocol stipulates that in accordance with  the  Family
    Procedure Rules (12.73 and 12.75) such documents may only be  disclosed
    with the express consent of the Family Court.   Since  I  do  not  know
    whether such consent was given in this case I do not replicate  any  of
    the content of the materials here.


11. The Appellants' evidence was that they see  their  daughters  once  per
    month, for one night.  It is  their  submission  before  me  that  this
    evidence was not weighed in the balance when  the  Tribunal  considered
    where the best interests of their daughters  lay.  Again,  Mr  Williams
    relied on the decision in RS.   Again,  I  find  that  reliance  to  be
    misplaced.

12. The point in RS was that if a family court has determined that it is in
    the best interests of a child to  have  no  contact  with  their  birth
    parents, that matter can be treated as determinative in the immigration
    context.  That would also be true of the  converse  situation.  If  for
    instance the family court had ordered that a parent have weekly  visits
    with his or her child, an immigration judge would be entitled to  treat
    that as determinative of the questions of whether there  is  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship, and where the best interests lie.
     In this case that is exactly what the  First-tier  Tribunal  does.  It
    accepts that it will normally be in the best interests of  children  to
    be with their parents, and it accepts that  the  parental  relationship
    subsists, notwithstanding the fact that the children have  been  placed
    in care.  At  paragraphs  35-36,  and  again  at  38-39,  the  Tribunal
    expressly considers the evidence about the contact  arrangements.   The
    Tribunal does not ignore or marginalise that evidence. It places it  at
    the heart of its determination. What it finds, however,  is  that  best
    interests are not a 'trump card'; it directs itself to the guidance  in
    EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874; it cites G  (Ghana)  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1126  in support of the proposition that an  order  by  the  family
    court does not prevent the Secretary of State from effecting removal or
    deportation.  Having had regard to  the  very  limited  nature  of  the
    contact it finds, in  all  the  circumstances,  that  the  decision  is
    proportionate. I can find no error in that approach.


    Ground (iii): procedural fairness


13. The third ground fails  for  the  same  reason  as  the  first.  It  is
    contended that in upholding the Respondent's  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal has denied the  Appellants  the  opportunity  to  continue  to
    participate in the care proceedings relating to  their  children.  That
    denial,  it  is  submitted,  is  a  breach  of  the  procedural  rights
    guaranteed by Article 8. Attractive as this argument is, it  fails  for
    want of evidence. There was  nothing  on  the  face  of  the  materials
    arising from the family proceedings which  indicated  that  proceedings
    were ongoing, or would be in the future.  I would observe that had  the
    Protocol been followed this omission in the evidence if indeed that  it
    what it is, may have been remedied.


    Coda


14. For the foregoing reasons I can find no error of law  in  the  approach
    taken by the First-tier Tribunal (save the failure  to  adhere  to  the
    Protocol, a matter not raised before me).


15. The position today is that the children are now  'qualifying'  in  that
    they have spent a continuous period of  over  7  years  in  the  United
    Kingdom.   That was not the position at the date of the  appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal. That change in their position has  significant
    repercussions for the  Appellants.   That  is  because  in  any  future
    assessment of Article 8 the Appellants would be able  to  rely  on  the
    terms of s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    which stipulates that it will not be in the public interest to remove a
    parent of a qualifying child where it would not be reasonable to expect
    that child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The  terms  of  the  care
    settlement are such that it would plainly not be reasonable  to  expect
    these children to leave. The  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    Appellants have a subsisting  parental  relationship;  there  does  not
    appear to be any factual basis for  disputing  that  it  is  'genuine'.
    Those are matters that the Respondent will no doubt take into  account,
    should any further application be made.

    Decisions


16. The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
    material error of law and it is upheld.


17. There is an order for anonymity.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    4th
                                October 2018
                           -----------------------
[1] For reasons set out at paragraph 10 below, I do not set out the
specifics of the Order

