
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00803/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business via Field House|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20th April 2021                         |On: 28th April 2021             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                 DILWAR ALI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 21st July 1987.  He
       arrived in the UK in 1992 at the age of four years with his parents,
       and was granted indefinite leave to remain on 20th October 1999.  He
       went back to Bangladesh in December 1999 and  remained  there  until
       February 2002 when he returned to the UK. He has remained in the  UK
       ever since with indefinite leave to remain. The rest of  his  family
       are British citizens.

    2. The appellant was convicted of four counts of theft  of  high  value
       jewellery at Snaresbrook Crown Court, and  on  8th  April  2016  was
       sentenced to 4 years imprisonment.  A  deportation  order  was  made
       against him on 5th July 2017 and his  human  rights  application  to
       remain was refused on 6th December 2017.   His  appeal  against  the
       decision refusing his human rights claim was dismissed by First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Traynor in a determination promulgated  on  the  24th
       March 2020.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Parkes on 10th November 2020 on the basis that it was arguable  that
       the First-tier judge had  erred  in  law  because  it  was  arguably
       procedurally unfair as the appellant had  been  recalled  to  prison
       when the appeal was determined and was thus unable to challenge  the
       decision in time as the respondent had not informed  the  First-tier
       Tribunal of his new address in prison, even  though  she  must  have
       been aware of it.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. In light of the need to take  precautions
       against the spread of Covid-19 and with  regard  to  the  overriding
       object set out in the Upper Tribunal Procedure  Rules  this  hearing
       took place via Skype for Business, a format to which  neither  party
       raised objection. There were no significant issues  of  connectivity
       or audibility during the hearing.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. In grounds of appeal from Mr Mervyn Cross of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
       for the appellant it is argued, in summary, as follows.

    6. The salient facts are said to be as follows.  It  is  found  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal that the appellant has been resident in  the  UK
       for 28 years since the age of 4 years. He  is  also  found  to  have
       learning difficulties and  impaired  hearing,  but  the  appeal  was
       dismissed. At the end of the appellant's four year sentence on  24th
       April 2018 the was detained under Immigration Act powers until  25th
       February 2019, at which point he was released on bail by the  First-
       tier Tribunal. When he was released  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
       informed of his address in Stepney Way. A notice of hearing for  the
       First-tier Tribunal appeal dated 12th  November  2019  was  sent  to
       Duncan Lewis Solicitors on 15th July 2019, and Duncan Lewis informed
       the appellant at the Stepney Way  address  of  the  hearing  on  2nd
       September 2019. However, as Duncan Lewis had no instructions  for  a
       period of more than three months, they went off the record with  the
       First-tier Tribunal on 31st October 2019. The appeal was then  heard
       in the absence of the appellant on 12th November 2019, and dismissed
       in a decision promulgated on 24th March 2020. On 8th February  2020,
       and thus prior to the promulgation of the  decision,  the  appellant
       was recalled to prison for breaching the conditions of his probation
       licence and remained in prison  at  the  time  the  application  for
       permission to appeal was made.

    7. It is argued in the grounds of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal's
       decision was contrary  to  procedural  fairness  for  the  following
       reasons. The appellant did not receive the decision  dismissing  his
       appeal made on 24th March 2020 even though he was a serving prisoner
       and thus in circumstances where the Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department would have been aware  he  was  in  custody  and  of  the
       details of his new address. Those at the address at Stepney Way  did
       not know where the appellant was so could not forward  the  decision
       to him. It is argued that the respondent had a duty  to  update  the
       First-tier Tribunal with the appellant's new  address,  particularly
       as from the decision it was clear that the respondent has been  made
       aware of the appellant's learning disability  and  hearing  problem,
       and as set out in the respondent's detention  and  case  progression
       review notes obtained by the appellant's solicitors  via  a  subject
       access request, he had been found to be a level 2 adult at risk  due
       to his dyslexia and hearing impairment.

    8. It is also argued in the grounds that as a result of this procedural
       unfairness the appellant was  unfairly  denied  the  opportunity  to
       challenge the decision which erred in law as it wrongly applied  the
       test of "unduly harsh" in light of the decisions in AA  (Nigeria)  v
       SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA.

    9. Mr Lee accepted before me that as Judge Parkes had extended time  to
       appeal when granting  permission  there  was  in  fact  no  material
       procedural unfairness, and further that the concept of unduly  harsh
       correctly played no part  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision-
       making and so that the grounds  as  drafted  did  not  disclose  any
       errors of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.

   10. Mr Lee argued however that I should permit an oral amendment to  the
       grounds so that he could argue  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred in law by not firstly making clear findings as to whether  the
       appellant met the three elements of the private  life  exception  to
       deportation at s.117C(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 2002, and then proceeding to consider  whether  there  were  any
       very compelling circumstances over and above that exception so as to
       conclude  whether  the  appellant  could  meet  s.117C(6)   of   the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Mr Lee accepted he had
       no instructions to explain why the grounds were being changed orally
       at this very late stage, but argued that the point  was  an  obvious
       one and that the fact that the appellant had lived in the  UK  since
       he was a very young child, albeit with a two  year  absence,  was  a
       potential element which might lead to it succeeding. He argued  that
       the guidance of the Court of Appeal in Latayan v  SSHD  [2020]  EWCA
       Civ 191 left the door ajar for me to permit such an amendment of the
       grounds.

   11. Mr Whitwell argued that I  should  not  permit  the  grounds  to  be
       amended at this late stage. He argued that this was contrary to  the
       guidance of the Court of Appeal in Talpada v SSHD  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
       841 which encouraged a strict approach to restricting amendments  to
       grounds in public law cases, and that in this instance the  approach
       was simply an attempt to reargue  the  facts  of  the  case  as  the
       appellant did not like the outcome of the appeal. Mr  Whitwell  also
       argued that there was no Robinson obvious error in the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal. He said he would not be in  a  position  to
       address this new ground as his preparation had been on the basis  of
       procedural fairness, and so  if  it  were  permitted  to  amend  the
       grounds he would be forced  to  apply  for  an  adjournment  of  the
       hearing.

   12. I informed the parties that I refused the application to  amend  the
       grounds of appeal by the appellant, and that as it was conceded that
       the original grounds did not disclose any error of law on  the  part
       of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  decision,  dismissing  the
       appellant's human rights appeal, was upheld. I did not give an  oral
       judgment however, and now set out my reasoning below.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   13. It is accepted by the appellant that the First-tier  Tribunal  acted
       lawfully in proceeding  with  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
       appellant  given  the  service  of  the  hearing   notice   on   his
       representative and his representative having  informed  him  at  his
       residential address, applying Rules 2 & 28 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (First-tier Tribunal)(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  as
       set out at paragraph 6 of the decision.

   14. As conceded by Mr Lee the  issue  of  the  appellant  not  initially
       receiving the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
       appeal due to his not having informed the First-tier Tribunal of his
       current address when he was recalled to prison,  and  so  having  to
       appeal out of time, is of no material relevance as time was extended
       by the First-tier Tribunal to make the application to appeal and  so
       the appellant has not been disadvantaged, or suffered any procedural
       unfairness, by receiving the decision late.

   15. Mr Lee also accepted  that  the  substantive  ground  of  appeal  at
       paragraph 16, that the wrong exposition of the "unduly  harsh"  test
       had been applied, could not disclose an error of law  as  this  test
       relates to the family life Exception 2, as set out at  s.117C(5)  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  to  deportation
       which has no application on the facts of the  appellant's  case  and
       was not applied by the First-tier Tribunal.

   16. Mr Lee wished however to amend the grounds orally before  me  to  an
       entirely different challenge as  outlined  at  paragraph  10  above,
       relating to the structuring of the decision-making, which he  argued
       should firstly have addressed Exception 1, as set out  at  s.117C(4)
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and  its  three
       component parts and then looked for  matters  over  and  above  that
       exception. Mr Lee argued that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in
       law in failing to make the decision in this way.

   17. I refused to permit this challenge to be argued. Mr Lee was not able
       to explain why this challenge was not originally put in the  grounds
       or why a timely application had not been made to amend  the  grounds
       in writing.

   18. I note the guidance of the  Court  of  Appeal  at  paragraph  32  in
       Latayan which cites Talpada at paragraph 69. I do not find that  the
       new ground encapsulates a Robinson obvious error on the part of  the
       First-tier Tribunal. The First-tier Tribunal sets  out  the  correct
       statutory framework at s.117C of the 2002 Act at paragraphs 28 to 30
       of the decision, and cites case law relevant to the consideration of
       the "very compelling circumstances" test at paragraphs 31  &  32  of
       the decision. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal had  in  mind
       the  known  facts  of  the  case  when  coming  to  its  conclusion.
       Consideration is given to the nature of the appellant's  criminality
       and the fact that he had been present in the  UK  for  most  of  his
       life. It is noted  by  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
       paragraph 36 of his decision that there was "no evidence  to  inform
       me as to the Appellant's current or physical status and what  he  is
       now doing."; and at paragraph 40 of his  decision  that  "little  is
       known" about the appellant beyond what is set out about  his  issues
       at school and special needs at paragraph 42, and a  contention  that
       he assisted his father considered at paragraph 43. I  conclude  that
       there is no Robinson obvious error by the First-tier  Tribunal:  the
       decision was  made  by  setting  out  the  correct  legal  test  and
       considering the very limited facts before the  Tribunal,  which  did
       not  have  the  benefit  of  the  appellant's  attendance  and  oral
       evidence, in the context of that test.

   19. In these circumstances I conclude that a robust position  should  be
       taken to this application to radically amend the grounds  of  appeal
       to one which is entirely unrelated to those on which permission  was
       granted, particularly as the application is made orally on  the  day
       of the hearing without any reasoning as to why it is  done  at  this
       late stage  in  the  context  of  the  appellant  being  represented
       throughout this application to  appeal  by  experienced  immigration
       solicitors. I therefore refuse the application to amend the grounds.





          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I refuse the application to amend the grounds of appeal.

   3. I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal
      on human rights grounds.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  20th April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

