
                                  [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00183/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for         |Decision & Reasons           |
|Business)                                   |Promulgated                  |
|On 25 March 2021                            |On 8 April 2021              |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                               MD ABDUR RAHIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, counsel, instructed by Syed Shaheen
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal McLaren ("the judge") promulgated  on  18  September  2020
         dismissing the human rights appeal  of  Mr  MD  Abdur  Rahim  ("the
         appellant") against a decision of the respondent dated 12  December
         2019 refusing the appellant's human rights claim.

      2. The appellant is a national  of  Bangladesh  who  was  born  on  12
         October 1981. He entered the UK on 9  December  2009,  and  he  had
         valid leave until 9 June 2016. He made an in-time  application  for
         further leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules, but this was
         refused on 24 September 2016. On 15 October 2016, within 28 days of
         the expiry of his previous leave (which had been extended by virtue
         of section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971), the  appellant  made  a
         further application for leave to remain on the 10 year route  under
         Appendix FM. This was refused on 30 March 2017. Within 14  days  of
         that date (but not within 14 days of the appellant's previous leave
         expiring - see paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules), on 10 April
         2017, the appellant made  a  further  application,  this  time  for
         Indefinite Leave to Remain ("ILR"). This was refused on 9  November
         2017 and an  appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Cary on 24 July 2019.

      3. Judge Cary noted, by way of a statement stated  13  December  2018,
         the  appellant's  assertion  that  he  would  face  persecution  if
         returned to Bangladesh on account of his activities as a journalist
         in the United Kingdom. An earlier hearing was adjourned  to  enable
         the  respondent  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  should   be
         interviewed  in  respect  of  what  appeared  to  be  a  claim  for
         international protection. The respondent did not  consent  to  what
         amounted to an asylum claim being considered  by  the  Tribunal  as
         this  constituted  a  "new  matter"  under  section   85   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. At the appeal  before
         judge Cary the appellant therefore  only  relied  on  private  life
         grounds under Article 8 ECHR and under paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the
         Immigration Rules.


      4. In the decision promulgated on 24 July 2019 Judge Cary  found  that
         there was nothing in the appellant's case to suggest that he  would
         have any significant difficulties in re-establishing a private life
         within the meaning of Article 8 if returned  to  Bangladesh.  Judge
         Cary noted that the appellant had been  born  and  brought  up  and
         educated  in  Bangladesh  and   would   have   no   difficulty   in
         understanding and adapting to the cultural norms. He  only  entered
         the UK when he was 27 years old and had spent the bulk of his  life
         in Bangladesh. He worked in that country as both a journalist and a
         graphic designer and there was nothing to indicate  that  he  would
         find it impossible to resume such employment, particularly in  view
         of the qualifications he had obtained in the  United  Kingdom.  The
         appellant had a wife, daughter, mother  and  various  brothers  and
         sisters in Bangladesh who would be able to help  him  re-integrate.
         Judge Cary noted that the appellant had been back to Bangladesh  on
         several occasions, and that there would be no language difficulties
         as the appellant gave evidence in Bengali.  Judge  Cary  found  the
         appellant was a resourceful individual  who  had  continued  to  be
         heavily involved with  the  Bangladeshi  community  in  the  United
         Kingdom, including the 'Bangladeshi  Students  Union  UK'  and  the
         'Voice of Bangladesh' which he described as an international  human
         rights organisation. Whilst Judge Cary found that the appellant had
         established a private life in the  United  Kingdom,  including  his
         relationship with his cousin, with whom  he  lived,  and  that  his
         cousin's sister (Mrs Rina Begum - also the appellant's cousin) gave
         him money, taking account of the factors in  section  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, Judge Cary  concluded
         that the refusal of the appellant's human rights  claim  would  not
         result in a disproportionate interference with Article 8.


      5. The appellant made a further out of time application on 9  December
         2019. This was an application for ILR based on the  long  residence
         rules, particularly paragraph 276B. In refusing the application the
         respondent noted that the appellant had been without  lawful  leave
         since 24 September 2016 and that he did not meet  the  requirements
         for a grant of leave under  paragraph  276B(i)(a).  The  respondent
         rejected the appellant's claim that there  were  'very  significant
         obstacles'  to  his  integration  in  Bangladesh,  as  required  by
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and found that there were  no  exceptional
         circumstances such as to constitute a breach of Article  8  if  his
         application was refused. The respondent was not satisfied that  any
         mental  health  issues  afflicting  the  appellant  could  not   be
         adequately treated in Bangladesh. The respondent  referred  to  the
         appellant's claim that threats had been made against him by a  gang
         in the UK which was also active in Bangladesh, but there  was  said
         to be no evidence of any specific threat against the appellant  and
         no evidence that the Bangladeshi authorities would not be  able  to
         deal with any threats made against him. The respondent  noted  that
         the appellant had not made a protection claim.  The  appellant  was
         advised that if he felt unable to live in any  part  of  Bangladesh
         because  he  feared  persecution,  he  could  apply  for  leave  on
         protection grounds.


      6. The appellant did not make  any  protection  claim.  The  appellant
         appealed the  respondent's  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002. The grounds of appeal relied on, inter-alia,  the  extent  of
         the  appellant's  contribution  to  organisations  in  the   United
         Kingdom, the threats he claimed had been made against  him  by  the
         Bangladeshi intelligence agencies, and his  fear  from  a  criminal
         gang that arose from him acting  as  a  prosecution  witness  in  a
         serious criminal trial. The appellant  claimed  that  the  criminal
         gang had a significant influence on Bangladesh's ruling  elite  and
         that he had been a under witness protection for a long time in  the
         UK. I pause at  this  juncture  to  express  my  surprise  that  no
         protection claim was made by the appellant.


The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that he had  at  least  10
         years continuous lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.  Although
         the judge's decision relies on Ahmed, R (on the application  of)  v
         SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1070  ("Masum  Ahmed"),  which  has   been
         overturned, the Court of Appeal authority of Hoque  &  Ors  v  SSHD
         [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 ("Hoque") makes plain that the  appellant  was
         not entitled to ILR because his overstaying  was  "open-ended"  and
         the first disregard in sub-para (v) of paragraph 276B could not  be
         construed  as  qualifying  the  definition  of  continuous   lawful
         residence in sub-para (i) (see Underhill LJ's judgement at [43]  to
         [45]).

      8. The judge set out in the appellant's evidence in section "D" of the
         decision. The judge noted that, despite assertions in letters  from
         Voice For Bangladesh that he and his family  members  face  several
         threats from Bangladesh, it was the appellant's evidence that  none
         of his family in Bangladesh had been directly threatened. The judge
         was not satisfied that the appellant had provided credible evidence
         of threats to him or his family as a result of his activities.

      9. At [20] the judge referred to a letter  from  the  Bangladesh  High
         Commission dated 16 November 2017, authored by T M  Jobaer,  asking
         him to explain his position in respect of reports  he  wrote  on  4
         August 2017, 13 October 2017 and 27 October 2017. The  judge  noted
         that the letter did not refer to a meeting being required and there
         was nothing in writing arranging a date or time for a meeting.  The
         judge then recounted, at [21], the appellant's claim  that  he  had
         been required to attend a meeting at the High Commission  and  that
         he was told by T M Jobaer "not to write like this and that it could
         be dangerous to him later." There had  been  no  written  follow-up
         from this meeting and the appellant confirmed that nothing  further
         had happened to him since 2017. At  [22]  the  judge  recorded  the
         appellant's claim that he had continued to write articles after the
         conversation with T M Jobaer but that there was only one article in
         the bundle dated 8 June 2018 and nothing after that. The  appellant
         claimed that TM Jobaer was a Brigadier General when he was with the
         High Commission and that he had now returned to Bangladesh and  was
         Director-General of the National Security Intelligence.  The  judge
         mentioned that he  had  been  provided  with  a  Wikipedia  article
         concerning this individual.


     10. At [23] the judge referred  to  an  article  from  a  UK  newspaper
         indicating  that  four  people  had  been  found  guilty  of  money
         laundering in respect of the trial that took place in January 2019.
         At [24] the judge recorded evidence from the appellant that he  had
         been threatened by a criminal gang  and  that  he  had  been  under
         witness protection for a long time. It was the appellant's evidence
         that the criminal gang had significant  influence  on  Bangladesh's
         ruling elite and threatened to take  action  against  him  both  in
         Bangladesh and in the UK  if  he  continued  to  be  a  prosecution
         witness. The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  provided  no
         evidence that the gang had continued  to  threaten  him  after  the
         trial. The judge stated:

             "on his own account they had told him they could do so in  the
             UK but had not  done  so.  I  find  that  they  are  therefore
             unlikely to do so in Bangladesh."

     11. The judge then summarised the evidence from the appellant's cousin,
         Mrs Rina Begum, and the submissions made by both representatives.

     12. In the section of his decision headed "Findings and  Decision"  the
         judge noted, with respect  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  that  the
         appellant had family in Bangladesh including his wife and child and
         had previously worked there and now had more qualifications.  There
         was nothing in the evidence now presented by the appellant that was
         said to be any different from the position at the  earlier  appeal.
         The earlier appeal had considered the appellant's relationship with
         his cousin and, although Mrs Begum now added that she would  suffer
         mental distress if the  appellant  returned,  was  no  evidence  in
         support of this.

     13. At [42] the judge stated:

             "The appellant was a prosecution witness and threatened by the
             perpetrators of the fraud. I have found that the  threat  from
             the criminal gang was one said to be capable of being  carried
             out in the UK or Bangladesh. Nothing  has  happened,  but  the
             threat by its nature encompassing  both  countries  is  not  a
             significant obstacle to reintegration in Bangladesh."

     14. At [43] the judge stated:

             "The appellant has said he has been threatened by the man  who
             now runs the security services that he would face  threats  to
             his safety if returned to Bangladesh. While the appellant  was
             sent a letter, in the absence of any communication setting  up
             a meeting, any written follow-up or  evidence  of  any  action
             taken against the appellant. [sic]  I  conclude  that  on  the
             balance of probabilities there is no risk on return. This does
             not create a significant obstacle."

     15. At [45] the judge stated:

             "Turning to Article 8 outside the rules, I have considered the
             5 steps set out in Razgar. The evidence given by Mrs Begum  as
             to the closeness of their  relationship  had  previously  been
             considered  and  I  have  addressed  it   above.   The   prior
             determination had also addressed the appellant's  contribution
             to the UK through his voluntary work. He has continued  to  do
             this, but this fact does not provide any  reason  to  reach  a
             different conclusion from the prior determination."








     16. At [46] the judge stated:


             "The assistance as a prosecution witness is laudable and I was
             asked to give the appellant credit for this in considering the
             public interest. I find that this does not constitute a factor
             that diminishes the  importance  of  immigration  controls.  I
             conclude that any interference with  the  appellant's  private
             life is in accordance  with  the  law  and  in  pursuit  of  a
             legitimate  aim,   namely   the   maintenance   of   effective
             immigration controls."


     17. The judge concluded, at [47], having stated that he had  undertaken
         the balancing exercise to  determine  proportionality,  that  there
         were  no  exceptional  circumstances  in  the  case  and  that  the
         interference  was  proportionate.  The  human  rights  appeal   was
         dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     18. The 1st ground contends that the judge failed to take into  account
         relevant  evidence  relating  to  the  nature  of  the  threat  the
         appellant claimed he faced if removed to Bangladesh. The  appellant
         maintained that he had been under witness protection in the UK  and
         that the gang he feared had significant influence  on  Bangladesh's
         ruling elite. If accepted, this evidence demonstrated that the gang
         could more easily harm the appellant in Bangladesh than in the  UK.
         The appellant would be well protected in the UK but more exposed in
         Bangladesh, where the gang had influential friends. It is  asserted
         that  this  evidence  contradicted  the   judge's   reasoning   and
         conclusion on this point. It was an error of law for the  judge  to
         fail to take this evidence into account.


     19. The 2nd ground  of  appeal  contends  that  the  judge  incorrectly
         characterised the 'very significant obstacles' test. To the  extent
         that the judge's assertion at [42] that "the threat by  its  nature
         encompassing both countries is not a significant  obstacle  to  re-
         integration in Bangladesh" was a distinct  reason,  i.e.  a  threat
         which applies in both the UK and the state to which  the  applicant
         will  be  returned  if  required  to  leave  the  UK  cannot  be  a
         significant obstacle to reintegration, this  will  was  a  material
         misdirection of law. Nothing  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  invited
         comparison between the appellant's situation  in  the  UK  and  the
         situation he would be in in  Bangladesh.  The  question  is  simply
         whether there were very significant obstacles to his integration in
         Bangladesh and  conditions  in  the  UK  were  irrelevant  to  this
         question.

     20. The 3rd ground contends that  the  judge  failed  to  give  any  or
         adequate reasons for concluding  that  there  were  no  exceptional
         circumstances in the  case  and  that  the  interference  with  the
         appellant's private life rights  was  proportionate.  At  [47]  the
         judge merely stated his conclusion but failed  to  explain  why  he
         reached this conclusion. It was therefore unclear  whether  and  to
         what  extent  key  factors   were   assessed   as   part   of   the
         proportionality exercise. For example, the appellant's  role  as  a
         prosecution witness was considered by the  judge  with  respect  to
         s.117B(1) of the 200-2 Act, but there was no assessment  that  this
         action contributed to UK society and values and willingness to risk
         threats of violence to uphold those values. Is  was  impossible  to
         know whether this was factored into the proportionality assessment.

     21. The 4th ground contends that the judge failed to take into  account
         relevant considerations in respect  of  the  threat  the  appellant
         claimed he would face from the Bangladeshi authorities due  to  his
         political writing,  as  confirmed  by  Voice  for  Bangladesh.  The
         Bangladeshi government is a relatively repressive regime that  does
         not tolerate dissent and there  was  nothing  in  the  evidence  to
         support a finding that there would be any  more  of  a  prelude  to
         action being taken against the appellant  then  writing  a  warning
         letter. Any consequent restrictions that the appellant may face  on
         his liberty or ability to express his political views in Bangladesh
         might amount to very significant obstacles.

     22. The 5th ground challenges  the  judge's  decision  on  long  lawful
         residence, but acknowledged that the decision in  Hoque  compromise
         the viability of this ground. The appellant  nevertheless  reserved
         his position as to whether to pursue this argument  further  noting
         that the judgement in Hoque may be the subject  of  an  application
         for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court.

     23. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson noted that  the
         appellant accepted that the final ground of  appeal  was  currently
         unarguable for the reasons given in Hoque. Although  Judge  Jackson
         considered that not all the grounds had strong arguable merit,  she
         did not restrict the grant of permission. She  noted  however  that
         the appellant would need to be prepared to deal with the  issue  of
         materiality of the grounds of appeal, if an error of law was found,
         as to whether this could have possibly had a bearing on the outcome
         of the appeal in all circumstances.

     24. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing I indicated my concerns
         with two aspects of the  judge's  decision  so  as  to  assist  the
         parties in their submissions. The judge did not appear to have made
         any specific findings in respect of the appellant's claim  to  have
         had a meeting with Mr TM Jobaer in  which  threats  were  allegedly
         made against the appellant. Nor did the judge appear to  take  into
         account the appellant's claim that the criminal gang he feared  was
         influential with the Bangladeshi elite, or  the  appellant's  claim
         (which is otherwise unsupported by independent  evidence)  that  he
         was under witness protection in the UK.

     25. Ms Everett observed that the judge's  decision  was  "concise"  and
         indicated that she may be in difficulties in trying to  defend  the
         decision on the basis of the two  concerns  I  raised.  She  stated
         that, as the appellant had not made a protection  claim  the  judge
         may  not  have  dealt  with  the  matters  raised  by  him  in   as
         comprehensive manner as was required, that it was unfortunate  that
         the appellant did not make a protection claim and that he should be
         encouraged to do so. I indicated my agreement with her  sentiments.
         I thereafter informed the parties that I was satisfied the decision
         contained errors on points  of  law  and  that  those  errors  were
         sufficiently material such s to require  the  decision  to  be  set
         aside.

Discussion

     26. I'm satisfied there is merit in the 1st ground. The appellant  gave
         evidence that he was (i) under witness protection in  the  UK,  and
         (ii)  that  the  gang  against  whose  members  he  testified   had
         significant influence on  Bangladesh's  ruling  elite.  Although  I
         could find no  independent  evidence  to  support  the  appellant's
         assertion to have been under witness  protection  in  the  UK,  the
         judge made no clear findings in respect of either assertion and did
         not appear to take them into  account  when  determining  any  risk
         faced by the appellant in Bangladesh. If  the  judge  accepted  the
         appellant's assertions (and he did not expressly reject them), then
         that evidence suggested that the gang could more  easily  harm  the
         appellant in Bangladesh than in the UK. The fact that  nothing  had
         happened to him in the UK did not obviate the possibility,  on  the
         balance of probabilities standard  (given  that  this  is  a  human
         rights claim), that  any  threats  would  not  be  carried  out  in
         Bangladesh sufficient to interfere  with  his  physical  and  moral
         integrity (as an aspect of the appellant's Article 8  private  life
         rights) or sufficient to constitute a very significant obstacles to
         his integration. The judge's failure to make material  findings  in
         respect of the appellant's two assertions, or  to  take  them  into
         account in his assessment under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  his
         Article  8  proportionality  assessment,  in  the  context  of  the
         appellant's Article 8 private life claim, constituted an  error  of
         law.


     27. I am additionally satisfied that the judge fell into legal error in
         his assessment of the appellant's claim to  have  received  threats
         from Brigadier-General TM Jobaer. Although the  judge  found  there
         was no risk to the appellant based on his political writing and, in
         so doing, noted the absence  of  any  communication  setting  up  a
         meeting between the appellant and TM Jobaer, there  was  no  actual
         finding as to whether the meeting occurred and whether the  alleged
         threats were made. Given  the  relevance  of  this  threat  to  the
         appellant's  claim  that  he  would  encounter  'very   significant
         obstacles' to his reintegration in Bangladesh and to his Article  8
         private life claim based on his moral and  physical  integrity,  it
         was incumbent on the judge to make these findings.

     28. I am also persuaded, although by a  narrow  margin,  that  the  2nd
         ground is made out. It is not  clear  from  the  decision  at  [42]
         whether the judge has actually fallen into the error  described  at
         paragraph 19 above. It  may  simply  be  that  the  judge  did  not
         consider that any threat would be carried out in Bangladesh if none
         occurred in the UK. If this is so, then the  judge  fell  into  the
         legal error described at paragraph 26 above. If, however the  judge
         considered that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  the
         appellant's integration because the threat faced in Bangladesh  was
         equalled by the threat faced in the UK, then  he  fell  into  legal
         error.  Paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  does  not  require  a  comparison
         between the country of proposed return and the UK when  determining
         whether there are very significant obstacles to return;  the  focus
         is entirely on the country of return.

     29. I am further persuaded, also however by a narrow margin,  that  the
         3rd ground is made  out.  The  judge's  proportionality  assessment
         under Article 8 outside of  the  immigration  rules  is  devoid  of
         adequate reasoning. The judge asserts that there are no exceptional
         circumstances in the case, but he does not explain why  he  reached
         this conclusion.

     30. I am  satisfied  that  the  errors  of  law  identified  above  are
         material.  Whilst  there  is  a  paucity  of  independent  evidence
         supporting  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  under  witness
         protection in the UK, or his claim that the 'gang' had influence on
         the Bangladeshi elite, or his claim that he met TM Jobaer,  in  the
         absence of any clear assessment of this evidence it cannot be  said
         that, had the judge not erred in the manner described  above,  that
         he would inevitably have reached the same conclusion.  Taking  that
         evidence at its highest, a judge, properly directing him or herself
         on the law, may be entitled to allow an Article 8   appeal  on  the
         basis advanced by the appellant.

     31. I make one final point. Given the basis of the  claim  advanced  by
         the appellant it was open to him to have made a  protection  claim.
         He did not do so. His account of  fearing  ill-treatment  based  on
         threats made to  him  by  an  influential  criminal  gang  and  the
         intelligences services, which would normally, by their very nature,
         be the subject of a protection claim, has therefore  not  been  the
         subject of detailed  examination  under  the  asylum  determination
         procedures deployed in this country. The assessment of all  aspects
         of his Article 8  human  rights  claim  at  the  moment  is  to  be
         conducted by reference to the higher standard of proof ("balance of
         probabilities"), and there has been no possibility for his evidence
         to be verified or further investigated by the respondent. A  person
         should not use an Article 8 human rights claim  as  a  backdoor  to
         making a protection claim, and the appellant may wish  to  consider
         whether it would be in his  best  interests  to  formally  lodge  a
         protection claim.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     32. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the
            First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for
            that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-tier
            Tribunal; or


         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
            necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made
            is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule
            2, it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
            Tribunal.

     33. The judge failed to make material findings of fact  and  failed  to
         take relevant considerations into account. In  these  circumstances
         it is appropriate to  remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a full fresh (de novo) hearing, all issues open.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making  of  an
error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside.

The case will be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
hearing before a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McLaren




D.Blum

Signed                                  Date     25 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



