
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/00109/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 January 2018                     |On 17 January 2018              |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAILA SOURIN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms K Reid (counsel) instructed by Visa Inn Immigration
Specialists


DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  to
avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the  First-tier
Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas, promulgated on 5 April 2017  which  allowed
the Appellant's appeal  to  the  limited  extent  that  he  found  that  the
appellant used fraud or deception to pass  an  English  language  test.  The
Judge then remitted the appellant's application for leave to remain  to  the
respondent for further consideration.

Background

3. The  Appellant  was  born  on  1  October  1986  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.  On  14  December  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
Appellant's application for leave to remain in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Lucas ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. The Judge found that the appellant had not employed  deception  in
an English Language test and remitted the application to the respondent  for
further consideration.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 6 October 2017 Judge  Grimmett  gave
permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that the Judge erred in  allowing  the  appeal  in  the
      absence of a finding of any compelling circumstances.

The Hearing

6. Before I heard submissions, both Ms Reid and  Ms  Everett  told  me  that
they  agreed  that  the  judge  has  fallen  into  error  in   relation   to
jurisdiction. The Judge's decision  is  quite  clearly  that  the  appellant
meets the requirements of the immigration rules. The Judge  focuses  on  the
authenticity of  an  English  language  test  certificate.  The  appellant's
application was submitted on 27  May  2015.  The  respondent's  decision  is
dated 14 December 2015. As the application was submitted  after  April  2015
the only competent appeal is on article 8 ECHR grounds.

7. (a) Ms Everett moved the grounds of appeal. She told me  that  the  Judge
misdirected himself in assessing the appellant's claim  on  the  basis  that
the appellant could speak English fluently. She relied on MA Nigeria  [2016]
UKUT 450. She told me  that  the  Judge  sets  out  inadequate  reasons  for
finding that the appellant did not use a proxy test taker. She told me  that
the Judge did not have the power to remit  the  case  to  the  Secretary  of
State for further determination.

(b) Ms Everett told me that the Judge's consideration of the article 8  ECHR
grounds is incomplete. After listening to Ms Reid's submissions, Ms  Everett
agreed that if I find that the Judge's findings in relation to  the  English
language test are sustainable, then the appellant meets the requirements  of
paragraph 276B of the immigration rules, but repeated  a  challenge  to  the
adequacy of the Judge's reasoning.

8. (a) For the appellant Ms Reid told me that although it was  an  error  to
allow the appeal under the immigration rules, that is not a  material  error
of law because the decision that the appellant meets the  immigration  rules
in this case equates to a decision that the appellant succeeds on article  8
ECHR grounds. She told me  that  the  Judge  gave  sustainable  reasons  for
finding that the appellant did not engage in  fraud  to  obtain  an  English
language test certificate. She told me that between [24] and [28] the  Judge
sets out adequate reasons for finding that the appellant took,  but  failed,
a TOEIC Test. She adopted  the  terms  of  the  rule  24  response  for  the
appellant.

(b) Ms Reid told me that the Judge's finding that the  appellant  meets  the
immigration rules is sustainable.  She  told  me  that  if  I  preserve  the
Judge's findings in relation to the immigration  rules  then  the  appellant
must succeed because she meets paragraph 276B of the immigration rules,  and
so by analogy her article 8 ECHR appeal must succeed.

Analysis

9. In SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -
Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held
that

     i)       The Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined with  her
        evidence particular to these two appellants, sufficed to  discharge
        the evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates  had
        been procured by dishonesty.

    ii)       However, given the multiple frailties from which this generic
        evidence was considered to suffer and, in the light of the evidence
        adduced by  the  appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
        discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part.

10. In that decision the Upper Tribunal added that "every case belonging  to
the ETS/TOEIC stable will invariably be fact  sensitive.   To  this  we  add
that every appeal will be determined on the basis of  the  evidence  adduced
by the parties". In Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 the Court  upheld  the  Upper
Tribunal's consideration of the expert evidence  and  said  that  the  Upper
Tribunal was entitled to reach  its  conclusions  on  the  English  language
abilities of the Claimants based on the evidence before them.

11. In MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450(IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
held

     i) The question of whether a person engaged in fraud  in  procuring  a
        TOEIC English language proficiency qualification will invariably be
        intrinsically fact sensitive.


    ii) Per curiam: where the voice data generated  by  TOEIC  testing  are
        those of a person other than the person claiming to have  undergone
        the tests, there is no breach of EU or UK data protection laws.

12. The Judge's findings of fact start at [22] of the decision. At [24]  the
Judge notes that the appellant is almost fluent  in  English.  At  [26]  the
Judge finds that the appellant obtained an IELTS certificate  in  Bangladesh
before coming to the UK. At [27] the Judge places weight on the  appellant's
account of her journey to the test centre and the timings of her  test.  The
Judge records that that evidence is unchallenged.

13. At [28] the Judge balances the evidence for the  appellant  against  the
generic evidence (detailed at [23]) offered by  the  respondent,  &  bemoans
the lack of voice recording evidence of the test results.

14. The Judge accurately recorded the evidence that was placed  before  him.
It is the Judge's duty to make findings of fact from  that  evidence  -  and
that is what the Judge has done. In reality, the first 13 paragraphs of  the
grounds of appeal are complaints about the weight that the Judge  has  given
to the various strands of evidence. In Green (Article 8 - new rules)  [2013]
UKUT 254 (IAC) the Tribunal said that "Giving weight to a factor one way  or
another is for the fact finding Tribunal and the assignment of  weight  will
rarely give rise to an error of law".

15. The Judge was clearly impressed with the evidence of the  appellant.  He
is entitled to find that that evidence was sufficient  to  demonstrate  that
fraud had not been employed.  The  Judge's  findings  and  analysis  of  the
evidence between [23] and [29] lead the Judge  to  the  conclusion  at  [31]
that the appellant did use fraud to obtain an  English-language  certificate
in 2011. At [31] the  Judge  manifestly  applies  the  correct  standard  of
proof.

16. The Judge's error is at [32] of the decision.  Because  the  appellant's
application was submitted on 27 May 2015 the only competent  appeal  lay  on
article 8 ECHR grounds. The Judge did not have jurisdiction  to  remit  this
case to the respondent for further consideration. That is a  material  error
of law.

17. Because the decision is tainted by material error of law I must  set  it
aside, however I have found that there is nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's
fact-finding exercise. The error  lies  in  his  disposal  of  the  case.  I
therefore preserve the Judge's findings of fact and go on to  substitute  my
own decision.

18. The appellant entered the UK on 21 June 2005  as  a  student.  Leave  to
remain was extended until 29 October 2012. On 4  April  2012  the  appellant
applied for a tier 1 post study Visa, and the respondent  granted  leave  to
remain until 30 August 2014. On 28 August 2014  the  appellant  applied  for
leave to remain as the spouse of a settled  person.  Whilst  the  respondent
was considering that application the appellant's marriage  broke  down.  The
appellant varied the application to an application for indefinite  leave  to
remain on the basis of 10 years residence in the UK.

19. The respondent refused the appellant's application on 14 December  2015.
The respondent considered paragraph 276B  of  the  immigration  rules,  and,
believing that the  appellant  had  used  a  fraudulently  obtained  English
language test certificate,  decided that the appellant could not  meet  sub-
paragraphs (ii) &(iii) of paragraph 322(5) of  the  immigration  rules.  The
only challenge to the appellant's suitability was the belief  that  she  had
fraudulently obtained a TOEIC certificate.

20. The Judge's finding that the appellant had not used fraud in an  English
language tests stand. That finding  undermines  the  respondent's  decision.
Because  the  appellant  did  not  employ  fraud,  she  meets  all  of   the
requirements of paragraph 276B of the immigration rules.

21. The only competent ground of appeal in this case it  is  an  appeal  on
article 8 ECHR grounds. It is article 8 private life which is  relevant  in
this appeal.

22. The respondent's position is that all article 8 ECHR considerations are
embraced by the Immigration Rules. The fact that I find that the  appellant
meets the requirements of the  immigration  rules  indicates  that  if  the
respondent had not acted in the mistaken  belief  that  the  appellant  had
employed deception in 2011, this application would  have  been  successful.
That is an indication that  the  respondent  has  a  willingness  to  grant
indefinite leave to remain to the appellant. The refusal of leave to remain
must therefore be a disproportionate breach of the  right  to  respect  for
private life. The respondent's own rules indicate that the  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the right to respect for private life.

23. In Agyarko v SSHD [2017] UKSC  11  The  Supreme  Court  held  that  the
Immigration Rules are compatible with article 8  ECHR,  as  this  provision
requires there to be a fair balance struck  between  competing  public  and
individual interests involved, applying a  proportionality  test,  and  the
policies adopted by the  Secretary  of  State  are  within  the  margin  of
appreciation. The respondent's own rules indicate that the  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the right to respect for private life.

24. On the facts as I find them to be, the appellant meets the requirements
of the Immigration Rules. On any reasonable and proper application  of  the
Secretary of State's own policy, it cannot be said that  the  interests  of
immigration control require that leave to remain should be refused. When  I
weigh all of these matters I find  that  the  respondent's  decision  is  a
disproportionate interference with the appellant's private life.

25. I therefore find that this appeal succeeds on article 8 ECHR grounds.




CONCLUSION

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 5 April  2017  is
tainted by a material error of law. I set it aside.

27. I substitute my own decision.

28. The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.



Signed  Paul Doyle
   Date  9 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle





