
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00640/2015
     HU/00638/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd May 2017                      |On 12th June 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  (1) [T J]
                                  (2) [M J]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Charles Mannam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Peter Armstrong (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boylan-Kemp,  promulgated  on  20th  October  2016,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham Sheldon Court on 20th  September  2016.   In  the
    determination, the judge  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the  Appellants,
    whereupon they subsequently applied for, and were  granted,  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are both nationals of Zimbabwe.  The first Appellant was
    born on [ ] 2002 and the second Appellant was born on [ ]  2009.   Both
    Appellants are siblings.  They were both born in the UK but returned to
    live in Zimbabwe, and the present appeal  arose  on  account  of  their
    application for entry clearance to join their UK based  parents,  which
    application was refused on 5th May 2015 on the basis of  paragraph  305
    (v) of HC 395.  On 3rd November 2015, the ECM upheld the decision.

The Judge's Decision

 3. The judge recounted the facts (at paragraph 7) and noted how the  first
    Appellant, [TJ], was born in the UK in 2002  and  then  moved  to  live
    permanently in Zimbabwe with his maternal grandparents in 2006, due  to
    the financial circumstances of his  parents  in  the  UK.   The  second
    Appellant, [MJ], was born in 2009, and also left to live permanently in
    Zimbabwe with  his  maternal  grandparents,  after  the  birth  of  his
    sponsoring parents' youngest child, [Z], in 2011, especially since  [Z]
    was born with complicated health issues.

 4.  In  what  is  undoubtedly  a  careful,  sensitive  and   comprehensive
    determination, the judge considered the basis of the  decision  by  the
    ECO, namely, the application of  paragraph  305  of  HC  395  (see  his
    paragraph  11),  and  observed  that  although  the  Appellants   could
    substantially satisfy the requirements of these  Rules  they  had  been
    away from the UK for more than two years, and therefore could  not  now
    return to join their parents in the UK.

 5. The Appellants were represented on that occasion by Mr Madanhi, and  he
    appears to have emphasised the fact that the Appellants  had  a  family
    life with their parents and siblings in the UK, which  is  demonstrated
    by the financial support and the regular visits to Zimbabwe made by the
    Appellants' mother and, therefore,

         "Mr Madanhi submitted  that  therefore  the  Appellants  should  be
         granted entry clearance to join their parents  in  the  UK  as  the
         Sponsors have lived lawfully for over fifteen years in the UK;  the
         father has a good job which will allow him to both financially  and
         emotionally support the children in the  UK;  the  process  of  the
         mother visiting the Appellants regularly in Zimbabwe  is  expensive
         and disruptive to  the  family;  and,  that  the  youngest  child's
         medical conditions are complicated and cannot be  adequately  dealt
         with in Zimbabwe" (paragraph 14).

 6. The judge noted that the Appellants' father had a secure job in that he
    was a school teacher and that "he is contributing both financially  and
    morally to the development of the country as a result" (paragraph  15).
    However, this alone was not enough to make  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellants "exceptional" such that would warrant  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance outside of the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 15).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge  failed  to  take  into
    account the circumstances of the Appellants' return to live in Zimbabwe
    and erred in placing insufficient weight to the best interests  of  the
    children, having regard to the Appellants and their younger brother.

 9. On 23rd March 2017, however, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on the basis  that  there  was  in  this  appeal  a
    "Robinson obvious" point, and this was that the appeal  ought  to  have
    been considered under paragraph 297 in the first instance because  that
    was an easy Rule to satisfy.

10. On 26th April 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State to the effect that, even if paragraph 297  had  been
    considered  there  was  no  indication  that  there  was  a   realistic
    possibility that the Appellants would be able to meet the provisions of
    this Rule.  The Appellants had the benefit of legal representation  and
    at no point was the possibility that the Appellants  could  meet  those
    requirements raised.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 23rd May  2017,  Mr  Mannam,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, drew my attention  to  the  skeleton  argument
    before the Tribunal below.  This appears in the Appellants' bundle.  It
    was, submitted Mr Mannam, difficult  to  have  overlooked  because  the
    index at the outset of the bundle makes it quite clear that the  second
    document in the bundle (at pages 2 to 6) is  the  Appellants'  skeleton
    argument.  When one turns to the skeleton argument then, it  is  stated
    at the outset (at paragraph 2) that, "the relevant Rules are set out in
    paragraph 297 of HC 395".

12. Second, although this was a case where in the appeal before IJ  Boylan-
    Kemp, there was no representation from the Respondent Home Office, such
    that Mr Madanhi may  well  have  overlooked  having  to  emphasise  the
    contents of the skeleton argument in  those  circumstances,  the  judge
    ought to have dealt with this provision.  Instead,  what  he  does  (at
    paragraph 11) is to focus exclusively on paragraph 305, and then to say
    (at paragraph 12) that the Appellants  satisfy  sub-paragraphs  (i)  to
    (iv), but not (v).

13. Third, the three main issues  before  the  judge  were,  accommodation,
    maintenance, and the Appellant children not living an independent life,
    yet the judge made no express findings on these matters, and  certainly
    did not make an express finding on accommodation.

14. For his part, Mr Armstrong submitted that he would rely upon  the  Rule
    24 response.  There was, he suggested, no witness statement today  from
    Mr Madanhi, to explain why he did not raise paragraph 297,  if  it  was
    such an important part of the argument before the Tribunal.  It was not
    enough to say that there was a skeleton  argument  in  the  Appellants'
    bundle, especially when the Home Office Presenting Officer was  not  in
    attendance, because it fell upon the Appellants' representative to draw
    the Tribunal's attention to the bundle, and to  specifically  say  that
    the appeal was to be determined under paragraph 297, and not  paragraph
    305.

15. In reply, Mr Mannam submitted that if, in the absence of  a  Presenting
    Officer, the judge was bound  to  look  carefully  at  the  documentary
    material presented by the Respondent Home Office, then he  was  equally
    duty bound to look at the documentary evidence presented on the side of
    the Appellant, and this he had obviously failed to do, because  he  did
    not pick up the reference to paragraph 297.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

17. First, one is bound to say, that in circumstances where  the  Appellant
    was represented, the failure to bring  to  the  judge's  attention  the
    precise provision in the Immigration  Rules  upon  which  reliance  was
    placed, must first and foremost count as a failing on the part of those
    that set out to represent these Appellant children.  The  failings  are
    considerable.  The Grounds of Appeal are entirely factual and  make  no
    reference to the applicable Immigration Rules.  This is  a  significant
    omission because the ECO's decision had already  highlighted  the  fact
    that the refusal was being made under paragraph 305 (and not  paragraph
    297), so that it behoved the drafter of the Grounds of Appeal  to  make
    it clear that paragraph 297 needed consideration.  Thereafter, although
    there is a skeleton argument, it is poorly drafted.  It draws attention
    to paragraph 297 early on, but it then goes on to refer to how there is
    a refusal under paragraph  305(3)  and  paragraph  6  of  the  skeleton
    argument, without ever at any stage, either making it clear why this is
    the wrong  provision,  or  why  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  under
    paragraph 297.  It is a skeleton  argument  that  does  not  serve  the
    purpose that it is designed  to  serve.   Thereafter,  at  the  hearing
    before Judge Boylan-Kemp, although there was a representative (who  one
    would have thought would have faced no opposition  in  his  attempt  to
    raise the appropriate provision in the Immigration Rules if he had been
    minded to do so), no reference was made to paragraph 297.  The emphasis
    was on the appeal  being  allowed  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  on
    Article 8 grounds.

18. Second, and be that as it may, the fact remains that paragraph 297  was
    mentioned in the skeleton argument, and the reference in these Rules to
    "sole responsibility"  and  "exclusion  being  undesirable"  (see  sub-
    paragraphs (e) and (f)), was something that needed  consideration.   In
    this sense,  the  matter  was  not  just  "Robinson  obvious"  but  was
    something that had specifically been raised in the  skeleton  argument.
    It is accordingly not correct for the Rule 24 response to end with  the
    statement that, "at no point was the possibility  that  the  Appellants
    could meet those requirements raised" in  relation  to  paragraph  297,
    because although this may not have been raised at the hearing,  it  was
    raised in the skeleton argument.  If it was not raised at  the  hearing
    this may well have been because there was  no  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer in attendance, although that is not to excuse  the  failing  in
    this regard.  All in all, therefore, the decision  below  must  be  set
    aside so that paragraph 297 can be properly considered on the  evidence
    by the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by a judge  other  than  Judge  Boylan-Kemp,
    under paragraph 7.2 of the practice statement so  that  clear  findings
    can be made in relation to accommodation, maintenance, and  whether  or
    not the Appellants are living an independent life.

20. The appeal is allowed.

21. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th June 2017

