
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00062/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 31 March 2021                 |On Wednesday 05 May 2021        |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     OLK
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E  Nicholson,  Counsel  instructed  by  Times  PBS
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   As  this  appeal
involves consideration of the Appellant's medical  condition  and  therefore
refers to personal data of a particularly confidential  nature,  I  consider
it is appropriate to continue that order.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member
of her family. This direction applies,  amongst  others,  to  both  parties.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Ford promulgated on 6 March 2020 ("the Decision"). By the Decision, the
   Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
   dated 19 December 2019, refusing her human rights claim based on her
   family and private life in the UK.  The claim was in large part based on
   the Appellant's medical condition.


2. The Appellant is a national of Zambia.  She was born in the UK but taken
   to Zambia by her parents when she was aged three.  She re-entered the UK
   as a student in 2009.  She had leave to enter in that capacity until 1
   January 2010.  Thereafter, she overstayed.  She applied for further leave
   in November 2019 leading to the decision under appeal. In the interim,
   she completed her studies in law and began working as a paralegal.  It is
   not entirely clear to me how she managed to do this without leave but
   that is not relevant to the issues I have to determine.

3. The Appellant suffers from HIV.  Her condition in the UK is stable and
   maintained by treatment involving monitoring and medication.  I will come
   on to the detail of the evidence in that regard later in this decision.

4. The Appellant also relies on her family life with her sister and nephew
   with whom she lives.  The two sisters grew up in an abusive household.
   Their father was a violent drug addict.  The Appellant says that
   therefore they share a close, emotional bond.  Further, the Appellant's
   sister and nephew are said to depend on the Appellant financially to some
   extent.

5. The Judge accepted that the Appellant receives "psychological and
   emotional support" from her sister and aunt ([34] of the Decision).
   However, she found that this could continue if the Appellant were removed
   to Zambia.  The Judge found at [32] of the Decision that the Appellant is
   well-educated and "a capable young woman" who "has secured stable
   professional employment and is self-supporting".  The Judge did not
   accept that the Appellant would be unable to secure employment in Zambia
   ([35]).

6. In relation to the Appellant's medical treatment, the Judge considered
   the evidence but concluded that there was insufficient evidence that the
   Appellant's return would lead to a breach of Article 3 ECHR on this
   account ([40]).

7. The Judge went on to consider the Article 8 claim including the
   Appellant's family life, the best interests of the Appellant's nephew and
   the Appellant's medical condition which the Judge accepted forms part of
   the Appellant's private life.  Having balanced the interference with the
   Appellant's family and private life, the Judge concluded that removal
   would not be disproportionate and therefore would not breach Article 8
   ECHR.  The appeal was therefore dismissed on human rights grounds.

8. The Appellant appeals the Decision on six grounds as follows:

   Ground one:    The Judge failed to determine a relevant issue under the
   Immigration Rules ("the Rules") namely whether there would be "very
   significant obstacles" to the Appellant's integration in Zambia
   (specifically under paragraph 276ADE(1((vi) of the Rules - "Paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi)").
   Ground two:    Whilst it was accepted that the Judge did reach a
   conclusion in relation to Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), it is said that her
   conclusion was premised on factual errors based on what is said to be an
   error made as to the Appellant's age.
   Ground three:  The Judge is also said to have reached an impermissible
   conclusion in relation to the position on return as regards the
   acceptability of the Appellant's qualifications in Zambia.  It is said
   that there was no evidence on which the Judge could have reached the
   conclusion that such qualifications would be acceptable.
   Ground four:   The Judge erred in her conclusion that the Appellant and
   her family would be able to maintain their family life at long distance.
   Ground five:   The Judge failed to consider whether "the Appellant's
   right to respect for her physical and moral integrity" under Article 8
   ECHR would be breached by removal, specifically with regard to the
   Appellant's medical condition.
   Ground six:         In relation to both Articles 3 and 8 ECHR, the Judge
   erred in her treatment of the evidence before her.

9. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on
   17 August 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:


    "...It is not arguable that the Tribunal failed to undertake a 'broad,
    evaluative judgement' under paragraph 276ADE (vi) of the Immigration
    Rules given its findings at paragraph 42, coupled with its finding (in
    the first sentence of paragraph 39) that the appellant had failed to
    prove that she would be unable to access appropriate treatment for her
    medical condition on return to Zambia.
    Neither is it arguable that the Tribunal's faulty arithmetic in
    calculating the number of years that had elapsed since the appellant
    left Zambia was material to the outcome of the appeal.  If anything,
    the fact the appellant had been absent from Zambia for fewer years than
    the Tribunal had assumed was one that weakened (rather than
    strengthened) her claim to face insurmountable obstacles to integration
    on return.
    It is not arguable that the Tribunal erred in placing little weight
    upon an expert report that failed to identify the source(s) of
    information upon which its author based his or her conclusion that the
    appellant's employment prospects in Zambia were poor.
    It is not arguable that the obiter dicta cited from the judgment in
    Mansoor [2011] EWHC (Admin) established any general or binding
    principle of law.  This is for several reasons, which include (but is
    not limited to) the fact that the judgement was given in judicial
    proceedings (and therefore not technically binding on the Tribunal) and
    that those proceedings had in any event been compromised.
    It is not arguable that the Tribunal made a material error of law in
    failing to consider the Appellant's medical condition within the
    context of Article 8 (in addition to Article 3) given that this could
    not of itself have sufficed to establish such a claim absent some
    additional factor that fitted, 'the Article 8 paradigm' (GS (India)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40).
    It is not arguable that the Tribunal erred in finding that the
    appellant had failed to discharge the burden of proving that adequate
    medical treatment would be unavailable to her on return to Zambia given
    that Dr Madge was 'not sure' that it would be available, whereas it was
    for the appellant to establish (on a balance of probabilities) that
    such treatment would not be available."

   Judge Kelly extended the Appellant's time to appeal as the application
   for permission was out of time.


10. The Appellant renewed the application to this Tribunal on the same
   grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted, it was said on grounds five
   and six only by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on 3 November 2020 in the
   following terms so far as relevant:


    "... The first four grounds of appeal are unarguable.  The First-tier
    Tribunal undertook a well-rounded assessment of the Appellant's likely
    circumstances on return to Zambia, considering all the factors as to
    whether she would face very significant obstacles to reintegration
    which contain no arguable error of law, the first ground of appeal
    amounting only to disagreement.  The second ground of appeal relates to
    a typographical error in the Appellant's age, which if anything is an
    error in her favour and cannot on any view be material.  The third
    ground of appeal somewhat misreads the decision, the First-tier
    Tribunal does not find that the appellant would necessarily be able to
    obtain employment as a lawyer with English language qualifications, but
    only that such professional qualifications and experience would have
    some value in finding employment and cogent reasons were given for
    attaching little weight to the expert report as this was not taken into
    account.  The fourth ground of appeal is not supported by any evidence
    that the family would be unable to keep in touch and there is nothing
    to suggest that they would not be able to keep in touch to maintain
    their relationship by some means.
    The fifth ground of appeal is just arguable, given that the First-tier
    Tribunal does expressly refer to the Appellant's medical condition as
    one of the matters taken into account as part of her private life.   It
    is arguable because it is intrinsically linked with the final ground of
    appeal.
    The final ground is arguable following the Supreme Court's decision in
    AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] 2 WLR
    1152 given the lack of specific evidence from the Respondent beyond the
    reference to a functioning healthcare system and no response to the
    Appellant's evidence identifying a particular medical need for specific
    ARVs and expert evidence (accepted as credible) on problems with supply
    of the required medication, all of which had to be imported and with
    risks of regularity and quality of supply.
    The First-tier Tribunal's decision does [contain] an arguable error of
    law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and permission to
    appeal is therefore granted on grounds five and six only.  Permission
    is refused on all other grounds."


   I observe at this point that, although Judge Jackson stated in her
   reasons that she refused permission on grounds other than grounds five
   and six that was not repeated in the heading of her decision.  I will
   come on to the effect of that below.


11. Judge Jackson indicated her provisional view that the error of law
   issue could be determined at a remote hearing.  The parties were given
   the opportunity to object to that course.  Neither party did so.


12. So it is that the matter comes before me to determine whether the
   Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-
   make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
   so.  The hearing was attended by representatives for both parties and by
   the Appellant herself. The hearing was disrupted by a loss of
   connectivity part-way through the hearing, but reconnection was achieved.
    Apart from that one disruption, the hearing proceeded with no major
   technical difficulties.


13. I had before me the Appellant's bundle before Judge Ford (to which I
   refer as necessary below as [AB/xx]) and the Respondent's bundle of core
   documents.  I also had outline written submissions and a skeleton
   argument prepared by Mr Nicholson and written submissions prepared by Mr
   Melvin.


DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The Ambit of the Grant of Permission

14. I begin with the basis on which permission was granted.  As I indicate
   at [10] above, UTJ Jackson expressed the decision as a grant on grounds
   five and six only.  Mr Melvin therefore submitted that the Appellant's
   arguments should be confined to those two grounds.


15. However, as I pointed out at the hearing, even though the grant of
   permission is expressed as a limited one and the grant states expressly
   within the reasons that permission is refused on grounds other than five
   and six, there is no express refusal within the decision itself (as
   opposed to the reasons).  The Tribunal in the case of Safi and others
   (permission to appeal decision) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) made clear that,
   where a Judge intends to grant permission only on limited grounds and
   refuse on others, that must be made clear in the decision section of the
   permission to appeal notice and not confined to the reasons section.

16. Further, and in any event, I reach the conclusion that I cannot exclude
   from my consideration grounds one to four based on what is said at
   paragraph 22 of the Procedure Rules ("Rule 22") which reads as follows:


    "Decision in relation to permission to appeal
    22.- (1) Except where rule 22A (special procedure for providing notice
    of a refusal of permission to appeal in an asylum case) applies, if the
    Upper Tribunal refuses permission to appeal or refuses to admit a late
    application for permission, it must send written notice of the refusal
    and of the reasons for the refusal to the appellant.
    (2) If the Upper Tribunal gives permission to appeal-
    (a) the Upper Tribunal must send written notice of the permission, and
    of the reasons for any limitations or conditions on such permission, to
    each party;
    (b) subject to any direction by the Upper Tribunal, the application for
    permission to appeal stands as the notice of appeal and the Upper
    Tribunal must send to each respondent a copy of the application for
    permission to appeal and any documents provided with it by the
    appellant; and
    (c) the Upper Tribunal may, with the consent of the appellant and each
    respondent, determine the appeal without obtaining any further
    response."


17. There are two reasons why the wording of Rule 22 leads me to the
   conclusion that the Appellant should be permitted to pursue his first
   four grounds.  First, UTJ Jackson did not, in the operative part of the
   decision granting permission expressly refuse permission to appeal on the
   first ground.  Second, unless a direction is made by the Tribunal, the
   application for permission to appeal stands as the notice of appeal.
   That application therefore includes grounds one to four and there is no
   direction removing those grounds as part of the appeal.


18. I can however deal very briefly with most of the arguments in grounds
   one to four as I agree with UTJ Jackson that they lack merit.  I
   therefore deal with those first for the sake of completeness and despite
   the fact that most of Mr Nicholson's submissions focussed on the issues
   raised by grounds five and six.

Grounds one to three


19. I take these three grounds together as they all concern the Judge's
   analysis whether there are very significant obstacles to integration in
   Zambia for the purposes of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  I make clear that
   for the purposes of these grounds, I exclude consideration of the
   Appellant's medical condition which is the subject of the Appellant's
   grounds five and six, even though there is some overlap there with
   Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).


20. The main paragraph setting out the Judge's conclusion on the Paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) issue is [42] of the Decision which reads as follows:

    "In relation to Article 8 I accept that the Appellant will face
    obstacles to her integration in Zambia but I cannot see how I can find
    on the evidence that those obstacles will be very significant.  She has
    lived her life as an independent adult for 21 years now since she left
    home at the age of 18.  Zambia's laws are based on common law and
    customary law and her qualifications and experience acquired in the UK
    will not be without value in Zambia.  I am not satisfied that she will
    be unable to find and sustain employment suitable to maintain herself
    in Lusaka."

21. I begin with ground one which suggests that the Judge has failed to
   determine the Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) issue.  That is without any merit.
   Although the Judge may not have referred expressly to the paragraph or
   given herself any legal direction in that regard, there is no error of
   substance.  She has clearly understood that the paragraph needed to be
   considered and the level of the test which applies.


22. At [11] to [13] of her outline submissions which were before Judge
   Ford, the Appellant points to the factors which she says are relevant to
   the assessment under Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as being the time spent in
   the UK which includes all her adult life, lack of contacts in Zambia
   (being estranged from her parents) and her medical condition.


23. To consider this ground, it is necessary to say something about the
   structure of the Decision.  The Judge begins her section entitled
   "Conclusion" at [32] of the Decision.  Although that is entitled
   "Conclusion", that section of the Decision in fact encompasses the
   Judge's findings, the Judge having dealt up to that point with the
   evidence received and the legal framework.  As such, when one comes to
   [42] of the Decision, the Judge has already dealt with the Appellant's
   situation in the UK ([32]), family life with her sister and nephew ([33]
   and [34]), situation in Zambia ([35]) and medical condition including
   availability of treatment ([36] to [41]).  Those findings therefore have
   to be read into the Judge's conclusions at [42] of the Decision.

24. I do not at this stage deal with family life (which is the subject of
   the Appellant's ground four) nor with medical condition (which is the
   subject of the Appellant's grounds five to six).  It is appropriate first
   to deal with the two shorter points regarding the obstacles on return.


25. Dealing first with length of residence, it is said that the Judge has
   miscalculated the Appellant's age and that this impacts on her assessment
   of the obstacles on return.  The Judge sets out the background chronology
   in this regard at [2] of the Decision.  The Appellant was born in 1990
   (not 1993 as stated in the grounds).  The chronology within her own
   bundle ([AB/1] states that she returned to the UK on 20 January 2009.
   She was then aged eighteen.  It is correctly recorded at [42] of the
   Decision that the Appellant left home at that age.  The only error
   therefore is a slip between the statement that she left home twenty-one
   years ago rather than eleven years ago.  That error operates in the
   Appellant's favour in two regards.  First, for the purposes of her life
   in the UK, the Judge has assumed that the Appellant has been in the UK
   for longer.  Second, and more importantly, for the purposes of
   integration in Zambia, the Judge has assumed that the Appellant has been
   away from her home country for longer and would be more likely to have
   lost her ability to integrate rather than less so.  The point made that
   the Appellant has lived as an independent adult since coming to the UK is
   no less relevant to the assessment and is not impacted by the error in
   calculation (see also what is said at [8] of the Decision regarding the
   Appellant's background).


26. The point made by the Judge is that the Appellant has lived
   independently in the UK and therefore could do so in Zambia (see in that
   regard [32] of the Decision).  That brings me on to ground three, and the
   ability of the Appellant to rely on her qualifications obtained in the UK
   and to secure employment in Zambia.  There are two answers to the
   Appellant's grounds on this point.

27. First, insofar as it is the Appellant who asserts that she would be
   unable to rely on those qualifications and obtain employment in the legal
   sector in Zambia, it is for her to provide evidence that this is so.  In
   that regard, the evidence which the Judge did have about the Appellant's
   employment prospects is set out at [35] of the Decision as follows:


    "According to the World bank the unemployment rate in Zambia in 2019
    was just above 7%.  The expert Mr Burchill is very negative about the
    Appellant's prospects of employment but his view is not backed up by
    information about professionals living in Lusaka and he does not take
    into account the Appellant's qualifications and experience when
    assessing her ability to secure employment.  The Appellant has several
    years experience as a paralegal and is will [sic] present as an able
    and capable professional in Zambia albeit with British legal
    qualifications.  She presented no evidence as to what she would have to
    do to requalify in Zambia.  She presented no evidence as to enquiries
    she had made of any potential employers in Zambia."


28. Second, what is there said has to be set in context.  The Judge is, as
   Judge Jackson remarked, not saying that the Appellant will necessarily be
   able to practise in Zambia without some form of requalification.  The
   point made however and the reason for giving less weight to Mr Burchill's
   report in that regard is that the qualifications gained will provide
   evidence to prospective employers of her professional background and
   education.  Those are factors not considered by Mr Burchill.  Similarly,
   therefore, when it comes to paragraph [42] and the assessment of
   employment opportunities as a potential obstacle, the Judge does not say
   that she would be able to practise as a lawyer relying solely on the
   qualifications obtained in the UK.  She makes the point that those
   qualifications would not be "without value in Zambia".  There is no flaw
   in the Judge's reasoning in that regard.


29. For those reasons, I emphasise, leaving aside the Appellant's medical
   condition which is considered by the Judge immediately prior to the
   paragraph regarding obstacles to integration in Zambia (which therefore
   needs to be looked at in the context of the earlier consideration of the
   Appellant's medical condition), the Judge has not erred either in failing
   to consider the Appellant's case under Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) nor in her
   findings or reasoning.

Ground Four


30. This ground criticises the Judge's approach to the Appellant's family
   life.  Although not directly relevant to the obstacles to integration,
   the Judge does in this section deal with the Appellant's estrangement
   from her parents.  The Judge's findings in relation to the Appellant's
   family circumstances are at [33] and [34] of the Decision as follows:


    "33. I find that the Appellant shares family life with her sister and
    her nephew because of their current circumstances and their family
    history.  They grew up as two sisters in an abusive household their
    father being a violent drug addict.  They grew close as a result and
    have relied heavily on each other emotionally for many years as
    children and as adults.  In addition the Appellant's sister and her
    sister's son have become financially dependent to some extent on the
    Appellant as they share accommodation and outgoings.  They share a
    closeness with their maternal aunt, in particular since they became
    estranged from their parents having left their parents' abusive home
    and moved to the UK.  The Appellant has no contact with either of her
    parents.  [A] is her only sibling.  She has never had a good
    relationship with her father although it would appear that her sister
    [A]'s relationship with him is even worse. I find that she cannot rely
    on her parents for any support.
    34.  I find that her sister [A] and her aunt [S] will continue to be a
    source of psychological and emotional support for her were she to
    relocate to Zambia.  I accept that they will be unable to supply monies
    on a regular basis for her maintenance due to their own outgoings and
    responsibilities."


31. I have already made the point at [26] above, that the Judge has found
   the Appellant to be independent and therefore to be able to look after
   herself on return to Zambia.  The Judge's findings in that regard are at
   [32] of the Decision as follows:


    "The Appellant is a well-educated lawyer.  She is a capable young woman
    of Zambian nationality who has entered the UK lawfully but then
    overstayed and gone on to study and work in the UK without permission.
    She has secured stable professional employment and is self-supporting.
    She speaks English as her primary language".


32. Paragraphs [32] to [34] need to be taken into account when one comes to
   the Judge's consideration of the Appellant's family life at [46] of the
   Decision which is the paragraph criticised in the Appellant's grounds.
   That reads as follows:


    "It was argued on her behalf that she enjoys family life with her
    sister, nephew, aunt and her aunt's daughter in the UK.  They are
    certainly close, and I accept that there is family life between them.
    But it is in the nature of extended family relationships that the
    family life between individuals will be enjoyed in different ways at
    different times according to the circumstances of the individuals
    involved which invariably shift over time.  I find that the family
    relationships in this case will continue if the Appellant is living in
    Zambia.  The Appellant will maintain her relationships with her sister,
    aunt and their children by written, Skype, social media and telephone
    communication."


33. It is said in the grounds that none of the witnesses gave evidence
   about their "disposition or ability to maintain their relationships in
   the manner described".  It is therefore said that this is impermissible
   speculation.  I return to the point however that it is for the Appellant
   to show the extent of her family life and the level to which removal
   would interfere.  As UTJ Jackson remarked in her permission grant, "[t]he
   fourth ground of appeal is not supported by any evidence that the family
   would be unable to keep in touch and there is nothing to suggest that
   they would not be able to keep in touch to maintain their relationship by
   some means."


34. The evidence given by the Appellant and her sister (who has "recently"
   been permitted to remain in the UK) is that they are close, and that the
   Appellant has a "very strong bond and close relationship" with her
   nephew.  It is said that she is like a second mother to her nephew
   particularly since there is no paternal support.  She "believe[s] that it
   will be emotionally difficult for [her] nephew to be separated from [her]
   and [she] from [him]".  That is undoubtedly the case.  There is however
   no independent evidence from, for example, a social worker as to the
   extent of the impact on the child and the Judge has considered that
   evidence within her assessment of the child's best interests at [43] of
   the Decision.

35. The fact that family life has been found to exist therefore does not
   mean that the appeal succeeds.  It is for the Appellant to demonstrate
   the strength of that family life and how removal would interfere with it.
    The Judge is entitled to consider what weight to give the family life,
   depending on the evidence, and to determine how removal would interfere
   (particularly if no evidence is given in that regard).  As the Judge
   states, the nature and extent of family life can vary over time.  Without
   wishing to speculate, the Appellant may well wish at some point in the
   future to move away to found her own family or may find work elsewhere.
   That is likely to be the position even if she remains in the UK.

36. The point made by the Judge is that context is all when considering the
   extent of and interference with family life. For that reason, the case
   relied upon in the grounds, Mansoor v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department [2011] EWHC 832 (Admin) ("Mansoor"), does not assist. The
   circumstances of that case are very different as is apparent from [16] of
   the judgment on which reliance is placed.  That paragraph reads as
   follows:
      "Third, the reference to 'continue to contact and can visit and
      communicate and maintain family ties' seems to again have been generic
      assessment as between husband and wife, husband and minor children,
      claimant wife and minor children as well as the parents and their
      older children, who were now over the age of 18 using the ages given
      at the outset of this judgment. If members of a family enjoy family
      life in an inter-dependent household of partners and minor and
      dependent children it is no comfort to say that they can continue to
      enjoy that family life by telephoning each other, emailing, video
      conferencing or any of the other forms of electronic technology that
      may be in existence. Lord Bingham was indicating this in the landmark
      case of Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 at paragraph 20, but more
      recently, and I appreciate not available to the IJ at the time, the
      Upper Tribunal has made the point in the case of EM (Zimbabwe) [2010]
      UKUT 98 (IAC). If the IJ thought that there would be no interference
      with the family life enjoyed between husband and wife and parents and
      minor children if they could communicate from abroad he was again
      mistaken."
37. As that paragraph reveals, the case of Mansoor concerned a family unit
   involving parents and minor children which is somewhat distinct from the
   circumstances of this case.  In any event, the judgment makes clear that
   the error was said to be in the finding by the Judge that there would be
   no interference with that family life even if one of the interdependent
   members were removed.  The Judge in this case does not find that there
   would be no interference.  The "family life interests" are weighted in
   the balance in the overall proportionality assessment at [47] of the
   Decision. Further, and in any event, Blake J did not decide that it could
   never be said that family relationships could be continued remotely.  His
   criticism was of the finding to that effect in the context of the extent
   of the family life and consideration of that family life by the Judge in
   that case.


38. For those reasons, I conclude that there is no merit in the Appellant's
   fourth ground.

Grounds five and six


39. I turn then to the grounds on which permission was expressly granted
   and which took up a major part of the submissions at the hearing before
   me.  I take them together as both concern the Appellant's medical
   condition. It is however appropriate to start with a point which does not
   find any mention in the original grounds of challenge to the Decision but
   is taken only against the refusal of permission to appeal by the First-
   tier Tribunal.  This concerns the appropriate burden and standard of
   proof.


40. I begin with the way in which this issue is articulated in the grounds
   at [14] and [15] as follows:


    "14. The test propounded in AXB v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC) is that of 'a real risk'.  As was
    submitted in the Appellant's grounds the Tribunal said:
         'We accept that the evidence provided by the appellant does not
         have to amount to 'clear proof' in terms of the standard which
         applies: that is due to the speculative nature of what has to be
         proved and is what justifies the application of the 'real risk'
         test in cases of this kind.'
     15. It follows that in refusing permission the Judge of the First Tier
    Tribunal was wrong in law to say that the Tribunal had not erred in law
    in its determination of the Appellant's appeal in respect of Article 3
    because:
         'it was for the appellant to establish (on balance of
         probabilities) that such treatment would not be available'."

41. The first and most obvious point to make in this regard is that I am
   not here concerned with the reasons of the First-tier Tribunal when
   refusing permission to appeal but the approach of the Judge in the
   Decision.  Mr Nicholson was however able to show me by reference to the
   Decision that the Judge is said to have imposed the burden on the
   Appellant to a balance of probabilities standard. The following are the
   relevant references:


    "6.  The Appellant bears the burden of proof and the standard is the
    balance of probabilities."
    "26. The Appellant appeals on Articles 3 and 8 human rights grounds.
    The Appellant bears the burden of proof and the standard is the balance
    of probabilities. I am considering the circumstances up to the date of
    the hearing."


42. The first of those references is a general self-direction.  The second
   is that relied upon in the main by Mr Nicholson, in particular so far as
   Article 3 ECHR is concerned.


43. I turn then to what is said in AXB (Art 3 health: obligations; suicide)
   Jamaica [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC) ("AXB") about the burden and standard in
   the headnote as follows:


    "3.  The burden is on the individual appellant to establish that, if he
    is removed, there is a real risk of a breach of Article 3 ECHR to the
    standard and threshold which apply.  If the appellant provides evidence
    which is capable of proving his case to the standard which applies, the
    Secretary of State will be precluded from removing the appellant unless
    she is able to provide evidence countering the appellant's evidence or
    dispelling doubts arising from that evidence.  Depending on the
    particular circumstances of the case, such evidence might include
    general evidence, specific evidence from the Receiving State following
    enquiries made or assurances from the Receiving State concerning the
    treatment of the appellant following return."
    [my emphasis]


44. Although that guidance was given in the context of a protection claim
   to which the test of "real risk" invariably applies, I accept that the
   same test is adopted in AXB in relation to what would occur on return in
   a health case.  That is because, as the Tribunal observed in AXB in the
   citation in the grounds (set out at [40] above) what will occur in the
   future is necessarily speculative.


45. The Supreme Court considered what was said in AXB in the case of AM
   (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ
   64 ("AM (Zimbabwe)") as follows:


    "32.             The Grand Chamber's pronouncements in
    the Paposhvili case about the procedural requirements of article 3,
    summarised in para 23 above, can on no view be regarded as mere
    clarification of what the court had previously said; and we may expect
    that, when it gives judgment in the Savran case, the Grand Chamber will
    shed light on the extent of the requirements. Yet observations on them
    may even now be made with reasonable confidence. The basic principle is
    that, if you allege a breach of your rights, it is for you to establish
    it. But 'Convention proceedings do not in all cases lend themselves to
    a rigorous application of [that] principle ...': DH v Czech
    Republic (2008) 47 EHRR 3, para 179. It is clear that, in application
    to claims under article 3 to resist return by reference to ill-health,
    the Grand Chamber has indeed modified that principle. The threshold,
    set out in para 23(a) above, is for the applicant to adduce evidence
    'capable of demonstrating that there are substantial grounds for
    believing' that article 3 would be violated. It may make formidable
    intellectual demands on decision-makers who conclude that the evidence
    does not establish 'substantial grounds' to have to proceed to consider
    whether nevertheless it is 'capable of demonstrating' them. But,
    irrespective of the perhaps unnecessary complexity of the test, let no
    one imagine that it represents an undemanding threshold for an
    applicant to cross. For the requisite capacity of the evidence adduced
    by the applicant is to demonstrate 'substantial' grounds for believing
    that it is a 'very exceptional' case because of a 'real' risk of
    subjection to 'inhuman' treatment. All three parties accept that Sales
    LJ was correct, in para 16, to describe the threshold as an obligation
    on an applicant to raise a 'prima facie case' of potential infringement
    of article 3. This means a case which, if not challenged or countered,
    would establish the infringement: see para 112 of a useful analysis in
    the Determination of the President of the Upper Tribunal and two of its
    senior judges in AXB v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2019] UKUT 397 (IAC). Indeed, as the tribunal proceeded to
    explain in para 123, the arrangements in the UK are such that the
    decisions whether the applicant has adduced evidence to the requisite
    standard and, if so, whether it has been successfully countered fall to
    be taken initially by the Secretary of State and, in the event of an
    appeal, again by the First-tier Tribunal."
    [my emphasis]


46. Whilst I accept therefore that the Appellant has only to show there is
   a "real risk" that the Appellant will face a situation which breaches her
   Article 3 ECHR rights, it is evident from this passage that it is for the
   Appellant to establish her case that the relevant (high) Article 3
   threshold is reached and to do so based on evidence which demonstrates
   that there are substantial grounds for believing that the real risk will
   eventuate.  There can therefore be no doubt where at least the initial
   burden lies and the threshold which applies to what has to be
   demonstrated.  Although the Court in AM (Zimbabwe) concluded that the
   ECtHR had intentionally modified the threshold which applies in an
   Article 3 health case in Paposhvili, it remains a high threshold.   As
   the Supreme Court noted at [31] of the judgment, "the general context is
   inhuman treatment; and the particular context is that the alternative to
   'a significant reduction in life expectancy'' is 'a serious, rapid and
   irreversible decline in.. health resulting in intense suffering'".


47. Turning back to the Decision itself, I accept that if the standard
   which the Judge required to be satisfied in relation to what would occur
   on return was one of a balance of probabilities as suggested in
   particular by what is said at [26] of the Decision then that would be an
   error, although might not, depending on the remainder of the reasoning,
   be a material one. I also observe that it may also be a somewhat
   simplistic analysis to suggest that the burden in relation to Article 8
   ECHR falls on an appellant to a balance of probabilities standard.  As I
   have reiterated a number of times above, it is for an appellant to
   demonstrate by evidence the strength of the family and private life with
   which removal will interfere and how removal will interfere.  The
   establishing of the facts in that regard is based on a likelihood of what
   will happen.  However, as the Judge recognised in this case at [27],
   thereafter, it is for the Tribunal to assess the circumstances.  It is
   for the Respondent to provide justification of the interference in terms
   of the necessity and proportionality of removal action (in other words to
   justify her actions in the public interest).


48. As Mr Nicholson accepted, the Judge did not have the benefit of what
   was said by the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) at the time of the hearing
   or the Decision.  Although the decision in AXB had been reported by the
   time of the hearing and Decision, there is no reference to it in the
   Appellant's outline submissions.  Reliance is placed on the Court of
   Appeal's judgment in AM (Zimbabwe).  It is no doubt for that reason that
   the Judge has set out parts of that judgment in extenso at [25] of the
   Decision.  Her citation includes the following which she has underlined
   no doubt for emphasis:


       "[38]  So far as the ECtHR and the Convention are concerned, the
       protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
       confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
       applicant is in the removing country. It extends to cases where
       'substantial grounds have been shown for believing that [the
       applicant], although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a
       real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in the
       receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being
       exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her
       state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant
       reduction in life expectancy' (para. [183]). This means cases where
       the applicant faces a real risk of rapidly experiencing intense
       suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the receiving state
       because of their illness and the non-availability there of treatment
       which is available to them in the removing state or faces a real
       risk of death within a short time in the receiving state for the
       same reason. In other words, the boundary of Article 3 protection
       has been shifted from being defined by imminence of death in the
       removing state (even with the treatment available there) to being
       defined by the imminence (i.e. likely 'rapid' experience) of intense
       suffering or death in the receiving state, which may only occur
       because of the non-availability in that state of the treatment which
       had previously been available in the removing state."
       [my emphasis]


49. I observe that, although the Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) concluded
   at [30] of the judgment that the Court of Appeal was wrong in its
   comments about the test in terms of imminence of death, there is no
   criticism by the Supreme Court of the remainder of that paragraph in
   particular in relation to the procedural, evidential requirement.


50. On the one hand, therefore, the Judge has made a bare assertion that
   the Appellant bears a burden of establishing a breach of Article 3 ECHR
   to the balance of probabilities standard and on the other has directed
   herself that the requirement is to provide evidence which demonstrates
   that there are substantial grounds for believing that there is a real
   risk of an Article 3 breach.

51. Although I accept that this is not clear from the Decision itself, it
   may be that the distinction which the Judge had in mind is between the
   establishing of the facts underlying the Appellant's case and the
   consideration thereafter of the consequences of the factual findings.
   That would not be inconsistent with the position in protection cases
   where, for example, an appellant may need to establish his or her
   nationality, ethnic group and past involvement with various groups. I
   accept that, in a protection claim, even past facts do not necessarily
   have to be proved to a standard of likelihood (see for example what is
   said in Karanakaran v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2000]
   EWCA Civ 11 at [98] to [102] of the judgment).  However, that is largely
   due to the difficulty of proving past events in such cases and that much
   of the evidence will be the appellant's testimony and therefore a Judge's
   assessment will turn on the credibility of an appellant.  By contrast, a
   health case, certainly in terms of the past and current position is
   likely to consist of evidence which is far more likely to be capable of
   proof to the civil standard.  Taking the instant case as an example, the
   Appellant has put forward evidence from those treating her in the UK as
   to the nature and extent of her condition and the treatment she is
   receiving.  She has put forward evidence which she says demonstrates what
   is the availability currently of that treatment in Zambia. That evidence
   then is more likely to be capable of proving past and current facts to
   the civil standard.


52. I do not need to decide whether this is a distinction which the Judge
   intended to draw, however, because, having read the Decision carefully, I
   am satisfied that, even if the Judge has erred in her assertion at [6]
   and [26] of the Decision, she has not applied a standard of balance of
   probabilities when assessing what will occur in the future.  Her
   conclusions in relation to what will occur on return to Zambia are set
   out at [39] and [40] of the Decision as follows:


       "39.   I do not accept that there is sufficient evidence to find
       that provided the Appellant uses a registered medical practitioner
       for her ongoing treatment, she will be at risk of not being able to
       access suitable ARVs or of being provided with out of date and
       ineffective drugs so as to diminish the effectiveness of her
       treatment.  The Appellant's situation falls well short of the high
       threshold for Article 3 breach.  I am not satisfied that if removed
       to Zambia she 'would face a real risk on account of the absence of
       appropriate treatment in the receiving country or lack of access to
       such treatment, of being exposed to a serious, rapid and
       irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting in
       intense suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy'.
       40.    I am not satisfied on the evidence as it stands that she
       'faces a real risk of rapidly experiencing intense suffering (i.e.
       to the Article 3 standard) in the receiving state because of their
       illness and the non-availability there of treatment which is
       available to them in the removing state or faces a real risk of
       death within a short time in the receiving state for the same
       reason."

   In other words, the Judge has reached her conclusion based on an
   assessment whether the evidence discloses a real risk.


53. Whilst I would accept that the reference to sufficiency of evidence at
   [39] of the Decision might beg the question of the standard which has
   been applied to assess whether it is sufficient, I am unable to read what
   is said in the remainder of that paragraph and at [40] of the Decision as
   indicating that the Judge adopted the wrong standard.  She has clearly
   directed herself to the question whether the evidence shows that there
   will be a real risk of treatment breaching Article 3 ECHR.  There is no
   reference to probability or even likelihood as to what will occur on
   return.  She has not required the Appellant to show that it is more
   likely than not that what she says will happen will in fact occur.  In
   the end, the Judge's conclusion turns on the absence of evidence that the
   requisite (high) Article 3 threshold is reached.


54. Before turning to the substance of the evidence, it is necessary to say
   something about [25] of the grounds regarding the burden of proof
   applying the guidance in AXB.  I have already set out at [43] above the
   headnote in relation to the way in which the burden is to be met.  I have
   also set out at [45] above, the paragraph of the judgment in AM
   (Zimbabwe) expanding upon what is there said and citing that guidance
   with approval.


55. As those paragraphs now make clear, it is for the Appellant to
   establish the "real risk" that she meets the very high threshold in
   Article 3 ECHR (described by the Supreme Court as a threshold which is a
   "not undemanding" one to cross).  It is only if her evidence establishes
   that the threshold is met that the burden passes to the Respondent to
   dispel the "doubts arising from that evidence".  In other words, whilst
   the standard of proof which the Appellant has to meet to show what will
   occur on return is a low one (and lower than balance of probabilities)
   the threshold of the effect of removal which the evidence has to
   demonstrate to be met is a high one.  It is not entirely clear to me that
   this is understood in what is said at [25] of the grounds.

56. Having set out my view about the burden and standard of proof and the
   Article 3 threshold which applies and the way the Judge deals with that
   in the Decision (which I have concluded is not erroneous in law), I turn
   to the Judge's consideration of the evidence which the Appellant
   provided.


57. I begin with the evidence of Dr Madge, the Appellant's consultant.  She
   is an Associate Specialist in the Department of Infection and Immunity at
   the Royal Free Hospital, London.  She has written a number of letters.
   The most recent is dated 10 July 2019 which appears at [AB/42] and reads
   as follows (so far as relevant):

    "..[The Appellant] has been seen here since 2012.  She was diagnosed
    with TB in February 2012 and subsequently found to be HIV positive.  At
    that time, she had advanced HIV disease with a low CD4 count (90
    cells/mm3) and a high viral load (over half a million copies.mL).  She
    has been on antiviral therapy since June 2012.  She remains on
    antiviral therapy and is currently on Rilpivirine 25mg daily and Kivexa
    1 tablet daily.  Her most recent viral load is undetectable with a CD4
    count of 429 cells/mm3. She is seen regularly in this service for
    monitoring and blood tests relating to her HIV disease.
    In the past she has had some intolerability of previous antiviral
    regimes.
    At the current time, she is not awaiting any other referrals in other
    departments here.
    I am not sure whether her current, exact, regime of Rilpivirine and
    Kivexa would be available in Zambia.  She has failed due to
    intolerability on previous regimes which might be available and whilst
    I know HIV therapy is available in Zambia, the range of antivirals is
    less and the range of monitoring tests, too, is less than in this
    country..."

58. The Judge faithfully recorded that evidence at [16] of the Decision and
   also noted at [13] of the Decision that the Appellant has "reacted badly
   to certain ARV combinations in the past".


59. Dr Madge's evidence then is that the Appellant's condition is well
   controlled on two types of medication with regular blood tests and
   monitoring (although it is not said in the letter how often she is
   monitored).  As will be noted from the foregoing, Dr Madge does not
   express any firm opinion about the availability of the Appellant's
   medication and routine monitoring which exists in Zambia.  She merely
   records that "she is not sure" that the exact medication and forms of
   monitoring exist there.

60. In terms of what would occur on return to Zambia, the Appellant relied
   on a report of John Birchall.  He is a Development Economist who has
   lived and worked in Zambia. His report dated 8 November 2019 appears at
   [AB/277-295].  He does not profess himself to have any medical expertise
   or involvement in medical services in that country.  Instead, he has
   relied on "several professional contacts working in the country",
   "especially those working in the medical profession".   It is not clear
   when he last lived in Zambia.  He says that he has "a range of contacts
   who live and work in Zambia".

61. The relevant section of Mr Birchall's report reads as follows:

    "To make certain of my personal interpretation of the availability of
    the correct range of medicines prescribed to [OLK] whilst resident in
    the United Kingdom, I asked the following for their opinions.  I used
    the latest recommendations from her medical team.
    Those I selected for assistance were:
    Sara Longwe - the leading Equality campaigner and proponent for
    comprehensive HIV/Aids treatment for all, regardless of income
    Felix Masiye - the Chief Executive of the prominent HIV/Aids NGO, which
    offers assistance to HIV/Aids sufferers.
    A doctor at the University Hospital, Lusaka - who wished to remain
    anonymous.
    I noted some differences in opinion.  Sara felt that even at the
    University Hospital, [OLK] would struggle to receive continuous
    treatment and the correct dosage.  She noted periods of acute shortages
    and some evidence of fake drugs and other supplies being out of date.
    The doctor did not deny shortages, especially when foreign currency was
    in short supply.  He was proud of how his team coped against what we
    agreed to be 'considerable challenges'.
    Felix was of the opinion that supplies were regular, free to someone
    who registers and provides adequate information of their requirements
    and that such treatment would be free of charge.  In fairness this is
    what appears on the official website of the Ministry of Health.
    Author's Comments
    I felt it best to investigate via an independent party, to whom I gave
    no information as to specific needs of [OLK], the availability of
    medicines required by her.  She too is a medical practitioner and
    someone I have worked with on development programmes involving girls
    and female hygiene.  She is a young Zambian, proud of her country and
    decorated at 'international' level for her work with young females.
    She favoured more the interpretation of Sara and the doctor.  In theory
    all medicines noted are available.  But supplies can be erratic and
    sometimes out of date stocks are known to be fed into the conventional
    supply.  I would therefore suggest to the Court that [OLK] cannot be
    guaranteed an adequate supply of ALL the drugs she needs.
    I would be concerned for [OLK] in two ways.  One is the actual
    availability of the specific drugs she needs and the other would be the
    regularity of supply.  Little, if any, credit lines exist for HIV drugs
    and as many come through South Africa the recipient institution has to
    be able to pay in foreign currency. I would also like to inform the
    Court of the problems associated with fake drugs, which can be
    considerable, especially if the route into Zambia involves Zimbabwe -
    which is now entering yet another period of hyper inflation and the
    firing of doctors from the public sector.  There is a distinct chance
    that out of date drugs will move within the region and so will fakes."

62. Before moving on to the Judge's consideration of this evidence, I make
   the following observations of my own.  First, the final paragraph of that
   section appears to be comment by Mr Birchall himself.  It is unsourced.
   As I have pointed out, he is a Development Economist and not a medical
   professional.  Whilst he may have personal knowledge of Zambia's economy
   which might include how the country procures drugs, much of what is there
   said appears speculative.  Although he refers earlier in the report to
   drugs having to be imported and his "own knowledge of the Zambian health
   service", he makes no mention from where that knowledge derives nor from
   when.  Similarly, his comment about "experience of low level of supplies,
   erratic supplies, poor quality of supplies" contains no specific
   information about from when and where his own experience arises nor
   whether the medications of which he is there speaking are those to treat
   HIV/Aids and/or the specific medication which the Appellant requires.


63. Second, it is unclear why Mr Birchall took it upon himself to ask
   another individual about the comments he had received from the three
   identified sources.  That person is not named.  It is not said that she
   has any expertise in relation to HIV/Aids treatment in Zambia.
   Importantly, Mr Birchall did not inform this person of the Appellant's
   medical needs.  The comments he received from that source appear largely
   worthless.

64. Third, the issue is not whether the Appellant can be guaranteed a
   steady supply of drugs but whether the supply of those drugs would be
   interrupted to a level that there would be a real risk that her condition
   would deteriorate to the threshold of the test set out in AM (Zimbabwe).



65. Fourth, it is said that the doctor from the University Hospital in
   Lusaka (who would appear to be the person most directly involved in the
   treatment of HIV/Aids sufferers) "did not deny shortages".  However, it
   is not said that he identified these shortages as of particular concern
   and said that his team "coped".

66. Fifth, insofar as there was a clear difference of opinion between Sara
   and Felix, it is to be noted that Sara is a campaigner whereas Felix is
   the Chief Executive of a prominent and relevant NGO.  As such, it is
   likely that his opinion would carry more weight.  As Mr Birchall fairly
   accepts, the official website of the Ministry of Health in Zambia
   indicates that there are regular supplies of medication which is provided
   free of charge.


67. I turn then to how the Judge dealt with this evidence.  She records the
   evidence in this regard at [17] to [22] of the Decision as follows:

    "17. In the country expert report John Birchall states that he spoke to
    an independent medical practitioner in Zambia about the availability of
    medicines required by the Appellant.  He says 'In theory all medicines
    noted are available.  But supplies are erratic and sometimes out of
    date stocks are known to be fed into the conventional supply'.  He
    suggests that the Appellant cannot be guaranteed an adequate supply of
    all the drugs that she needs.  He is concerned in two ways.  Firstly
    the availability and secondly the regularity of supply.  He said that
    given the presence of fake drugs in the market (in particular coming
    through Zimbabwe where they are entering another period of
    hyperinflation), there is a distinct chance that out of date drugs will
    move within the region and so will fakes.
    18.  Mr Burchill [sic] spoke to a doctor at the University Hospital in
    Lusaka who did not deny shortages, especially when foreign currency was
    in short supply.
    19.  The chief executive of a prominent AIDS NGO which offers
    assistance to AIDS and HIV sufferers said that supplies were regular,
    free to someone who registers and provides adequate information of
    their requirements and such treatment would be free of charge.  But the
    doctor to whom Mr Burchill spoke said that even at the University
    hospital the Appellant would struggle to receive continuous treatment,
    noting periods of acute shortages and some evidence of fake drugs and
    supplies being out of date.  Specialist care is only available in
    Lusaka and even then the care is not consistent and is understaffed.
    He said that the Appellant would be forced to live in a high-density
    area of the capital and as a single woman with a serious medical
    condition he would not advise this.  He says that the Appellant would
    struggle to gain any meaningful employment.
    20.  The numbers of those suffering with HIV/AIDs has fallen but
    remains worryingly high at 14.3% of women in Zambia over the age of 15
    in 2017.  This compares with 8.8% of their male counterparts.  In 2018
    75% of all people with HIV were on treatment.  This rose to 89% in
    2019, 75% of whom were virally suppressed.
    21.  Mr Burchill [sic] concludes that although Zambia is a peaceful
    country its finances have suffered considerable decline in the last
    decade and that has had a negative impact on the quality of the service
    offered and the maintenance of supplies.  He says that as someone
    returning after a considerable period of time abroad, with virtually no
    other family or other support, she would be vulnerable to exploitation.
     He believes she would have difficulty maintaining herself in such a
    society. She would suffer the additional difficulty of social stigma.
    22.  Mr Burchill [sic] is a development economist with considerable
    knowledge of and expertise in Zambian affairs and he has used suitable
    qualified contacts in Zambia to gather and verify information relevant
    to the Appellant's case.  I consider him to be a suitably qualified and
    experienced country expert on Zambia and attach weight to his report
    and included in my holistic assessment."

68. The Judge reaches her findings about the medical evidence generally and
   Mr Birchall's evidence specifically at [36] and following (leading to the
   conclusions which I have already set out at [39] and [40] of the
   Decision).  This passage reads as follows:


    "36. Mr Burchill is concerned about [the] whether there would be a
    steady and reliable supply of suitable antiretrovirals for this
    Appellant to maintain the stability of her current condition.  He made
    some enquiries of a medical contact but he has not enquired of the
    health service or of NGO's including the World health organisation as
    to whether the Appellant would be able to access supplies of suitable
    ARVs.
    37.  I was concerned that he assessed the Appellant's difficulties on
    the basis that she would be very ill on arrival or shortly thereafter,
    unable to work or if able to work then working in a menial job, only
    able to afford the most basic accommodation in an overcrowded area and
    be at risk of exploitation as a young, single and vulnerable woman.  I
    find that I have to treat his opinion with some caution because he has
    not taken account of the Appellant's education, professional skills and
    experience and her coping mechanisms acquired through her life
    experiences since coming to the UK in order to assess whether she will
    be able to secure employment in Lusaka (where I accept that she will
    need to live in order to access suitable medical treatment).
    38.  Her current medical condition is well controlled with ARVs, her
    viral load is negligible and she is currently well.  She will not
    present as unwell if her condition continues to be well controlled.
    While the death rate from HIV/AIDs is horrific in Zambia the expert has
    not sufficiently acknowledged that the percentage of deaths among those
    suffering from HIV/AIDs in Zambia has fallen markedly over the last few
    years which is good evidence of successful treatment being available in
    the country."

69. At [22] of the grounds, issue is taken with the Judge's treatment of Dr
   Madge's evidence.  It is said that "the only evidence as to the
   availability of the Appellant's necessary medication came from Dr Madge.
   There was nothing in the objective evidence compiled by the Appellant's
   representatives which indicated otherwise than that her doubts as to the
   availability of Rilperverine and Kivexa were well founded".  As I have
   already pointed out, though, Dr Madge did not offer a view about
   availability of treatment save to say that she was not sure that the
   medication would be available.  She did not say that it would not be nor
   even that it might not be.  She expressed concerns in that regard but
   that is the highest her evidence can be put.

70. I deal at this point with a discrete point regarding monitoring.  It is
   said in the grounds that Dr Madge was concerned whether monitoring would
   be available.  However, the same answer applies.  Dr Madge was not sure
   that it would be but did not know.  Mr Birchall's report does not deal
   with this discrete issue.  The concerns expressed by those with whom Mr
   Birchall spoke relate to availability of medication not with availability
   of monitoring.


71. Turning then to Mr Birchall's report, the grounds set out extracts from
   his report and from the Decision.  However, all that is said is that Mr
   Birchall's report "identified the existence of the risk that the
   Appellant would not receive the treatment she needed in Zambia".  Mr
   Nicholson in the course of his submissions accepted that the evidence in
   this regard was "very well set out" by the Judge at [16] to [19] of the
   Decision (as set out so far as relevant to Mr Birchall's report above).
   He said though that this recital of the evidence could not lead to the
   conclusion at [39] of the Decision.

72. I disagree.  The Judge at [36] of the Decision has pointed out the
   deficiencies in Mr Birchall's report in relation to availability of
   medication.  As I have already pointed out, more might be said about
   those deficiencies, but the point made by the Judge that Mr Birchall had
   not made direct enquiries of the health service or of NGOs including the
   WHO about accessible supplies of ARVs is a valid one.  In fact, Mr
   Birchall had made some enquiries of a treating doctor and the Chief
   Executive of one NGO as the Judge recorded.  The evidence which they
   provided as set out in Mr Birchall's report does not assist the Appellant
   for the reasons I have already given.

73. As the Judge points out at [38] of the Decision, Mr Birchall has also
   failed sufficiently to acknowledge the progress of Zambia in treating
   HIV/Aids and reducing deaths (as set out at [20] of the Decision).

74. Finally, as the Judge also found, Mr Birchall failed sufficiently to
   have regard to what were likely to be the Appellant's circumstances on
   return, particularly given her professional qualifications and
   background.

75. Those were all criticisms of Mr Birchall's report that the Judge was
   entitled to make.  She was entitled to reach the conclusion she did about
   the evidence.  Whilst the Appellant might have shown that there were some
   concerns about the availability of medication from time to time, her
   evidence did not show sufficiently that there would be a real risk that
   she would not be able to access the medication she needs in order to keep
   her condition under control as it is now.  As I have already pointed out,
   the Appellant has to show a real risk that she would suffer very serious
   impact on her health.  As the Supreme Court said in AM (Zimbabwe), the
   threshold is a not undemanding one.

76. The other criticism made about the Judge's treatment of the Appellant's
   evidence as to her medical condition is that set out in ground five.  In
   short summary, the Appellant says at [20] of the grounds that "the Judge
   of the First Tier Tribunal has nowhere in her determination indicated
   whether the Appellant's right to respect for her physical and moral
   integrity is violated by the Respondent's decision nor whether if it is
   the violation is proportionate".

77. I have already dealt with the Judge's findings about very significant
   obstacles to the Appellant's integration in Zambia leaving out of account
   the Appellant's medical condition as well as her findings regarding the
   Appellant's family life.  At [47] of the Decision, the Judge says this:

    "The decision is in accordance with the law and is, on the facts of
    this case entirely justified.  I accept that the Appellant's HIV+
    status and the needs arising from that condition form part of her
    private life.  I find that this educated, intelligent and capable young
    woman will ensure that she is provided with legitimate medication from
    a reliable source through a qualified and reputable medic.  I am not
    satisfied that she will be unable to find suitable employment to
    support herself financially as she has done in the UK for the last 10
    years.  While unemployment levels are higher than in the UK, this
    Appellant has the advantage of several years of good qualifications and
    professional working experience behind her.  Even taking into account
    the best interests of the children and adding in the weighted private
    life interests and the family life interests of the Appellant and
    weighing it against public interest in immigration control, I find that
    the decision is justified and goes no further than is necessary on the
    facts of this case to protect the public interest.  The decision is
    proportionate and there is no breach of Article 8 protected rights of
    any of the individuals named above.  I dismiss the appeal on Article 8
    grounds."

78. Whilst I accept that the Judge does not use the words "physical and
   moral integrity" she has considered this in substance in her finding that
   the Appellant's medical condition and "needs arising from that condition"
   (in other words the treatment she is receiving for it) form part of her
   private life with which removal will interfere.  The Judge has therefore
   taken into account when balancing interference with the public interest
   the impact on the Appellant's private life of the withdrawal of treatment
   in the UK.  This passage follows the Judge's finding that there is not a
   real risk that the Appellant will be unable to access treatment to
   control her condition on return to Zambia.  There is no error in the
   Judge's assessment in this regard.  She has not failed to have regard to
   the Appellant's physical and moral integrity.


79. At [12] to [15] of her outline submissions, the Appellant says that the
   Judge has failed to take into account the Appellant's medical condition
   as part of the obstacles to integration and has failed conversely to take
   into account the Appellant's other family and private life when
   considering Article 8 as a whole.  Mr Nicholson made reference to what
   was said by Laws LJ in GS (India) and others v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40 that "If the Article 3 claim fails
   ..., Article 8 cannot prosper without some separate or additional factual
   element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm - the
   capacity to form and enjoy relationships - or a state of affairs having
   some affinity with the paradigm."  The difficulty for the Appellant in
   this regard is that the Judge, at [47] of the Decision, has clearly taken
   into account all the factors relating to the Appellant's family and
   private life when balancing the interference against the public interest.
    As I have already pointed out, that includes the impact on the
   Appellant's private life of the withdrawal of her treatment in the UK.


80. As to the consideration of the Appellant's medical condition as part of
   the very significant obstacles to integration, it is again necessary to
   look at the structure of the Decision.  The paragraph which I cited at
   [20] above regarding the obstacles to integration follows immediately
   after the Judge's assessment of the Appellant's medical case and the
   consideration of what will occur on return.  That section includes
   consideration of the likely employment situation.   What is said in the
   first sentence of [42] of the Decision about the existence of obstacles
   to integration has to be read in conjunction with the section of the
   Decision preceding that paragraph.  The Judge was clearly aware that the
   Appellant would face some obstacles to integration based on her medical
   condition but concluded that those were not sufficient to reach the
   threshold.


81. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that grounds five and six do
   not disclose errors of law in the Decision.  The Judge has applied the
   correct burden and standard of proof when assessing what will occur on
   return to Zambia as regards the Appellant's medical treatment.  The
   Appellant's medical condition and treatment therefor are considered both
   under Article 3 and Article 8.  Those factors are considered alongside
   the other factors forming part of the Appellant's private and family life
   when assessing interference.  The Judge was entitled to reach the
   conclusions she did that the evidence did not sufficiently show that
   there would be a real risk of impact reaching the threshold of Article 3
   ECHR and that, even taken with all factors relating to the Appellant's
   family and private life, when interference with that family and private
   life is balanced against the public interest, removal would not breach
   Article 8 ECHR.




CONCLUSION

82. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law
   in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision with the result that
   the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

DECISION
The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford promulgated on 6 March 2020
does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I therefore
uphold the Decision.



Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  26 April 2021

