
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00988/2018
     HU/00995/2018
     HU/00993/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2018                         |On 8th January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                 luckson [m]
                                  hecel [l]
                                    [m m]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Guy Davison of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is a citizen of Malawi.   His  partner  the  second
    Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines and their son is a citizen of
    both Malawi and of the Philippines.  They made an application for leave
    to remain here on the  basis  of  family  and  private  life  and  that
    application was refused resulting in an appeal to  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Khan  who  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3rd  September  2018
    dismissed the appeal.  Grounds of application were lodged  and  it  was
    said that the judge had erred in  law  in  that  he  had  not  properly
    considered the reasonableness  of  removal  of  the  child  who  was  a
    qualifying child.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the matter came before me  on
    the above date.

 3. It is not necessary to set out the Grounds of Appeal any further as  Mr
    Jarvis, quite properly, indicated that he did not consider the decision
    to be safe and it should  not  stand;  a  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was required.  His reasoning, endorsed by Mr Davison  for  the
    Appellants, was that the judge had not considered  the  impact  on  the
    child of the removal of the family from the United Kingdom.

 4. Given that parties agreed there was an error in law (and I  agree  with
    their views) it is plain enough that the decision is not safe and  must
    be set aside. Mr Davison sought no more than a remittal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. It seems to me that further fact-finding is necessary  and  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Khan.

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 8. I set aside the decision.

 9. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. No anonymity order is made.




Signed      JG Macdonald                               Date   18th  December
2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JG Macdonald

