
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00391/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th September 2020 and 2nd February 2021 |On 26th February 2021         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                MOURAD TALBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 10th
      December 2018 to refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK
      on the basis of his private life and on Article 8 grounds, was
      dismissed by Judge Thapar for reasons set out in a decision
      promulgated on 26th of July 2019.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne
      on 29 November 2019.  Following a hearing before me on 14th January
      2020, I set aside the decision of Judge Thapar for reasons set out in
      my error of law decision. I found the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal Judge is tainted by a material error of law and that the
      appropriate course is for the decision to be remade in the Upper
      Tribunal.


   3. The matter was listed for a hearing on 16th April 2020, but that
      hearing was vacated because of the need to take precautions against
      the spread of Covid-19.  As the issues in the appeal are limited, I
      issued further directions in which I expressed a provisional view that
      the hearing could be held remotely, by Skype for Business.  Neither
      party objected.  The resumed hearing before me on 15th September 2020
      took the form of a remote hearing using skype for business.  The
      hearing was adjourned part heard and listed before me again on 2nd
      February 2021.  On both occasions I sat at the Birmingham Civil
      Justice Centre. I was addressed by the representatives and the hearing
      was conducted in exactly the same way as it would be if the parties
      had attended for a face-to-face hearing.  I was satisfied that no
      party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any
      restriction on a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and
      proportionate.  I was satisfied that it was in the interests of
      justice and in accordance with the overriding objective to proceed
      with a remote hearing because of the present need to take precautions
      against the spread of Covid-19, and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied
      that a remote hearing would ensure the matter is dealt with fairly and
      justly in a way that is proportionate to the importance of the case,
      the complexity of the issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and
      resources of the parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied
      that both parties had been able to participate fully in the
      proceedings.


   4. The appellant's representatives did not file and serve a consolidated
      bundle setting out the evidence upon which the appellant relied, until
      18:30pm on Friday 11th September 2020. That consolidated bundle
      running to some 291 pages included the evidence of a number of
      individuals that Ms Akinbolu intended to call to give evidence, but
      who had not given evidence before the FtT previously.  As the bundle
      previously sent had not reached me, Ms Akinbolu arranged for the
      bundle to be emailed to the Tribunal on 15th September 2020.  Although
      I was told that the bundle runs to some 291 pages, I had only been
      provided with parts A and B, comprising of 115 pages.  At the resumed
      hearing on 2nd February 2021, Ms Akinbolu assured me that she would
      only be referring to the material set out in the first 115 pages that
      I do have before me.


INTRODUCTION


   5. By the decision dated 10th December 2018, the respondent refused a
      human rights claim made by the appellant.  The appellant has appealed
      that decision under s82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002 on the ground that the decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human
      Rights Act 1998.


   6. The appellant claims he arrived in the United Kingdom in April 1997
      using a French identity document, in the name of Samir Madi, to which
      he was not entitled, but which he used to obtain work following his
      arrival in the UK.  He claims that he has lived continuously in the UK
      for at least 20 years so that he satisfies the requirements to be met
      by an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds of private life set
      out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.  If that
      requirement is met, Ms Akinbolu submits, it follows that his appeal
      should be allowed on human rights grounds.


   7. Because it is relevant to my consideration of the claim made by the
      appellant, I refer to the decision of FtT Judge White promulgated on
      27th November 2012 following the refusal of a previous application for
      leave to remain that was made on 16th June 2011.  That application was
      made on the basis of the appellant's long residence in the UK, and
      Judge White considered the appellant's claim that he has been in the
      UK since April 1997.  Judge White heard evidence from the appellant
      and a number of witnesses.  As evidence of his presence in the UK
      since April 1997, the appellant relied upon a series of payslips from
      a company called Fish and Fowl Ltd, for whom he claimed he worked
      (using the name Samir Madi), as a delivery man. The first payslip
      relied upon was dated 2nd May 1997.  At paragraph [13] of his
      decision, Judge White said:


         "... If he entered the United Kingdom on 24th April 1997 he could
         not have been working for Fish and Fowl Limited for four weeks by
         2nd May. He could not even have been working for two weeks by 2nd
         May, although that is what this payslip invites me to accept."


   8. Judge White noted the appellant also relied upon a series of payslips
      from London Hotel Management Limited, the first of which was dated 30
      April 2000, and the last dated December 2001. Judge White noted that
      subsequent to that, he had before him P60's for the employment of
      Samir Madi, firstly with Thameslink rail and then starting with the
      year ending 5th April 2006, from Chiltern Railway Co Ltd.  At
      paragraph [16] of his decision, Judge White said.


         "... I have no doubt that on the balance of probabilities that it
         is the appellant who has been employed in the name of Samir Madi by
         Chiltern Railways for some time.  It seems to me also on the
         balance of probabilities likely that the person who was employed in
         a similar capacity and with the same National Insurance number by
         Thames Link rail was also the appellant using the name Samir Madi.
         It seems to me that I have some reliable evidence covering the
         period from some time in 2002, certainly during the tax year up to
         the end of 5th April 2003 and thereafter, to show that Samir Madi
         has been employed by two railway companies in this country. This
         also shows that the person who has been using that identity is in
         fact the appellant who appears before me...."


   9. At paragraphs [17] to [30] of his decision Judge White addressed the
      other evidence relied upon by the appellant at the hearing of his
      appeal in November 2011.  At paragraph [21] Judge White addressed the
      evidence of the appellant's brother, Mohammed Talbi that he could
      remember in 2012, the precise date in 1997 when he went to Gatwick
      airport to collect his younger brother.  Judge White concluded that
      "... the evidence about a specific date must be approached with very
      considerable reservation.".  Judge White also found at paragraph [22]
      of his decision that the evidence of Samir Keniza that he was able to
      remember the date upon which he drove the appellant's brother to
      Gatwick airport to collect the appellant was not "particularly
      reliable".


  10. Having carefully considered the evidence before him, at paragraphs
      [29] and [30], Judge White said:


         "29. ... I come to the conclusion at the end of the day that I
         cannot be satisfied that the documents produced prior to 2002 are
         reliable documents and it seems to me that there is a very specific
         reason for thinking that the documents purporting to be from Fish
         and Fowl may in fact be wholly unreliable documents. If so it seems
         to me that this must affect the view that I take of the rest of the
         evidence. I conclude that those documents not being reliable and
         that the claim to remember a specific date on which the appellant
         entered the United Kingdom also not being reliable, it has not been
         shown on the balance probabilities that the appellant entered the
         United Kingdom as long ago as 1997.


         30.  It further seems to me that once I reach that conclusion it is
         impossible for me to be satisfied of the date on which he did
         finally enter the United Kingdom save that it must have been some
         time in or before 2002. It is also right to add that if he had,
         when first entering, a false French identity, he would have no
         difficulty travelling between this country and Europe, so that his
         presence, for example, at Mr Merzouk's wedding would not
         necessarily mean that he was continuously here thereafter. On the
         findings that I feel able to make I am not satisfied that he meets
         the requirements of paragraph 276B to have been in this country for
         a full period of 14 years. That is sufficient to mean that this
         appeal under the immigration rules falls to be dismissed."


  11. I record at the outset, that at the hearing before me on 15th
      September 2020, Mrs Aboni conceded that although FtT Judge White does
      not expressly say in his decision that the appellant has lived
      continuously in the UK since 2002, the respondent accepts the evidence
      before Judge White at the hearing of the appeal in November 2011 was
      such that the appellant has established that he has lived continuously
      in the UK between 2002 and 2011.  Furthermore she concedes that based
      upon the medical evidence and the applications that have been made to
      the respondent by the appellant since 2011, the respondent accepts the
      appellant has lived continuously in the UK since the decision of Judge
      White was promulgated.


The issues


  12. In the respondent's decision of 10th December 2018, the respondent
      concluded that the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements for leave
      to remain on the grounds of private life set out in paragraph 276ADE
      (1) of the immigration rules for two reasons. First, the application
      falls for refusal on grounds of suitability, as the appellant's
      presence in the UK is not conducive to the public good and his conduct
      and character makes it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK.
      The respondent relies upon the appellant's deception in order to enter
      and remain in the UK, and his illegal presence in the UK throughout,
      which is said to show a blatant disregard of the immigration rules of
      the UK.  Second, the respondent does not accept the appellant has
      provided sufficient evidence that he has lived in the UK since April
      1997 and has therefore lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
      years.


The evidence


  13. The Tribunal has been provided with a comprehensive consolidated
      bundle that is relied upon by the appellant. Tab A of that bundle
      includes a copy of my error of law decision and the decision of Judge
      White promulgated on 27th November 2012.  I have been provided, in Tab
      B, with a chronology and a number of witness statements that are
      relied upon by the appellant, and the appellant's medical records. As
      I have already said, the last page of that bundle that I have is page
      115, and Mr Akinbolu confirmed in her submissions that it is that
      page, that she would be drawing my attention to.


  14. It is entirely impractical for me to refer in this decision to all the
      evidence that is set out in the extensive bundle prepared by the
      appellant's representatives. I do however make it clear that in
      reaching my decision I have had regard to all of the evidence whether
      that evidence is expressly referred to or not, in this decision.


  15. I heard evidence from the appellant, Mr Abbas Merzouk, Mr Mourad Maza
      and Mr Hamza Imansoura at the appearing before me on 15 September
      2020. Each of them gave their evidence via video link.  The appellant,
      Mr Mourad Maza and Mr Namza Imansour were able to give their evidence
      remotely from the offices of the appellant's solicitors.  Mr Abbas
      Merzouk now lives in Slovakia and gave his evidence by video link from
      his home.  I heard evidence from Mr Hakim Sadeg on 2nd February 2021.
      He too, gave his evidence remotely from the offices of the appellant's
      solicitors.


The evidence


  16. The appellant adopted his witness statement dated 19th May 2020.  He
      confirms that he was born in Algiers and that he is the second eldest
      of five siblings.  He was about 20 years old when he left college and
      then spent about 1� years in Algeria when he was neither studying nor
      working.  He then went to college to study banking for two years and
      after the end of his course, he could not enter employment or continue
      to study.  He claims, in 1996, he decided to go and see his uncle in
      Italy, and he stayed with his uncle for about six months.  His brother
      was living in the UK and the appellant claims his intention was to
      come to the UK and make a better life for himself.  The appellant had
      a conversation with his uncle and was introduced to someone in Naples.
      He was provided with a false passport and he used that document to
      book a flight to Gatwick.  He claims he feels bad for entering the UK
      illegally and not making himself known to the authorities but was
      young and impressionable. The appellant maintains that his first job
      was as a delivery assistant in a Fish and Fowl Shop situated at
      Liverpool Street between May 1997 and March 2000.  He also claims that
      he obtained a job in his true name of Morad Talbi using a temporary
      national insurance number as a night porter at Hyde Park West Hotel,
      London, between March 1998 and July 1999. He claims he was then
      employed as a night porter at the Majestic Hotel between March 2000
      and December 2001, before working with British Rail from 2002 to 2012.


  17. The appellant states that he has been supported by Mr Mustapha, his
      brother, and members of the Algerian community in his area.  He claims
      that between 1999 and 2013 he assisted his friend Hamza Imansoura with
      the Cricklewood Football Team.  In his oral evidence before me, he was
      referred to a photograph that appears at page 45 of the appellant's
      bundle.  He confirmed that the photograph had been taken in 1998 in a
      pub in Charing Cross, following the wedding of his friend Mr Mourad
      Maza that had taken place that day at Wembley Town Hall. The appellant
      identified himself and Mr Maza in the photograph.


  18. The appellant confirmed that he had met Mr Hamza Imansoura in the
      Cricklewood area in the late 1990s and they had become close friends.
      He was referred to the photograph at page 55 of the appellant's bundle
      and identified himself and Mr Imanzoura in that photograph.


  19. By way of clarification, I asked the appellant when the photograph at
      page 55 of the bundle was taken.  He replied that it was taken in
      Leytonstone about 15 years ago, although he could not recall exactly
      when.  He also confirmed to me that he first met Mr Imansoura in
      1997/1998 and to the best of his recollection, he had been in the UK
      for about 1 to 1� years when they first met. He explained that there
      was a big Algerian community playing football in the Cricklewood area
      at the time, and only one halal butchers in the area that members of
      the community would go to. He said that they had both also prayed at
      the same Mosque and got to know each other.  The appellant said that
      he used to see Mr Imansoura quite often and they played football
      together in 1998 before he became one of his assistants.  They played
      football nearly every week at first, but then played less regularly.


  20. The evidence of Mr Abbas Merzouk, Mr Mourad Maza, Mr Hamza Imansoura
      and Mr Hakim Sadeg is set out in the record of proceedings and it
      serves no purpose to burden this decision with a lengthy recitation of
      their evidence.  I refer to the evidence in my findings and
      conclusions below.


The party's submissions


  21. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs Aboni relied upon the matters set out
      in the respondent's decision.  She submits the application under the
      immigration rules falls for refusal under the suitability grounds set
      out in Section S.LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM.  That is, the presence of the
      appellant in the UK is not conducive to the public good because his
      conduct, character, associations, or other reasons, make it
      undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK.  Mrs Aboni submits that
      having entered the UK unlawfully, the appellant demonstrated a blatant
      disregard for the Immigration Rules until he made an application some
      14 years after his arrival.  She also submits that Sections S-LTR.4.2
      and 4.3 are relevant because of the appellant's previous use of
      deception to remain in the UK.  She submits the appellant used a false
      identity to enter and secured employment under that false identify,
      when he had no permission to work, and was also able to access medical
      services using that false identity.


  22. Mrs Aboni submits that on the evidence before the Tribunal, the
      appellant has failed to establish that he has lived continuously in
      the UK for at least 20 years at the date of the application made on
      8th May 2017.  She submits Judge White previously found the documents
      relating to the presence of the appellant in the UK during the period
      prior to 2002 were unreliable, and there were doubts about the
      reliability of the evidence of the witnesses that Judge White heard
      from.  Mrs Aboni submits that even if the appellant had attended the
      wedding of Abbas Merzouk on 28th March 1998 and the wedding of Mourad
      Maza on 3rd November 1998, that is not sufficient to establish the
      appellant has lived in the UK continuously since 1998.  Taking into
      account the appellant's unlawful entry to the UK and his use of false
      documents previously, Mrs Aboni submits, the appellant could have left
      and re-entered the UK.


  23. Mrs Aboni submits that although the appellant relies upon the evidence
      of a number of witnesses, the evidence is of little assistance in
      establishing whether the appellant has lived continuously in the UK.
      Each of the witnesses that have given evidence claim to believe the
      appellant has been in the UK, but none of them has been in continuous
      contact with the appellant throughout or has first-hand knowledge of
      the appellant's presence in the UK between 1997/98 and 2002.  She
      submits none of the witnesses can say with any certainty that the
      appellant has been in the UK continuously and there is no independent
      evidence to corroborate his presence in the UK during that crucial
      period.  Mrs Aboni submits the appellant cannot succeed under
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules, and if I find that
      he has lived in the UK for less than 20 years, the evidence does not
      establish that there would be very significant obstacles to
      integration into Algeria where he has family.  The appellant's family
      would assist him, and the appellant can continue to receive financial
      support from friends.  He has remained in contact with the Algerian
      community and there is nothing to prevent the appellant maintaining
      contact with the friends that he has made.  The private life that the
      appellant has established in the UK has been established while he has
      been in the UK unlawfully and having regard to the relevant public
      interest, Mrs Aboni submits, the appellant's removal would not be
      disproportionate or in breach of Article 8.


  24. Ms Akinbolu relied upon her skeleton argument dated 11th September
      2020. As to whether the application falls for refusal on grounds of
      suitability, she submits the suitability grounds relied upon are
      discretionary, and in any event, the appellant's unlawful entry to the
      UK and the deception relied upon by the respondent occurred over 10
      years ago.  She submits the duration of a re-entry ban where an
      applicant is deported from the UK or uses deception in an application
      for entry clearance would be 10 years.  Here, the deception was over
      10 years ago.


  25. The appellant maintains that he meets the criteria of paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii), or alternatively, given the length of time he has been
      resident in the UK, removal would constitute a disproportionate
      interference with his private life.  Ms Akinbolu submits there is no
      dispute between the parties that the appellant entered the UK in 1997
      and the issue between the parties, is whether he lived in the UK
      continuously between 1997 and 2002.  She refers to the witness
      statements and letters relied upon from various individuals that
      support the appellant's claim that he has resided in the UK since 1997
      and the medical records that appear at pages 74 to 115 of the
      appellant's bundle that corroborate the claim that the appellant has
      resided in the UK since 2000.  Mrs Akinbolu submits the evidence
      corroborates the appellant's account of entry in 1997, and continuous
      residence thereafter.   Alternatively, she submits, the appellant has
      established a strong and entrenched private life in the United Kingdom
      over the course of 23 years in the United Kingdom, and, even if it is
      not accepted that he has produced evidence of continuous residence
      over that period, the appellant has built up a substantial private
      life during that time.  He has worked, both voluntarily and to support
      himself, and has paid the taxes due.  He has assisted with various
      community-based projects, including the running of a local football
      team.  He is a source of support to friends and to his brother, with
      whom he has a very close relationship, and in turn, he depends on
      others for their support.  Ms Akinbolu submits that insofar as s.117B
      of the 2002 Act is concerned, the appellant is fully conversant in
      English, and whilst his leave has not been lawful, it has been
      substantial.  The appellant has not relied on public support over the
      course of his time in the United Kingdom.  Ms Akinbolu submits the
      appellant's ties with Algeria have significantly weakened, and his
      knowledge of current custom and culture is out of date. He has no job
      to rely upon, and little means of support.  Thus, she submits, the
      strength and length of his private life in the UK outweighs the
      legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control.


Findings and conclusions


   26. The appellant does not claim to have established a family life in the
       UK. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
       the grounds of private life are set out in paragraph 276ADE of the
       immigration rules.  Insofar as relevant here, paragraph 276ADE
       states:


         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:


            (i) does not fall for refusal  under  any  of  the  grounds  in
            Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5  in
            Appendix FM; and


            ...


            (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at  least  20  years
            (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


            ...


            (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years  or  above,
            has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
            (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there  would  be
            very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into
            the country to which he would have to go if required  to  leave
            the UK."


         ...


   27. Being able to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the
       Immigration Rules requires being able to meet the suitability
       requirements set out in paragraph 276ADE (1).  It is convenient to
       refer to the relevant requirements referred to by the respondent:


         Section S-LTR: Suitability-leave to remain


         S-LTR.1.1. The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain on
         grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2. to 1.8.
         apply.


         ...


         S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive
         to the public good because their conduct (including convictions
         which do not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character,
         associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them
         to remain in the UK.


         ...


         S-LTR.4.1. The applicant may be refused on grounds of suitability
         if any of paragraphs S-LTR.4.2. to S-LTR.4.5. apply.


         S-LTR.4.2. The applicant has made false representations or failed
         to disclose any material fact in a previous application for entry
         clearance, leave to enter, leave to remain or a variation of leave,
         or in a previous human rights claim; or did so in order to obtain
         from the Secretary of State or a third party a document required to
         support such an application or claim (whether or not the
         application or claim was successful).


         S-LTR.4.3. The applicant has previously made false representations
         or failed to disclose material facts for the purpose of obtaining a
         document from the Secretary of State that indicates that he or she
         has aright to reside in the United Kingdom.


   28. Here, the respondent refers to the appellant's immigration history
       and his claim to have entered the UK in April 1997. She notes the
       appellant's evidence that he entered the UK with a French ID that he
       obtained with the help of an agent. She noted it was not until June
       2011, some 14 years later, that the appellant made an application for
       indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long residence under
       paragraph 276B of the immigration rules in force at the time. The
       respondent noted that the application was refused on 25th September
       2012.  On 25th September 2012 a form IS151; Notice that a person is
       to be treated as an illegal entrant/a person liable to administrative
       removal under section 10 of the 1999 Act was also served upon the
       appellant because the appellant had been found to have committed
       document abuse.  The decision to refuse the application for
       indefinite leave to remain carried a right of appeal and the
       appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
       Tribunal Judge White in November 2012. The respondent referred to the
       further applications for leave to remain that were made by the
       applicant and refused in October and November 2013.  She then states:


          "Suitability


         For the reasons given above, your application falls for refusal on
         grounds of suitability in Section S-LTR under paragraph
         276ADE(1)(i) of the Immigration Rules because your application
         falls for refusal under paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of the immigration
         rules as your presence in the UK is not conducive to the public
         good and your character makes it undesirable to allow them (sic) to
         remain in the UK. This is because you claim to have been in the UK
         for over 20 years despite never having had any legal leave to enter
         or remain in the UK. You have shown blatant disregard of the
         immigration rules of the UK and have shown little, if any, desire
         to regularise your immigration status. Your application falls for
         refusal of suitability under Section S-LTR because you have
         previously used deception in order to enter and remain in the UK.
         You therefore fail to meet the suitability paragraphs S-LTR.4.2 and
         S-LTR.4.3."


   29. I reject the submission by Ms Akinbolu that the suitability grounds
       are discretionary.  Paragraph S-LTR.1.1 of Appendix FM states that an
       applicant will be refused (my emphasis) on grounds of suitability if
       any of paragraphs S-LTR.1.2. to 1.8. apply.  Therefore, a mandatory
       refusal will result if one or more of the discrete factual
       circumstances are established, and paragraph S-LTR.1.6. identifies
       one such circumstance.  Paragraph S-LTR.4.1. of Appendix FM states
       that the applicant may be refused (my emphasis) on grounds of
       suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.4.2. to S-LTR.4.5. apply and
       refusal under paragraphs S-LTR.4.2 and S-LTR.4.3 is therefore,
       discretionary.


   30. An application can be refused on grounds of suitability under
       paragraph S-LTR.1.6 if the presence of the applicant is not conducive
       to the public good because their conduct, character, associations or
       other reasons make it undesirable to allow the applicant to remain in
       the UK.   The wording of the provision is general in its terms,
       confirming that an applicant's presence in this country is 'not
       conducive to the public good' because their 'conduct', 'character',
       'associations' or 'other reasons' make it 'undesirable' to allow them
       to remain in this country. The applicant does not need to have been
       convicted of a criminal offence for the provision to apply. In his
       witness statement, the appellant accepts that he used a false
       identity to enter the UK and to work. He states that he has never
       been in trouble with the police and Mrs Aboni did not claim that the
       appellant has any convictions.


   31. The immigration rules should be read sensibly, and I am mindful of
       the function which they serve in the administration of immigration
       policy. Lord Brown confirmed in Mahad v. Entry Clearance Officer
       [2009] UKSC 16, at [10], in a judgment approved by the other members
       of the Court, that '[t]he Rules are not to be construed with all the
       strictness applicable to the construction of a statute or a statutory
       instrument but, instead, sensibly according to the natural and
       ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising that they are
       statements of the Secretary of State's administrative policy.'  I
       have already set out above the reasons given by the respondent for
       concluding that the application fell for refusal on the grounds of
       suitability.


   32. A fact sensitive enquiry is required, and I remind myself that the
       burden of proof in respect of paragraph S-LTR.1.6 rests upon the
       respondent.  It is uncontroversial that even if the appellant did
       arrive in the UK in April 1997 as he claims, he took no steps
       whatsoever to regularise his immigration status until he made his
       application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of long
       residence, in June 2011. During that lengthy period of time,
       consistent with the findings previously made by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge White in the determination promulgated on 27th November 2012, I
       find the appellant used a false identity knowingly, to secure
       employment.  In light of the entries set out in the appellant's
       medical records, I also find that he had access to medical treatment
       using the false identity.  I have no doubt that he believed when he
       made his application in June 2011 that if he could satisfy the
       respondent that he has lived in the UK since April 2017 and therefore
       continuously for a period of 14 years, he was likely to succeed in
       his application.  Paragraph 276B(i)(b) of the immigration rules in
       force at the time, required that he had had at least 14 years
       continuous residence, lawful or otherwise, in the United Kingdom.


   33. I find that the use of a false identity to enter, work and remain in
       the UK without making any attempt to regularise his immigration
       status for a significant period (on the appellant's account, 14
       years), amounts to sufficiently reprehensible conduct for the
       purposes of paragraph S-LTR.1.6.  The conduct is not mere
       carelessness, genuine or in any way innocent.  Even acknowledging the
       rule is concerned with conduct of a sufficiently serious character,
       albeit not requiring conviction for a criminal offence, and that even
       dishonest conduct will not always and in every case reach a
       sufficient level of seriousness, such dishonest behaviour as
       demonstrated by the appellant here, strikes at the heart of
       immigration control and as the respondent stated in her decision,
       demonstrates a blatant disregard for the immigration rules of the UK.
       There was, I find, a deliberate attempt by the appellant to evade
       immigration control and any contact with the respondent by a cynical
       attempt not to draw attention to himself until he believed he was in
       a position to demonstrate that he could make an application on the
       grounds of long residence in June 2011.


   34. I must however consider whether that conduct, makes it undesirable to
       allow the appellant to remain in the UK.  I do so, taking account of
       all relevant circumstances known about the applicant.  The appellant
       claims in paragraphs [31] to [33] of his witness statement that he
       assists in the care of a friend that has been in a care centre for
       about 19 years after having had a stroke. The appellant sees him 3 to
       4 times a week and provides him with assistance in feeding, going to
       the toilet and encouraging him with exercise. He also describes the
       bond that he has established with another individual that he met at
       the St John's Care Centre, that he has maintained contact with.  That
       evidence was not challenged by Mrs Aboni and I accept it.


   35. I have also had regard to the numerous statements and letters that
       are relied upon by the appellant that all speak to the appellant's
       kindness towards others, and which I accept, establish that the
       appellant has made a positive contribution to his local community.  I
       have a letter before me from the National Algerian Centre' dated 15th
       February 2017 that confirms the appellant has volunteered for the
       charity in numerous ways through partaking in projects and assisting
       at  its caf�.  The appellant is described in the letters and
       statements before me, as an individual that is well organised,
       competent, popular, honest, charitable and someone who dedicates much
       of his time to helping others.  I accept, as the appellant claims, he
       has never been in trouble with the police.  I also accept, as Ms
       Akinbolu submits, the deception the appellant embarked upon occurred
       several years ago. These are all factors that in my judgment weigh in
       favour of the appellant.


   36. I conduct a balancing exercise informed by weighing all relevant
       factors, and in reaching my decision I have also had regard to the
       factors that weigh against the appellant.  The appellant entered the
       UK illegally and sought for a significant period, to remain here,
       without any regard for immigration control.  The appellant knowingly
       used a false identity document to enter that was supplied to him by
       an agent, in the name of someone else, and he used that false
       identity to seek employment.  Although I accept that the appellant's
       fraudulent activities are not the most egregious, they do in my
       judgement, strike at the heart of immigration control.  True it is
       that the deception occurred several years ago, but the appellant has
       been aware since his appeal was dismissed by Judge White in November
       2012 that he has no lawful basis to be in the UK.  Undeterred, and
       notwithstanding the positive contribution the appellant has made to
       his local community, the appellant has remained in the UK unlawfully,
       albeit now using his true identity. He sought to take advantage of
       paragraph 276B of the immigration rules in 2011 previously and having
       exhausted his right of appeal, nevertheless remained in the UK
       knowing he had no proper basis to do so. The appellant has throughout
       his presence in the UK demonstrated a blatant disregard for the
       immigration rules and the need for orderly immigration control.
       Although, as Ms Akinbolu submits, the duration of a re-entry ban
       where an applicant is deported from the UK or uses deception in an
       application for entry clearance would be 10 years and the deception
       here occurred over 10 years ago, a 're-entry ban' such as that
       referred to in Appendix V of the immigration rules, applies from the
       date the individual left the UK.  The appellant has made a positive
       contribution to his local community, but I am quite satisfied that
       those he has assisted and supported will continue to receive any
       support and assistance they require.  The activities of the local
       community that he assists with, will continue without the appellant
       and without any detriment to the local community.


   37. On balance, I am satisfied and find that the presence of the
       appellant in the UK is not conducive to the public good because his
       conduct makes it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK.  I
       find that the application falls for refusal under Section S-LTR.1.6.
       of Appendix FM.


   38. In the circumstances, I do not need to consider whether the
       application also fell for refusal under the discretionary grounds set
       out in Section S-LTR.4.2 and S-LTR.4.3.  I do however note that the
       appellant entered the UK unlawfully using a false identity document.
       He did not make any application to the respondent at all until the
       application made on 16th June 2011. He had not in fact made a false
       representation or failed to disclose any material fact in a previous
       application for entry clearance, leave to enter, leave to remain or a
       variation of leave, or in a previous human rights claim (my
       emphasis).  Similarly, he had not previously made false
       representations or failed to disclose material facts for the purposes
       of obtaining a document from the respondent (my emphasis) that
       indicates that he has a right to reside in the UK.  He had entered
       unlawfully and simply did nothing until he made his application in
       June 2011. Any false representations that he made were not made to
       the respondent or made in a previous application to the respondent.
       Neither was any false representation made in order to obtain from a
       third party, a document required to support such an application or
       claim to the respondent.  It is the appellant's conduct that has led
       me to the conclusion that the application fell for refusal on grounds
       of suitability.


   39. I now turn to the appellant's length of residence.  I begin by saying
       that I do not accept, as Ms Akinbolu submits, that there is no
       dispute between the parties that the appellant entered the UK in
       1997.  The respondent does not accept the appellant arrived in the UK
       in April 1997. The respondent states in her decision: "you have not
       provided sufficient evidence that you have lived in the UK since
       April 1997...".  Mrs Aboni concedes the appellant has lived
       continuously in the UK since 2002.  The issue is whether the
       appellant has lived continuously in the UK between April 1997 (the
       date he claims to have entered the UK) and 2002.


   40. I remind myself that the principles set out in Devaseelan [2002]
       UKAIT 00702, apply and the determination of Judge White stood as an
       assessment of the claim that the appellant was making at the time of
       that first determination.  Judge White concluded that he could not be
       satisfied that the documents produced before him to evidence the
       appellant's continued presence in the United Kingdom prior to 2002
       were reliable documents.  In fact, his view was that there is very
       specific reason for thinking that the documents purporting to be from
       Fish and Fowl may in fact be wholly unreliable and he concluded that
       the appellant had failed to establish on the balance probabilities
       that the appellant entered the United Kingdom as long ago as 1997.


   41. Mrs Aboni concedes Judge White found the appellant must have come to
       the UK some time in or before 2002, and that the appellant has lived
       continuously in the UK since 2002.  In my search to establish the
       dates between which I find the appellant has continuously lived in
       the UK,  I have had regard to the documents that are set out the
       appellant's bundle, the evidence of the appellant, the letters and
       statements relied upon by the appellant and the oral evidence of the
       witnesses called to give evidence before me.


   42. Ms Akinbolu drew my attention to the appellant's medical records that
       are to be found in the appellant's bundle. I see that the records
       relate to Samir Madi (born 03.03.78), the false identity adopted by
       the appellant when he entered the UK.  At page 115 of the appellant's
       bundle there is an entry in the GP records dated 1st January 2000
       which states "Date of entry to Uk".  There is no evidence before me
       as to how that entry came to be recorded in the GP records, but it
       suggests that at some point the appellant told his GP that he entered
       the UK in January 2000.  Ms Akinbolu was unable to draw my attention
       to any other evidence explaining that entry in the appellant's GP
       records.


   43. The first consultation recorded (page 105 of the bundle) is a
       consultation with Dr Britta Derbuch-Markovic at the GP surgery on 8th
       October 2002.  That records the problem as "Haemorrhoids" and records
       the medication prescribed. That entry can be reconciled with the
       first entry in the section headed 'Medication' (page 106 of the
       bundle).  I am quite satisfied that there is evidence of regular
       attendances by the appellant and his GP surgery following that first
       entry recorded on 8th October 2002. The two entries dated 1st January
       2000 and 1st January 2001 are curious.  Looking at the GP records, I
       have been unable to find any evidence of consultations attended by
       the appellant between January 2000 and January 2001. In the section
       'Significant past' (page 74 of the bundle), there is an entry dated
       1st January 2001 by Dr Richard Mendall.  The entry simply states
       "Haemorrhoidectomy".  If the appellant did in fact undergo a
       Haemorrhoidectomy, I have been unable to find anything within his GP
       records that record any consultations, referrals or medication
       leading to that procedure.  In the absence of any satisfactory
       explanation for those entries, I find that the GP records relied upon
       by the appellant establish that he has lived in the UK continuously
       since October 2002.


   44. I then turn to the other evidence before me regarding the appellant's
       presence in the UK.  I gain no assistance from the following
       evidence. The authors of the various letters were not called to give
       evidence.


        a. The letter the National Algerian Centre (page 15 of the bundle)
           confirms the appellant has volunteered for the charity since
           August 2013.  It is uncontroversial that the appellant has lived
           in the UK continuously since 2002.


        b. Miss Park states in her undated letter (page 16 of the bundle)
           that she met the appellant "many years ago in London ...".
           There is no evidence before me as to when they first met.


        c. Mr Sofiane Behidi states in his letter dated 16th January 2019
           (page 18 of the bundle) that he has "known Mr Talbi Mourad for
           many years".  There is no evidence before me as to when they
           first met or the frequency of their contact over the years.


        d. Elmas Lachi states in her letter dated 15th March 2019 (page 16
           of the bundle) that she has known the appellant since 1998 and
           they have become very good friends over the years.  There is no
           further elaboration as to the circumstances in which they first
           met, or the frequency of their contact over the years.


        e. Nabil Benakmoum states in his letter dated 16th March 2019 (page
           25 of the bundle) that he first met the appellant "... Nearly 17
           years ago and we have been close friends ever since ...".  At
           its highest the evidence establishes that Mr Benakmoum met the
           appellant in or about 2002 and they have been close friends ever
           since.  It is uncontroversial that the appellant has lived in
           the UK continuously since 2002.


        f. Mr Halim Ghalem states in his letter dated 3rd April 2019 (page
           27 of the bundle) that he has known the appellant since 1997,
           without any further elaboration. There is no evidence as to the
           circumstances in which they first met, or the frequency of their
           contact over the years, beyond the very vague claim that the
           appellant is a very good friend and has been a customer in his
           shop since the opening.


   45. In his letter dated 7th April 2019 (page 29 of the bundle), which Mr
       Hakim Sadeg confirmed in his oral evidence to be true, Mr Sadeg
       confirms that he has known the appellant "for the last decade".  I
       accept his evidence, but it does no more than establish that the
       appellant has been resident in the UK continuously since 2009. It is
       uncontroversial that the appellant has lived in the UK continuously
       since 2002.


   46. I attach little weight to the following evidence:


        a. Mr Abdelkader Akhrih:  He was not called to give evidence and
           his witness statement dated April 2020 (page 30 of the bundle)
           is unsigned.  There are unexplained anomalies in his evidence.
           He claims that he has known the appellant since 1997.  He claims
           they lived in the same house together between 1997 and 2008 when
           the appellant moved out. He claims the appellant did not leave
           the country during the time they lived together. He claims the
           appellant worked at the "Overground station" and he worked at
           Ria Money Transfer.  They would see each other nearly every
           morning and often shared breakfast together.  If they had lived
           in the same house together between 1997 when the appellant
           claims to have arrived in the UK, it is surprising that Mr
           Akhrih was not called to give evidence before First-tier
           Tribunal Judge White in 2012, to attest to the appellant's
           presence in the UK since 1997.  Furthermore, Mr Akhrih refers to
           the appellant working at an 'Overground station'.  The appellant
           claims that his first job was as a delivery assistant in a Fish
           and Fowl Shop, and that between March 1998 and July 1999, he
           also worked as a night porter at the Hyde Park West Hotel.  It
           was not until 2002 that he began working for British Rail.


        b. Azzedine Hattabey: He was not called to give evidence and his
           letter dated 2nd February 2019 (page 19 of the bundle) is
           unsigned.  He states he has known the appellant since the
           appellant came to England in 1997. He states he and the
           appellant are very passionate Arsenal football club supporters
           and the appellant "... regularly used to come over to my house
           to watch football".  He states that they used to play football
           together in Algeria and England, and, when he first had a stroke
           "19 years ago" the appellant was always there for him.  The
           letter is in the vaguest of terms and makes the bold assertion
           that he has known the appellant since the appellant came to
           England in 1997 without any information as to the circumstances
           in which they met and how he recalls that to be in 1997.


        c. In his letter dated 14th March 2019 (page 21 of the bundle),
           Samir Kenzia states that when the appellant arrived in the UK 22
           years ago (i.e. 1997), the appellant's brother had asked him to
           pick the appellant from Gatwick airport.  He goes on to say that
           during all these years the appellant has been a close friend to
           him and his family.  He claims they have been "socialising
           together for years", mostly when playing football and eating
           out.  Mr Keniza gave evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge
           White as set out in paragraph [22] of Judge White's decision.
           He does not now claim to know the precise date upon which the
           appellant arrived in the UK but maintains the appellant arrived
           in the UK 22 years ago.  There remains no satisfactory
           explanation as to how Mr Kenzia is able to say with any
           certainty that the appellant arrived in the UK in 1997. He is
           unable to point to a particular event by reference to which he
           is able to say, many years later, that he can be confident that
           the appellant arrived in the UK in 1997.


        d. In his witness statement that is unsigned and dated April 2020
           (page 33 of the bundle), Moustapha Harrak confirms that he met
           the appellant at the beginning of 1998, and they have been
           friends ever since. They met at the Cricklewood Mosque in
           London. He claims they would see each other without fail every
           Friday during lunchtime prayers. They also studied the Quran at
           the same group at the Harrow Road Mosque and met up socially
           outside prayer and study.  There has been no opportunity to test
           his evidence that he met the appellant in 1998 or the frequency
           of their contact thereafter.


   47. I found Mr Abbas Merzouk to be a credible witness who was doing his
       best to assist the Tribunal.  I accept the evidence of Mr Merzouk
       that he has known the appellant since childhood and that he first met
       the appellant in London when Mr Merzouk married in March 1998. Mr
       Merzouk candidly accepted that following the appellant's attendance
       at his wedding in March 1998, Mr Merzouk did not see the appellant
       very often, perhaps once or twice a year.  He recalled two particular
       occasions.  The first was a visit in 2006 and the second was a visit
       in 2015.  I also accept the evidence of Mr Merzouk that he had first
       spoken to the appellant in 1997 after the appellant had obtained his
       phone number from Mr Merzouk's family and contacted him to tell him
       that he was in London.


   48. I also found Mr Mourad Maza to be a credible witness and I accept his
       evidence that he met the appellant in 1997.  He was able to credibly
       articulate how he knew the appellant, when and where he met the
       appellant.   I accept his evidence that they became very close and
       the following year, when he got married, the appellant was a guest at
       his wedding.  There is evidence in the form of a marriage certificate
       confirming that Mr Maza married on 3rd November 1998 and a photograph
       that was taken at his wedding, in which the appellant features.  I
       accept his evidence that although he moved to Morden in 1999, he has
       remained in regular contact with the appellant.


   49. Finally, I have been assisted by the evidence of Mr Hamza Imansoura,
       who I also find to be a credible witness.  I accept his evidence that
       he first met the appellant in 1998 through the Cricklewood Football
       team, of which he is the Assistant Manager.  I accept his evidence
       that he has worked together with the appellant on various projects
       and the appellant has had various roles, sometimes playing on the
       team, and at other times, acting as an assistant coach. I accept his
       evidence that the appellant participated in those projects between
       1999 and 2013 and his evidence that the appellant was in the UK
       between 1997 and 2002. He was able to confirm that he met with the
       appellant regularly, playing football, with matches on a Friday and
       training twice each week.  His evidence was that that the appellant
       had started out as a player in 1997 or 1998 and when asked in cross-
       examination whether the appellant had ever left the UK since his
       1997/98, he said that to the best of his knowledge the appellant had
       not ever left the UK.


   50. The evidence of Mr Merzouk and Mr Mazza establishes the appellant's
       presence in the UK in 1997/1998.  The evidence of Mr Imansoura
       establishes the appellant's continued presence in the UK between 1998
       and 2002.  Considering all the evidence before me, and in particular
       the oral evidence of the three witnesses that I heard from, I find
       that the appellant has established that he entered the United Kingdom
       in 1997 and has remained in the UK continuously since 1997.  Although
       none of the witnesses were able to say when in 1997 the appellant
       arrived in the UK, the appellant has always maintained, and I am
       prepared to accept his evidence, that he arrived in April 1997.  The
       appellant made his application for indefinite leave to remain on 8th
       May 2017.  Looking at all of the evidence in the round, on balance, I
       find that at the date of application, the appellant had lived
       continuously in the UK for at least 20 years and satisfies the
       requirement set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration
       rules.


   51. However, as I have found that the requirement set out in paragraph
       276ADE(1)(i) is not met because the application fell for refusal
       under the grounds of suitability, the application cannot succeed
       under the immigration rules.  The only ground of appeal available to
       the appellant is that the respondent's decision is unlawful under s6
       of the Human Rights Act 1998. The judgment of the Supreme Court
       in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 confirms that the fact that the
       immigration rules cannot be met, does not absolve decision makers
       from carrying out a full merits-based assessment outside the rules
       under Article 8, where the ultimate issue is whether a fair balance
       has been struck between the individual and public interest, giving
       due weight to the provisions of the rules.


   52. The appellant has now lived in the UK for almost 24 years and has
       clearly established a private life in the UK.  The appellant confirms
       in his witness statement that he does not have a partner or children
       because he has been unable to develop a relationship whilst his
       immigration status is outstanding. I have had regard to the evidence
       of the appellant regarding his character and the disruption that his
       removal would cause to the acquaintances he has made in the United
       Kingdom, set out at paragraphs [30] to [45] of his witness statement.
        The appellant will undoubtedly have formed a bond with those that he
       refers to in his witness statement.


   53. Article 8 is plainly engaged.  I find that the decision to refuse the
       appellant leave to remain may have consequences of such gravity as
       potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.  I accept that the
       interference is in accordance with the law, and that the interference
       is necessary to protect the legitimate aim of immigration control and
       the economic well-being of the country.  The issue in this appeal, as
       is often the case, is whether the interference is proportionate to
       the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


   54. I have had regard to the respondent's policy as set out in the
       immigration rules.  Despite the appellant's lengthy presence in the
       UK, I have found the appellant is unable to satisfy the requirements
       of the immigration rules because his presence in the UK is not
       conducive to the public good because his conduct makes it undesirable
       to allow him to remain in the UK.  In reaching my decision, I have
       also had regard to the public interest considerations set out in
       s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The
       maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest. I note
       the appellant is able to speak the English language and that he has
       previously worked in the UK, and has not been a burden on the
       taxpayer, albeit that he previously worked under a false identity.
       I remind myself that s117B (4) of the 2002 Act provides that little
       weight should be given to a private life established by a person at a
       time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  The
       appellant's presence in the UK since 1997 has been unlawful
       throughout.


   55. I have also had regard to the appellant's evidence set out in
       paragraphs [46] to [65] of his witness statement, regarding the
       perceived difficulties that the appellant would face in Algeria.  The
       appellant spent the early formative years of his life in Algeria and
       his parents, a brother and sister remain in Algeria. He has remained
       in contact with his family.  I find the appellant would have the
       support of his immediate family in Algeria. I have no doubt the
       appellant would prefer to continue his life in the UK and considers
       the UK to be his home and where his future lies.


   56. I have carefully considered whether despite my finding that the
       application falls for refusal on the grounds of suitability for the
       reasons I have given, the decision to refuse leave to remain is
       nevertheless disproportionate.  The factors that I consider in the
       balancing exercise that particularly weigh in favour of the appellant
       are:


        a. The significant length of continuous residence in the UK since
           April 1997 and his integration into the local community.


        b. Absent the suitability criteria, the appellant would now qualify
           for leave to remain in the UK under paragraph 296ADE(1)(iii) of
           the immigration rules.


        c. The numerous statements and letters that are relied upon by the
           appellant that all speak to the appellant's kindness towards
           others, and which I accept, establish that the appellant has
           made a positive contribution to his local community.  As I have
           said before, the appellant is described in the letters and
           statements before me, as an individual that is well organised,
           competent, popular, honest, charitable and someone who dedicates
           much of his time to helping others.


        d. The appellant has never been in trouble with the police or been
           convicted of any offences and acknowledges the deception he
           engaged in when he was younger and impressionable.


        e. The deception the appellant embarked upon, occurred several
           years ago.


   57. The factors that I consider in the balancing exercise that
       particularly weigh against the appellant are:


        a. The appellant's presence in the UK has throughout been unlawful.
            The appellant entered the UK illegally with a false identity
           document and sought for a significant period, to remain here,
           without any regard for immigration control.


        b. The appellant knowingly used a false identity document to enter
           that was supplied to him by an agent, in the name of someone
           else, and he used that false identity to seek employment.


        c. Although the deception occurred several years ago, the appellant
           has been aware since his appeal was dismissed by Judge White in
           November 2012 that he has no lawful basis to be in the UK, but
           he has remained in the UK unlawfully, nevertheless.


   58. I also acknowledge that where an individual has lived continuously in
       the UK for at least 20 years, there is perhaps an implicit acceptance
       within the immigration rules that in doing so, they will have been in
       the UK unlawfully.  The 20-year residence requirement set out in
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) does not require that a person has lived in
       the UK lawfully, but simply "continuously".  It is however plainly to
       the detriment of society that people seek to circumvent the
       immigration rules by entering the UK unlawfully and by using false
       documents to procure work and services that they are not otherwise
       entitled to do.


   59. The facts and circumstances here can in my judgement be distinguished
       from those cases where an individual enters the United Kingdom
       lawfully, but during the course of the individual's continuous
       presence in the United Kingdom, the individual's presence becomes
       unlawful, even for a significant period, because any leave to enter
       or remain came to an end. The appellant entered the United Kingdom
       unlawfully, and for the first 14 years, as I have found, embarked
       upon a deliberate attempt to evade immigration control and any
       contact with the respondent by a cynical attempt not to draw
       attention to himself until he believed he was in a position to
       demonstrate that he could make an application on the grounds of long
       residence in June 2011.  Even after that application had been
       refused, and the appellant had exhausted its rights of appeal in
       March 2013, the appellant went on to make further applications that
       would act to prevent his removal until determined.  There was, I
       accept, a period of inactivity on the part of the respondent between
       November 2013 and May 2017, but put in context, that period of
       inactivity was of a short duration.  The facts and circumstances here
       can also be distinguished from those cases in which during the course
       of a lengthy period of unlawful presence in the UK, the individual
       has established a meaningful family life such that the removal of the
       individual would impact upon a partner or children.  As the appellant
       candidly accepts in his witness statement, he does not have a partner
       or child because he has been unable to develop a relationship whilst
       his immigration status is outstanding.


   60. In my final analysis, I find the appellant's protected rights,
       whether considered collectively with rights of others that he has
       formed associations with, or individually, are not in my judgement
       such as to outweigh the public interest in the appellant's removal
       having regard to the policy of the respondent as expressed in the
       immigration rules.  For the reasons that I have set out, I am
       satisfied that on the facts here, the decision to refuse leave to
       remain is not disproportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration
       control.  In the circumstances I dismiss the appeal on Article 8
       grounds.


Notice of Decision


   61. I dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

Signed   V. Mandalia                Date              16th February 2021

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

