
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00273/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 June 2019                  |On 24th July 2019                |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                     DT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moriarty, instructed by Lex Sterling Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a Jamaican national who was born on 13  November  1990.
   He appeals against a decision which was made by the Secretary  of  State
   on 20 December 2017, refusing his claim that it  would  be  contrary  to
   Article 8 ECHR to deport him from the United Kingdom.


Immigration History
2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom as an eleven year old child,
   on 20 June 2002.  He accompanied his grandmother and his  cousin.   They
   sought leave to enter at Heathrow Airport.  Leave to enter  was  refused
   but they were given Temporary Admission until 23 June 2002, when it  was
   intended to return them to Jamaica.  They  failed  to  attend  for  that
   flight, however, and it was not until 14 January 2011 that the appellant
   was next encountered by the authorities.

3. The appellant came to light in January 2011 because he was arrested  for
   affray.  No criminal charges were pursued but  it  was  the  appellant's
   arrest which prompted an application to regularise his status in the UK.
    That application was made  on  17  January  2011,  and  relied  on  the
   appellant's relationships in the UK.  In particular, he  relied  on  his
   relationships with his mother (IB), his half-brother (DB) and  his  then
   partner (DA).  That application was refused on 22 February 2011.

4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard
   on 7 June 2011 and allowed by Judge Paul on Article 8 ECHR grounds in  a
   decision which was sent to the parties on 20  June  2011.   In  reaching
   that conclusion, Judge Paul attached particular significance to the fact
   that the appellant's mother was a single parent who  had  limited  leave
   under the  domestic  violence  concession  and  to  whom  the  appellant
   'clearly provides both support and sustenance'.  He did not  regard  the
   appellant's criminal convictions  (to  which  we  will  turn  below)  as
   significant.  He noted that the appellant had spent much of his life  in
   the UK and concluded that it would be  disproportionate  to  return  the
   appellant to Jamaica.  He considered that the proper course would be  to
   grant the appellant leave to  remain  in  line  with  his  mother.   The
   respondent did not appeal against this decision, and the  appellant  was
   granted leave to enter from 8 July 2011 to 8 January 2012.

5. On 16 December 2011, the appellant applied for leave to remain, again on
   Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The application was refused on 22 November 2012
   but the respondent was unable to serve the decision.  Having  failed  to
   do so, the respondent decided to reconsider  the  decision  and  it  was
   reversed.  On 19 December 2013,  the  appellant  was  granted  leave  to
   remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds until 18 June 2015.

6. On 10 June 2015, the appellant applied  for  further  leave  to  remain.
   Criminal proceedings against the appellant  were  instigated  at  around
   that time, however, and a decision on the claim was postponed  to  await
   the outcome of  those  proceedings.   As  a  result  of  his  subsequent
   conviction, the appellant was served with a notice indicating  that  the
   respondent intended to make a deportation order.  His solicitors replied
   on 30 May 2017, submitting that his deportation  would  be  contrary  to
   Article 8 ECHR.


Offending History
7. The appellant received a police warning for robbery on 6 December  2004.
   He was convicted of robbery, following a Guilty plea,  at  Inner  London
   Crown Court  on  18  July  2007.   He  was  sentenced  to  an  intensive
   supervision order for 12 months and a curfew with electronic  monitoring
   for 3 months.


8. The appellant received a caution for possessing an offensive weapon in a
   public place (in Leicestershire) on 28 September 2010.  On  2  September
   2016, at the Crown Court in Southampton,  the  appellant  was  convicted
   after a trial of conspiracy to supply drugs of Class A (heroin and crack
   cocaine) and conspiracy to blackmail.  HHJ Henry sentenced the appellant
   to six years' imprisonment  for  the  first  offence  and  three  years'
   imprisonment (concurrent) for the second.  In  his  sentencing  remarks,
   which are reproduced in full  in  the  respondent's  bundle,  HHJ  Henry
   explained the way in which the  offences  had  been  committed  in  some
   detail.  We take what follows from those remarks.


9. A couple in the Southampton area, both of whom  were  drug  users,  were
   introduced to a drug dealer who was known as  Mike.   He  was  based  in
   London.  He supplied this couple with class A drugs  over  a  period  of
   months. The drugs were supplied 'on tick' and by April 2015 they owed an
   appreciable sum.  On 16 April  2015,  the  drug  dealer  travelled  from
   London to Worthing by train.  He met the appellant there.  The appellant
   was also known to the drug users, as "Max".  The  two  men  were  driven
   from Worthing to Southampton by a woman called Jane.  They went  to  the
   drug users' flat and put pressure on the male drug user to work off  the
   debt, by dealing drugs for them and by allowing the flat to be used as a
   base.  'Mike' stayed there overnight and for much of the following  day,
   whilst the appellant and Jane returned to Worthing  and  came  back  the
   following day.  The appellant and  'Mike'  then  left  the  property  in
   Southampton with Jane.  Upon doing so, they left drugs for the users  to
   consume and to supply to others.  They did not sell any  of  the  drugs,
   however, and consumed all of what had been left.  They  then  failed  to
   answer telephone calls from  the  appellant  and  Mike.   This  led  the
   appellant to send a message to the female user, saying  "You  two  don't
   want to do that, so think before you act".


10. On 21 April 2015, the appellant  was  driven  to  Southampton  again  by
   Jane.  The drug users were in bed in their flat.  The  appellant  kicked
   the door open and surprised them.  The appellant had  with  him  a  tyre
   iron or wheel brace from the car which he concealed  under  his  jacket,
   giving the impression that he had a gun.  He threatened to  'smoke'  the
   female drug user and kept fiddling with the gun in order to ensure  that
   they both understood the seriousness  of  their  position.   Whilst  the
   appellant was in the flat, the female drug user went into  the  bathroom
   and called the police.  A transcript of the call was played to the  jury
   and HHJ Henry recorded that there was no doubt that she was  'absolutely
   terrified'.  He went on to note that for a drug user to call the police,
   'something very serious must have gone on'.  The dealer  known  as  Mike
   was not present but there was a  point  during  the  incident  when  the
   appellant passed a telephone to the male drug user so that 'Mike'  could
   make further threats.


11. The appellant and 'Mike' were sentenced by HHJ Henry on the  basis  that
   they were attempting to set up 'some sort of drugs line in  Southampton'
   and that they both had a significant role in the  conspiracy.   Both  of
   them performed an operational or management function in the chain, which
   involved  others  by  pressure,  intimidation  or  reward.   They   were
   motivated by financial gain and had an awareness of  the  scale  of  the
   operation, which they were trying to expand.  Whilst the drugs  had  not
   made their way onto the streets,  that  had  been  the  intention.   The
   appellant and his co-defendant had travelled significant  distances  and
   had gone to lengths to enforce the debt and, for the  appellant's  part,
   to threaten them with what was thought to be a firearm.  Notwithstanding
   the mitigation advanced, which  included  the  appellant's  relationship
   with his mother and his half-brother DB, the least sentence which  could
   be  imposed  was  six  years'  imprisonment  in  respect  of  the  drugs
   conspiracy and three years' concurrent  imprisonment  on  the  blackmail
   conspiracy.  Jane,  the  third  defendant,  was  accepted  to  be  in  a
   different  position  from  the  two  male  defendants  and  received   a
   considerably shorter sentence of imprisonment, suspended for two years.


12. The appellant was advised in writing by trial counsel (Mr  Onslow)  that
   his conviction was sound and that the sentence was appropriate.  In  the
   event, no appeal was brought against the conviction or the sentence.




Human Rights Claim
13. In response to the  respondent's  notice  of  intention  to  deport  the
   appellant,  detailed  representations  were  made  by  the   appellant's
   solicitors on 30 May 2017.  It was submitted that the appellant had been
   living with his grandparents in Jamaica and had been brought to  the  UK
   by his grandmother after his grandfather had passed away.  The appellant
   had been left here with his  mother,  whilst  his  grandmother  and  his
   cousin both emigrated to the USA.  The appellant had attended school  in
   South East London whilst living with his mother, who was his sole carer.
    The appellant had no relationship with his own  father  but  he  had  a
   close relationship with his mother's husband, EB.   On  4  October  2005
   (three years after the appellant's arrival in the  UK)  the  appellant's
   mother and EB had their only child together,  DB.   Sadly,  EB  dies  of
   malaria on 12 December 2012.  The bond between the appellant and DB  was
   consequently very strong,  and  the  latter  looked  to  him  as  'elder
   brother, friend, role model and father'.   It  was  submitted  that  the
   appellant's deportation would have a significant effect on DB.


14.  The  representations  stated  that  the  appellant  had   been   in   a
   relationship with DA for ten years.  DA had  visited  the  appellant  in
   prison on a number of occasions.  They had previously lived together for
   some time as unmarried partners in a property situated in Leicester.  It
   was submitted  that  this  relationship,  as  well  as  the  appellant's
   relationship with his mother and his half-brother should  be  considered
   under Article 8 ECHR.


15. The appellant was said to have been working in the building  trade  from
   2010  and  had  positive  references  from  his   employer   and   other
   acquaintances.  It was submitted that the appellant would not commit any
   further offences and that, taking into account the factors in Boultif  v
   Switzerland [2001]  ECHR  497,  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
   contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  Particular significance was attached to the
   position of DB and it was submitted that the appellant deportation would
   be strongly contrary to his best  interests.   A  volume  of  supporting
   evidence, including a number of documents about DB, were submitted  with
   these representations.




The Respondent's Decision
16. The  respondent  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration  and  offending
   history before summarising the representations made on 30 May  2017  and
   the evidence submitted in support of those representations.  The  author
   of the decision analysed the propriety of  the  appellant's  deportation
   against the framework provided by Part  13  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
   Because the sentence for the  index  offence  exceeded  four  years,  he
   concluded that the exceptions in paragraphs 399 and 399A of those  Rules
   could not apply to the  appellant  and  consideration  was  consequently
   given to whether there were very compelling circumstances over and above
   those described in those paragraphs.


17. The respondent did not accept that the appellant enjoyed a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with his partner, or  that  she  was  a  British
   citizen as claimed.  Even accepting those facts, the respondent did  not
   accept that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  appellant's  partner  to
   remain in the UK without him, or to accompany him to Jamaica.


18. The respondent noted that much of the appellant's time  in  the  UK  had
   been without leave to enter or remain.  It was not accepted that he  was
   socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom because there
   was an absence of evidence to establish such integration and because the
   appellant had committed serious criminal offences,  as  demonstrated  by
   the remarks of the sentencing judge.   It  was  not  accepted  that  the
   appellant would encounter very significant obstacles to his  integration
   to Jamaica.  English was the language  spoken  there  and  even  if  the
   appellant had no family in  the  country,  he  would  be  able  to  live
   independently using any skills he had acquired in the UK.  A  degree  of
   hardship was to be expected but it did not reach the threshold  of  very
   significant obstacles.


19.  The  appellant's  relationship  with  his  mother  was  not  one  which
   displayed more than normal emotional ties.  His younger  brother  had  a
   diagnosis of adjustment disorder and had been feeling overwhelmed in the
   wake of his father's death but he was  not  in  immediate  need  of  the
   appellant's presence.  Whilst the appellant's deportation  would  result
   in some negative emotional impact, he would remain in the  UK  with  his
   mother and would receive ongoing support from the NHS.  Considering  the
   circumstances as a whole the respondent did not accept that  the  public
   interest was outweighed by very compelling circumstances over and  above
   those in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules.   The  appellant's  human
   rights claim was therefore refused with a right of appeal to the  First-
   tier Tribunal.


Appellate History
20.  The  appellant  gave  notice  of  his  appeal  on   3   January   2018.
   Particularised grounds were pleaded,  submitting  that  the  appellant's
   deportation would be contrary to Article 8  ECHR.   Then,  as  now,  the
   appellant submitted principally that he had lived in  the  UK  for  many
   years and would struggle to adjust to life in Jamaica and that his half-
   brother, who had already suffered bereavement  and  resulting  problems,
   would be severely affected by his deportation.


21. The appellant's appeal came  before  Judge  Feeney,  sitting  at  Hendon
   Magistrates' Court, on 16 October 2018.  The appellant  was  represented
   by counsel, the respondent by a Presenting Officer.  Judge Feeney  heard
   oral evidence from the appellant and his mother.   In  addition  to  the
   main bundles from the appellant and the  respondent,  Judge  Feeney  was
   presented with a  report  about  DB  from  Tamara  Licht,  a  registered
   Clinical Psychologist and Counselling Psychologist.


22. Judge Feeney  set  out  summaries  of  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
   respondent's decision at [4]-[8] and [9]-[14] respectively.  She set out
   the documents before her and the legal framework at [15]-[25].  At [26]-
   [38], she set out extensive findings of fact regarding  the  appellant's
   family life and the circumstances of his half-brother DB.  At [37],  she
   expressed a number of criticisms of the report prepared by Ms Licht.  At
   [38], she stated that her main criticism  of  the  report  was  that  it
   failed to address other possible causes of DB's presentation and whether
   these might have  had  an  effect  on  Ms  Licht's  prognosis  for  him.
   Notwithstanding those concerns, she was prepared,  at  [42],  to  attach
   weight to Ms Licht's conclusion that DB had difficulties with his mental
   health and to accept her conclusion that he was at risk of acting on the
   suicidal thoughts he had expressed to Ms Licht.


23.  At  [44]-[58],  the  judge  considered  whether  there  would  be  very
   significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  re-integration  to  Jamaica.
   That analysis was undertaken with  reference  to  authority,  which  was
   cited at [44]-[45]. Notwithstanding a report from a Mr de  Noronha,  and
   although the appellant had no family in Jamaica and no  home  to  return
   to, Judge Feeney considered that the appellant would be able to  achieve
   integration within a reasonable timeframe: [48].  She considered that it
   might be difficult for the appellant to find work but that this was  not
   an obstacle he could not overcome: [49]-[51].  Considering all  relevant
   matters, including the stigma attached to deportees as recorded in Mr de
   Noronha's report, Judge Feeney concluded that  the  appellant  would  be
   capable of overcoming the difficulties he would  experience  on  return:
   [58].

24. At [59]-[68], Judge Feeney undertook a  'balance  sheet'  assessment  of
   whether the strong public interest in the  appellant's  deportation  was
   outweighed by matters militating in his  favour.   Having  balanced  all
   relevant considerations, and considered a number of authorities at [63],
   Judge Feeney concluded that what set the case apart was DB's reaction to
   the appellant's potential deportation, in that Ms  Licht  had  concluded
   that he would be at high risk of completed suicide: [64].  At [67],  she
   concluded that the only very compelling circumstance in the case was the
   effect of the appellant's deportation on DB and, weighing that factor in
   the balance along with the  others  she  had  identified,  Judge  Feeney
   concluded  that  the  appellant   had   demonstrated   very   compelling
   circumstances which satisfied paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules and
   rendered his deportation disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

25. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  27
   November  2018.   Although  the  grounds  were   expressed   over   nine
   paragraphs, the gravamen was summarised at [4].  The Secretary of  State
   there submitted that the judge had failed to explain  why,  despite  the
   identified  shortcomings  in  the  Licht  report,  it  had  nevertheless
   provided the basis on which the judge had ultimately allowed the appeal.


26. The respondent's appeal was heard by the Upper Tribunal (Lang J and  UTJ
   McWilliam) on 5 March 2019.  On 27 March 2019, the Upper Tribunal issued
   a decision in which it concluded that Judge Feeney had materially  erred
   in law as contended in the Secretary of State's grounds  of  appeal  and
   set aside her decision.  The decision is appended, so  it  suffices  for
   present purposes to record that Lang J wrote at [43] that 'in the  light
   of the weaknesses in Ms Licht's report, identified by the FTT Judge, the
   substantial reliance which the FTT Judge then placed upon her assessment
   of the suicide risk in his [sic] conclusions was inadequately  explained
   and perverse.'  Judge Feeney's decision having been set  aside  on  that
   basis, the Upper Tribunal decided to retain the appeal and to remake the
   decision under s12(2)(b)(ii) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement
   Act 2007.


Resumed Hearing
27. In preparation for  the  resumed  hearing,  the  appellant's  solicitors
   filed  and  served  a  supplementary  bundle  of  34  pages,  comprising
   statements, letters and supporting  material.   Mr  Moriarty  filed  and
   served a skeleton argument in advance of the  hearing.   The  respondent
   also filed and served a skeleton (which was not settled by  Mr  Jarvis).
   Mr Moriarty adduced a single additional authority:  Garzon  [2018]  EWCA
   Civ 1225.  Mr Jarvis produced a bundle of authorities on the morning  of
   the hearing without objection from Mr Moriarty.


28. We narrowed the issues with the advocates at the start of  the  hearing.
   We were anxious to ensure that we conducted a fully  structured  enquiry
   under section 117C, as required by [38] of NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ
   662; [2017] 1 WLR 207.  We  reminded  the  parties  that  it  was  still
   necessary to consider  the  statutory  exceptions  to  deportation  even
   though the appellant could not satisfy those exceptions as a  result  of
   his six-year sentence.

29. Considering s117C(4), Mr Moriarty accepted that the  appellant  had  not
   been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life,  but
   submitted that his length of residence was  nevertheless  a  matter  for
   consideration under s117C(6).  Mr Moriarty also indicated that he  would
   not be inviting the Tribunal to go behind  Judge  Feeney's  findings  of
   fact at [44]-[58] of her decision, which related to whether or not there
   would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's re-integration to
   Jamaica.  Mr Moriarty indicated that he would be inviting  the  Tribunal
   to conclude that the appellant is  socially  and  culturally  integrated
   into the United Kingdom.  There was no finding on that question in Judge
   Feeney's decision.  We asked him to consider the decision of  the  Court
   of Appeal in Binbuga  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  551  in  connection  with  that
   submission.


30. Mr Moriarty accepted that he was unable to  submit  that  the  appellant
   had a qualifying relationship with a child or a partner under  s117C(5),
   although  he  indicated  that  it  would  be  his  submission  that  the
   appellant's relationships with family and others in the  United  Kingdom
   were critically important in the assessment  of  whether  there  existed
   very compelling circumstances under s117C(6).


31. Mr Jarvis indicated that he did not wish to cross-examine  a  number  of
   the witnesses who were in attendance.  He did not seek to  cross-examine
   the appellant's half-brother DB, his brother AD or  JL,  with  whom  the
   appellant hoped to go into business.  There were to be questions for the
   appellant, his mother and his girlfriend SD.


32. We duly heard oral evidence from these witnesses in English.  We do  not
   propose to rehearse their oral evidence in this decision.  We will refer
   to their oral evidence insofar as we  need  to  do  so  to  explain  our
   findings of fact.


Submissions
33. Mr Jarvis relied on the respondent's decision and the skeleton  argument
   and invited us to adopt the  approach  required  by  NA  (Pakistan),  in
   considering the statutory exceptions  to  deportation  before  assessing
   whether there were very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
   exceptions which outweighed the public interest in deportation.


34. It was accepted by the appellant that he had not been lawfully  resident
   in the United Kingdom for most of  his  life.   There  were  periods  of
   lawful residence, however, and  these  fell  to  be  factored  into  the
   overall assessment.  It would  be  inappropriate  to  hold  against  the
   appellant the periods of time when he was a child: SC  (Jamaica)  [2017]
   EWCA Civ 2112; [2018] 1 WLR 4004, at [56].


35. The appellant's offences were committed in  2015,  at  which  stage  his
   situation in the United Kingdom was precarious.  The appellant's conduct
   was relevant to the extent to which his position was precarious.  It was
   to be recalled that section 117B NIAA  2002  was  relevant  in  such  an
   appeal and  the  appellant's  precarious  immigration  status  militated
   against him, even though he was able to satisfy the neutral  factors  in
   s117B(2) and (3) (English language and financial independence).

36. The appellant was not socially and culturally integrated  into  the  UK.
   The nature and seriousness of his offending militated against  any  such
   conclusion: Binbuga [2019] EWCA Civ 551, at [58], endorsing the approach
   of the Upper Tribunal in Bossade [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC);  [2015]  Imm  AR
   1281. In  reality,  there  was  little  evidence  of  integration.   The
   appellant had lived unlawfully in the UK for much of his stay and he had
   been committing criminal offences long before the  index  offence.   The
   appellant had consistently denied his involvement in the  index  offence
   and his denial  was  further  evidence  of  a  lack  of  integration  or
   rehabilitation.  Whilst the appellant protested  his  innocence  in  his
   oral evidence, the advice he had received from trial counsel  was  clear
   about the safety of the conviction.  It had been for the jury to  decide
   whether the appellant was involved in the manner claimed and it was  not
   for the Upper Tribunal to go behind their assessment.  The appellant was
   a significant figure or manager in a serious conspiracy.


37. As for  whether  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
   appellant's re-integration to Jamaica,  that  had  been  dealt  with  in
   detail in the FtT's decision.  The appellant was in any  event  able  to
   make an application to the Facilitated Returns Scheme  for  a  grant  of
   �750.  He was ineligible for assistance  in  principle  because  of  his
   conviction but he could be given an award nevertheless if the scheme was
   satisfied that he would be destitute without it.  The Upper Tribunal had
   relied on such awards in AAW [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC) and MOJ (Somalia)  CG
   [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC).   (The  parachute  package  to  which  the  Upper
   Tribunal had referred in AS  (Afghanistan)  CG  [2018]  UKUT  118  (IAC)
   applied only to returns to Afghanistan) and it was the FRS scheme  which
   continued to apply.)


38. Mr Jarvis submitted that the Tribunal should  attach  little  weight  to
   the report of Mr de Noronha.  In AAW, the Upper Tribunal  had  explained
   the  importance  of  there  being  transcripts  of  personal  interviews
   conducted by expert witnesses.  Without such  transcripts,  it  was  not
   possible to attach weight to what was said to have been the evidence  of
   those interviewed,  including  various  deportees.   The  importance  of
   adequate sources being cited by experts had been underlined  in  various
   cases, including LP  (Sri  Lanka)  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  76.  That  was  of
   particular concern when  Mr  de  Noronha  had  cited  a  report  in  his
   footnotes (entitled Rebuilding Self and Country: Deportee  Reintegration
   in Jamaica) which actually painted a more positive picture than had been
   suggested by Mr  de  Noronha.   The  report  suggested  that  there  was
   significant support for deportees,  including  the  Salvation  Army  and
   other NGOs.


39. The appellant was not able to satisfy the test in s117C(5).  He did  not
   have a qualifying partner and he was not in a parental relationship with
   DB.


40. In relation  to  the  ultimate  question  of  whether  there  were  very
   compelling circumstances over and above those exceptions, the  President
   of the Upper Tribunal had issued two  relevant  decisions  in  2019:  RA
   (Iraq) [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC) and MS (Philippines) [2019] UKUT 122 (IAC).
    Importantly, Mr Jarvis submitted, the President had underlined that the
   assessment required by s117C(6) encompassed all factors.  It was also to
   be noted that it had been concluded in MS that the deterrent  effect  of
   deportation remained an important consideration post Hesham  Ali.   Even
   if the appellant had rehabilitated  and  posed  a  low  risk  of  future
   offending (which was  not  accepted  in  light  of  his  denial  of  the
   offences), this was not a factor which would  ordinarily  bear  material
   weight: RA (Iraq), at [31]-[33].  The public interest in the appellant's
   deportation was significant, particularly when the ECtHR's stance on the
   scourge of addictive drugs was recalled: Baghli  v  France  [1999]  ECHR
   135.


41. The FtT had attached particular significance to DB's best  interests  in
   concluding that the appellant was able to  satisfy  s117C(6).   In  that
   connection, it  was  necessary  to  consider  the  evidence  from  CAMHS
   carefully.  The respondent did not challenge the evidence given  by  the
   appellant's mother regarding the relationship between DB and  his  half-
   brother.  It was notable,  however,  that  the  evidence  given  by  the
   appellant and his mother in relation to their attendance  at  CAMHS  was
   completely at odds.  She said that the appellant had been to CAMHS  only
   in the past, whereas he had said that he had been to  appointments  with
   them more recently.  The reality is that DB is attached to the appellant
   and that he will be negatively affected by the  appellant's  deportation
   but this did not come near to outweighing the strong public interest  in
   the appellant's  deportation.   It  was  relevant  to  recall  that  the
   appellant had lived in Leicester, away from  DB  and  their  mother  for
   around three years, as confirmed in the FtT decision from 2011.


42. Ms Licht had suggested that DB would be at risk of completed suicide  in
   the event of the appellant's removal.  DB continued to  receive  support
   from CAMHS, however, and it had  been  this  help  and  the  appellant's
   mother's  support  which  had  been  principally  responsible  for   his
   improvement.  There was no evidence of interventions over and above  the
   CAMHS involvement.  Overall,  the  picture  was  not  one  in  which  DB
   presented a real risk of committing suicide.  Instead, he clearly felt a
   sense of despair at the risk of losing another member of the family.  If
   there had been a risk of the type identified in the Licht report,  there
   would have been greater intervention from CAMHS.  DB had improved  since
   the appellant's release but that was merely part of the reason  for  his
   improvement.  Their mother had worked throughout and continued to do  so
   whilst the appellant was in prison.  It was  clear  that  she  had  been
   under significant  stress  but  she  was  resolute  and  tough  and  she
   continued to  support  DB.   DB  would  be  affected  adversely  by  the
   appellant's deportation but that is what deportation does.


43. Social services and the  NHS  could  be  relied  upon  to  do  what  was
   necessary to support DB: BL (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 357.  The specific
   impact on DB should be considered but was not such as  to  outweigh  the
   strong public interest in deportation.  In WZ (China)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
   795, the court had held that comparable facts were not even  capable  in
   principle of amounting to very compelling circumstances.


44. In the event  that  the  Tribunal  considered  it  necessary  to  assess
   whether the appellant's deportation would give rise to  undue  harshness
   for DB, it was relevant to recall that this was  a  high  threshold,  as
   demonstrated by the application of the law to the facts in KO (Nigeria).


45. Mr Moriarty relied on his skeleton argument and  the  skeleton  prepared
   by Ms Daykin of counsel for the FtT hearing.  When we stated that we did
   not have the latter skeleton, he indicated  that  he  would  incorporate
   those written submissions into his oral submissions.  He submitted  that
   there were two legal propositions to be made at  the  outset.   Firstly,
   that every case was to be considered on its own  facts  and  that  cases
   such as WZ (China) and MK  (Sierra  Leone)  were  of  little  assistance
   because they were not binding on the facts.  Secondly, what was required
   under s117C(6) was a broad evaluative judgment taking all relevant facts
   into account.


46. It was clear that there was a strong public interest in the  appellant's
   deportation.  Even though  he  was  unable  to  rely  on  the  statutory
   exceptions in s117C, it was still relevant to recall in the  context  of
   the necessarily holistic enquiry that the appellant  had  arrived  as  a
   child of eleven years old, which was  held  to  be  of  significance  in
   Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ 1225.  The core of the appellant's case, however,
   was the emotional and psychological consequences of his  deportation  on
   DB.  The appellant is not his primary carer  or  his  de  facto  father.
   Their mother would continue to help DB in the event of  the  appellant's
   deportation and she would wish to do so.  There would however be a  huge
   impact on DB if the appellant was deported.  That  was  clear  from  the
   totality of the material before the Tribunal, which showed how badly  he
   had been affected by the loss of  his  father  and  by  the  appellant's
   imprisonment.  The written evidence showed that  DB  had  been  excluded
   from school temporarily during the appellant's  incarceration.   It  had
   been their mother's evidence that DB had improved since the  appellant's
   release because he had something to cling onto, in the form of hope that
   his brother would remain in the UK.  The report from CAMHS  showed  that
   DB had experienced the  loss  of  his  father  in  2012  as  a  kind  of
   rejection.  His behaviour  had  improved  from  2014  to  2015  but  had
   declined markedly after the appellant went to prison.

47. It was appropriate to consider Ms  Licht's  report  notwithstanding  the
   criticisms levelled at it in Judge Feeney's judgment and in the decision
   to set her judgment aside.  Much of that report was untainted  by  those
   criticisms.  It was clear that DB suffers from Adjustment  Disorder  and
   that he did deteriorate whilst the appellant was imprisoned.  He  had  a
   picture of the appellant in his room and he suffered disturbed sleep and
   feelings of anger and upset at that time.  Ms  Licht  had  undertaken  a
   number of tests with DB.  It was clear from those tests that he  was  at
   the severe end of the spectrum.  He was more significantly  affected  by
   the prospect of the appellant's deportation than an ordinary child.   He
   had been hugely impacted by  his  father's  death  and  the  appellant's
   incarceration but he had improved  considerably  since  the  appellant's
   release.  His situation was not analogous to  the  cases  cited  by  the
   respondent.  The impact on DB amounted to very compelling circumstances.
    His own letters, which appeared in the bundle presented to the FtT were
   powerfully supportive of that  submission.   It  was  also  relevant  to
   recall, as part of the overall exercise, that the appellant had spent  a
   great deal of his life in the UK, even though much of that was unlawful.
    The respondent had been correct to submit that the appellant could  not
   be blamed for his precarious immigration status as a child.


48. There was little that militated  against  the  appellant  under  section
   117B NIAA 2002.  If it was accepted under s117C  that  there  were  very
   compelling circumstances, the factors in s117B would make no  difference
   to the assessment.  The  appellant  was  engaging  positively  with  the
   Probation Service and there was evidence of rehabilitation, although  it
   was accepted in light of the authorities cited by Mr  Jarvis  that  this
   carried little weight.


49. The appellant had gone to the property in Southampton with a tyre  iron.
    He accepted that, although he emphasised that he had not been  carrying
   a fire arm.  It was accepted on his behalf that it would be wrong to ask
   the Tribunal  to  go  behind  the  basis  on  which  the  appellant  was
   sentenced.  The letters in the Upper Tribunal  bundle  showed  that  the
   appellant would be a loss to his local community  if  he  was  deported,
   however.  These were relevant matters to  consider,  as  was  the  stark
   reality of life for a returnee to Jamaica.  The  respondent's  criticism
   of the de Noronha report  were  accepted  but  there  were  very  recent
   reports of attacks on those returned to Jamaica.  (Mr Moriarty accepted,
   in response to our question,  that  no  such  reports  were  before  the
   Tribunal).  It would be very dangerous for him to return, even if he was
   able to avail himself of the FRS package.  The provision of  �750  would
   do little to mitigate the risks to the appellant,  who  had  no  support
   network in Jamaica and would be easily identified as a deportee.


50. It was relevant to consider Garzon, submitted Mr Moriarty.  He  too  had
   arrived in the UK at the age of 11 and had been granted leave to remain.
    He had committed numerous offences and was a persistent  offender.   He
   had visited Colombia.  He did  not  meet  the  statutory  exceptions  to
   deportation.  There was evidence of integration and  he  had  spent  his
   formative years in the UK.  It was clear that the  court  had  accepted,
   notwithstanding  the  attempt  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  submit
   otherwise, that the factors relevant to the exceptions were still to  be
   considered under s117C(6).  There had been no child in that case but the
   FtT had still been entitled to conclude that there were very  compelling
   circumstances.  The appellant presented an altogether stronger case than
   Garzon's when it  was  recalled  that  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
   deportation on DB would be huge.  In response  to  a  question  from  Mr
   Jarvis,  Mr  Moriarty  confirmed  that  he  did  not  submit  that   the
   appellant's removal would be  contrary  to  the  Refugee  Convention  or
   Article 3 ECHR.


51. We reserved our decision for postal delivery.


Statutory Framework
52. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  applies
   where a court or tribunal is required to determine  whether  a  decision
   made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect for
   private and family life under Article 8 ECHR.  In considering the public
   interest, the court or tribunal must have regard in  all  cases  to  the
   public interest  considerations  in  section  117B,  which  provides  as
   follows:


      1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the  public
         interest.


      2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
         the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-
         (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

      3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
         the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-
         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and
         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


      4) Little weight should be given to-
         (a)  a private life, or
         (b)  a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.


      5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.


      6) In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
         (a)       the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
         (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.


53. In cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals (as defined  in
   s117D(2)), a court or tribunal must also have regard to  the  additional
   considerations in section 117C, which provides as follows:


      1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.


      2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,  the
         greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

      3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies.

      4) Exception 1 applies where-
         (a)      C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,
         (b)      C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and
         (c)       there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

      5)  Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


      6) In the case of a foreign criminal  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

      7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken  into
         account where a court or tribunal  is  considering  a  decision  to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.


Discussion
54. Part 5A of the 2002 Act, as inserted  by  s19  of  the  Immigration  Act
   2014, provides for  a  structured  approach  for  the  determination  of
   Article 8 ECHR claims in the  context  of  deportation:  NE-A  (Nigeria)
   [2017] EWCA Civ 239; [2017] Imm AR 1077.  It is  consequently  necessary
   to  consider  the  statutory  exceptions  to  deportation  even  if  the
   appellant cannot, due to the length  of  his  sentence,  hope  to  avail
   himself of those exceptions: NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 662; [2017] 1
   WLR 207, at [37].


55. The appellant could not satisfy Exception 1 even if it was available  to
   him.  As to s117C(4)(a), although the appellant has been resident in the
   UK for most of his life,  having  arrived  at  the  age  of  eleven  and
   remained since,  most  of  his  residence  has  not  been  lawful.   The
   appellant was initially given temporary admission for three days and  he
   held leave to remain for approximately four years  from  2011  to  2015.
   The remainder of his residence has  been  without  leave.   Mr  Moriarty
   accepted that to be the case, although he submitted  that  it  would  be
   relevant to consider under section 117C(6) that much of the  appellant's
   unlawful residence was as a child.

56. As to s117C(4)(b), we note that there  was  no  finding  made  by  Judge
   Feeney in this regard.  We do not consider the appellant to be  socially
   and culturally integrated into the UK.  He arrived as  a  child  and  he
   received some education  in  this  country,  although  the  letter  from
   Walworth School at page L51 of the respondent's bundle demonstrates that
   the appellant's attendance and compliance was sporadic. We note that  he
   has a circle of friends and family in  this  country  and  that  he  has
   worked in the building trade.  As  the  Court  of  Appeal  explained  in
   Binbuga [2019] EWCA Civ 551, however, such factors represent  only  part
   of the enquiry when considering whether a foreign criminal  is  socially
   and culturally integrated in the UK.   Endorsing  the  approach  of  the
   Upper Tribunal in Bossade [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC);  [2015]  Imm  AR  1281,
   Hamblen LJ (with whom Floyd LJ agreed) held  that  social  and  cultural
   integration connotes integration as law-abiding citizen;  that  breaking
   the law may involve discontinuity in integration; and that being part of
   a pro-criminal gang is manifestly anti-social: [49]-[62].

57. The nature and seriousness  of  the  appellant's  offending  is  plainly
   relevant to the question  of  whether  he  is  socially  and  culturally
   integrated to the UK.  He was not simply involved  in  a  conspiracy  to
   supply drugs of Class A.  He was attempting, as the  sentencing  remarks
   of HHJ Henry show, to set up a 'County Lines'  operation  on  the  south
   coast of the country,  thereby  increasing  the  proliferation  of  drug
   addiction for his own financial gain.  That conspiracy also involved  an
   attempt to force vulnerable drug users to allow their home as  the  base
   for the operation, often described  by  the  term  'cuckooing'.   It  is
   apparent that the drug users were terrified by the  appellant's  threats
   to 'smoke' them and his pretence that he had a firearm under his jacket,
   to the extent that one of  them  chose  to  call  the  police  from  the
   bathroom whilst the appellant was on the premises.  Involvement in  such
   activity is manifestly anti-social and contrary to  the  values  of  the
   United Kingdom.  It indicated that the appellant was  not  socially  and
   culturally integrated at the time that he took part in the conspiracy.

58. We consider Mr Jarvis to have made a cogent submission about the  degree
   to which the appellant  can  be  said  to  be  culturally  and  socially
   integrated at present.  He continues  to  deny  responsibility  for  the
   index offence.  Before us, he said that he had no involvement with drugs
   and that he maintained his innocence,  although  he  seemingly  accepted
   that he had threatened the drug users with a tyre iron.  He said that he
   had wanted to appeal but that there had been  difficulties  in  securing
   alternative legal representation after he had been given negative advice
   on appeal by trial counsel, Richard Onslow.  We obviously proceed on the
   basis that the decision reached in Southampton Crown Court stands unless
   it is overturned.  We consider  the  appellant's  ongoing  protestations
   that he was not involved in the drugs conspiracy to indicate an  ongoing
   lack of respect for the rule of law in this country and an ongoing  lack
   of adherence to the values of the United Kingdom.  Whilst he has been in
   the UK for seventeen years and has ties to this country, we consider his
   offending and his refusal to accept responsibility for  that  course  of
   conduct to indicate that he is not socially and  culturally  integrated.
   In fairness to Mr Moriarty, he indicated at the outset  of  the  hearing
   that he would be inviting us to find for the appellant under s117C(4)(b)
   but, having considered Binbuga and the submissions made by Mr Jarvis, he
   did not seek to suggest in closing that the appellant was  socially  and
   culturally integrated to the UK.


59. As to s117C(4)(c), Judge Feeney made a finding that the appellant  would
   not experience very significant obstacles to re-integration to  Jamaica.
   Mr Moriarty accepted at the start of the  hearing  that  those  findings
   should stand but that he would invite us to consider  the  obstacles  to
   integration as part of  the  holistic  assessment  under  s117C(6).   We
   consider that to be an appropriate way to proceed, and  will  return  to
   the difficulties which would face the appellant on return to Jamaica  as
   part  of  our  assessment  of  whether   there   are   very   compelling
   circumstances over and above the statutory exceptions which outweigh the
   public interest in the appellant's deportation.  It suffices for present
   purposes to record that the appellant accepts the decision of the First-
   tier, reached with reference to authority including Kamara  [2016]  EWCA
   Civ 813; [2016] 4 WLR 152, that  there  will  not  be  very  significant
   obstacles to his integration.

60. It follows that the appellant would not be able  to  satisfy  the  first
   statutory exception to deportation even if he was  a  'medium  offender'
   who had access to that provision.

61. We can deal with  the  second  statutory  exception  more  shortly.  The
   appellant does not have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
   qualifying partner, or a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
   with a qualifying child.  Mr Moriarty did not seek to suggest  otherwise
   and the appellant could not avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the
   second exception even if he was a medium offender.  We need not consider
   whether the effect of the appellant's deportation on DB would be  unduly
   harsh since that exercise is only appropriate when the foreign  criminal
   has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying
   child; those who do not have a qualifying relationship fall outwith  the
   protection of the exception.

62. Having considered the statutory exceptions,  we  turn  to  the  ultimate
   question  in  this  case,  of  whether   there   are   very   compelling
   circumstances over and above those exceptions which outweigh the  public
   interest in the appellant's deportation.  In considering that  question,
   it is appropriate to consider the best interests of DB first.  We remind
   ourselves that his best interests are a primary consideration, that is a
   consideration of substantial importance: SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
   550; [2014] 1 WLR 998, at [44].  It is important to have a clear idea of
   the child's circumstances and of what is in their best interests  before
   asking whether those interests are outweighed  by  the  force  of  other
   considerations: Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74; [2013] 1 WLR 3690, at [10].

63. It is necessary to recall the history of  the  appellant's  relationship
   with DB before turning to the present situation.  The appellant  entered
   the UK with his grandmother, who left this country for the  USA  shortly
   thereafter.  The appellant then lived with  his  mother  and  his  step-
   father, EB.  The appellant's mother and EB had their only  son,  DB,  in
   October 2005 and they lived together as a  family  for  a  short  period
   until the appellant moved to Leicester to live with his then girlfriend.



64. The appellant gave evidence before us that he did not live in  Leicester
   but this contradicts the evidence he and his  then  girlfriend  gave  to
   Judge Paul in the appeal which was heard in June 2011.  The  appellant's
   statement for that appeal (IA/09257/2011) is before us and  states  that
   he and his then girlfriend had 'lived together as unmarried partners  in
   Leicester': [4].  Judge Paul found that the appellant had lived with his
   then girlfriend in Leicester for at least three years, from  about  2007
   onwards: [17].  A letter from the appellant's current solicitors records
   at page L3 of the respondent's bundle that the appellant  and  his  then
   girlfriend 'lived together for some time  as  unmarried  partners  in  a
   property situated in  Leicester'.  We  consider  that  to  be  the  true
   position, and do not accept the appellant's evidence that he was  merely
   travelling up to Leicester to visit his  girlfriend  regularly.  By  the
   date of the hearing  before  Judge  Paul,  however,  the  appellant  had
   returned to London to live with his mother and DB.  It  seems  that  his
   step-father had left the family home by that  stage,  since  Judge  Paul
   recounted at [6] of his decision that the appellant's mother  had  leave
   to remain as a result of domestic violence suffered at the hands of DB's
   father.


65. The appellant continued to live with his mother and DB from  about  2010
   until his arrest for the index offence.  He told us that he was released
   on an electronic tag following his arrest and that he was remanded  into
   custody on 27 July 2016, as a result of an unspecified incident.  He was
   convicted on 2 September 2016 and was released from custody on 3 January
   2019, whereupon he resumed living with his mother and DB.

66. There is no suggestion in the papers before  us  that  DB  was  anything
   other than a healthy and happy child until the death of  his  father  in
   2012.  The suggestion in [13] of the appellant's first witness statement
   (in these proceedings) that DB had counselling from 2009 seems to be  in
   error; there is no such suggestion in any of the other  papers  and  the
   appellant's  mother's  statement  makes  reference   to   DB   receiving
   counselling from the age of  nine,  which  corresponds  with  the  other
   material.  EB passed away at King's  College  Hospital  on  12  December
   2012.  A report from South  London  and  Maudsley  NHS  Trust  dated  16
   October 2014 documents what happened thereafter.

67. The report was written by Nicholas Messing,  a  Clinical  Specialist  at
   the Southwark Child and Family  Service.   It  was  addressed  to  Karen
   Sylvester, the Special Educational Needs Co-ordinator  at  DB's  Primary
   School, and copied to DB's mother  and  the  family  GP.   DB  had  been
   referred to the service by Ms Sylvester's  predecessor,  Nicola  Frazer.
   DB and his mother were seen for a first assessment on 30 June 2014.  The
   report was delayed somewhat because  the  appellant's  mother  had  been
   unable to attend planned assessments in July, which took place in August
   and September instead.  The report spans  nearly  six  pages.   We  have
   considered it in its entirety  but  we  consider  the  following  to  be
   particularly relevant.  DB had been  given  a  diagnosis  of  Adjustment
   Disorder, which was defined as a person experiencing, in response  to  a
   significant life change, a level of distress which interfered with their
   social functioning.  Mr Messing stated that DB had been  overwhelmed  by
   and was struggling to make sense of the loss  of  his  father.   He  was
   attempting to 'parcel away painful emotion' and was struggling to manage
   external situations, resulting in frustration with his school  work  and
   anger in regard to his peers.  He had felt rejected  by  his  father  in
   death and found it difficult that his mother was withdrawn at times,  as
   a result of her own grief.  He was acutely sensitive  to  situations  at
   school in which he felt overlooked by adults.


68. Mr Messing stated that DB had become anxious about his  mother  and  had
   wanted to be near her after EB's death.  He had  difficulties  with  two
   particular  children  at  school  and  had  been  involved  in  physical
   altercations with them.  His mother had struggled with  her  own  grief,
   having lost her father in 2010 and her partner in 2012 but she explained
   that DB and her comforted each other. DB had  had  a  good  relationship
   with his father and  had  rarely  talked  about  him  since  his  death,
   although he sometimes asked why his father had left and whether  he  had
   loved him.  There had been  significant  difficulties  reported  by  the
   SENCO, Ms Frazer, since the start of the school year.  DB had  found  it
   difficult when he was not receiving the teacher's attention and would go
   underneath a table, throw chairs or hit other children, causing  him  to
   be restrained on occasion.  He expressed concern  about  his  mother  to
   teachers, did not eat as much as his mother felt he should eat, and felt
   that it was hard to be at school except during play  time.   Mr  Messing
   concluded that a suitable treatment plan  would  involve  a  therapeutic
   space in which DB could communicate his emotions using art.  His  mother
   was referred to Southwark Psychological Therapies Service to assist with
   her grief, and to the debt management service as there  appeared  to  be
   issues in that area also.


69. DB then underwent therapy in 2015 and Mr Messing reported  in  a  letter
   dated 27 January 2016 that DB had engaged positively with that  therapy;
   that his behaviour at school had improved; and that he no longer had any
   concerns about him.

70. There are then eight letters from  Bacon's  College,  recording  various
   actions taken in respect of DB for behavioural problems in the period  5
   March 2018 to 11 July 2018.  He had been sent to the  'RAP  room'  on  a
   number of occasions because he had been disruptive in lessons and he had
   been temporarily excluded from school twice.   On  the  first  occasion,
   this was because he and his friends had left  the  school  premises  and
   gone to a primary school 'where they were verbally abusive towards  very
   young children in the playground'.  On the  second  occasion,  this  was
   because he had caused physical harm to  another  student,  stabbing  two
   girls in the back with a compass when they would not allow him  to  jump
   the queue for the water fountain.  The final  letter  from  the  school,
   which was not  in  either  of  the  appellant's  bundles,  is  dated  28
   September 2018 and records that the appellant's mother had been  invited
   for a meeting with the school's Educational Psychologist on  30  October
   2018.


71. The material from Mr Messing, which was  written  before  the  appellant
   went to prison  for  the  index  offence,  makes  no  reference  to  the
   appellant.  Nor do any of the other materials to which we have  referred
   in the preceding four paragraphs.

72. Then there is the report of Tamara Licht, which was prepared  for  these
   proceedings and is dated 15 October 2018.  Ms  Licht  is  an  accredited
   Clinical  Psychologist  and  Counselling  Psychologist  who  works  with
   children and adults inside the NHS and on a private basis.   She  has  a
   Bachelors degree  in  Clinical  Psychology  and  an  Masters  degree  in
   Clinical and Health Psychology.  In order to prepare the report, she was
   provided with the Messing report  from  2014,  the  letters  from  Bacon
   College and DB's mother's response thereto,  the  respondent's  decision
   and the grounds of appeal and some 'email correspondence containing some
   background facts regarding [the appellant's] family history'.  Ms  Licht
   was asked to conside the precise  impact  of  the  consequences  of  the
   appellant's deportation on DB.  Ms Licht interviewed DB and  his  mother
   on 2 October 2018  and  also  asked  each  of  them  to  complete  self-
   assessment scales.  At paragraph 1.03, she summarised her conclusions in
   the following way:

         "This report will conclude that in  my  professional  opinion  [DB]
         presents with separation anxiety disorder as a consequence of  [the
         appellant] facing possible deportation  to  Jamaica.   Furthermore,
         this report will conclude  that  if  [the  appellant]  were  to  be
         removed from the UK, [DB's] separation anxiety disorder  is  likely
         to further deteriorate his overall wellbeing.  The  present  report
         will conclude that there is a high  risk  of  [DB]  acting  on  his
         suicidal thoughts and ideation, should his step-brother be  removed
         from the UK.


         This report will explain that it is likely that due to  [DB's]  age
         and considering that he appears to depend mostly on  his  immediate
         family, any situation that may distress his family environment  has
         the potential to have a negative impact on his mental health.


         The report will also conclude that it is my opinion  that  if  [DB]
         was to be separated from [the appellant], his  overall  quality  of
         life would be additionally and significantly  affected  since  [his
         mother] is facing woth low mood [sic] after the loss  of  important
         family members  and  this  may  stop  her  from  being  emotionally
         available to attend to [DB's] psychological needs.


         From a risk assessment perspective, this report will conclude  that
         scores  obtained  from  psychometric  scales   recorded   in   this
         assessment and from my interview with [DB] and his  mother,  it  is
         possible to suggest that because of [DB's] age and gender, the risk
         of him acting on suicidal thoughts and ideation is high.


         Finally, this report will conclude that,  in  the  long  term,  [DB
         would benefit from receiving psychological therapy to assist him in
         expressing thoughts and emotions in order to  reinforce  his  self-
         confidence  and  thus,  better  regulate   emotions   when   facing
         situations that he may perceive to be distressful."

73. We have recorded at [26] above that Judge Feeney considered there to  be
   a number of serious shortcomings in this  report,  and  that  the  Upper
   Tribunal set aside Judge Feeney's decision because it was  not  possible
   to reconcile the extensive criticism of that report with the decision to
   attach weight to it in allowing the appeal.  We consider  that  each  of
   the observations expressed by Judge Feeney at [37]  of  her  report  was
   well made.  In particular, it is clear that Ms Licht failed to undertake
   her assessment in the context provided by the material from  Mr  Messing
   and she  failed,  therefore,  to  consider  the  extent  to  which  DB's
   presentation in 2018 could be attributed to his father's death  and  his
   subsequent diagnosis of Adjustment  Disrorder.   She  failed,  as  Judge
   Feeney observed, to consider other possible causes for DB's presentation
   and she did not explain why she settled on Separation  Anxiety  Disorder
   as distinct from other mental health conditions.   She  also  failed  to
   consider the support available to DB and his mother  from  other  family
   members.


74. We consider there to be additional difficulties with Ms Licht's  report.
    As an expert, she obviously provided her opinion based on the  evidence
   she was given and the meeting she had with DB and his  mother.   She  is
   not to be criticised for that.  The weight which can be attached to  her
   opinion is necessarily reduced, however, given that she was demonstrably
   not given access to DB's remaining medical records.  She  knew  that  he
   had undergone treatment in 2015 for Adjustment  Disorder  and  she  knew
   that he had started to develop behavioural problems again in  or  around
   2018 but she was not able  to  consider  his  GP  records  and  make  an
   informed assessment of the picture for these three years.   These  three
   years were, on  any  proper  view,  critical  to  her  assessment.   The
   appellant was arrested in 2015 but he was remanded in  custody  in  July
   2016.  Given that DB's behavioural problems appear to have resurfaced in
   2018, it is a serious deficiency in the report that it fails to consider
   alternative  causes  for  DB's  presentation.   If  those  problems  are
   attributable to DB's separation from the appellant, why  did  they  take
   the best part of two years to come to the fore, and what,  if  anything,
   occurred during the first two years of the appellant's imprisonment?


75. Ms Licht also considered DB to present with an extant risk  of  suicide,
   which would be increased in the event  that  the  appellant  was  to  be
   deported.  There was no attempt on her part, however,  to  consider  the
   absence of any such concern from any other  medical  source.   There  is
   nothing in the correspondence from Mr Messing to indicate  that  suicide
   risk was a concern.  There was nothing to indicate that  this  had  ever
   been raised by DB's mother, whether with the  family  GP  or  any  other
   agency, including CAMHS.  Ms Licht did not  consider  why  such  a  risk
   might exist upon the appellant being  deported  when  DB  had,  by  that
   stage, been separated from the appellant (by imprisonment) for more than
   two years and had not made an attempt on his life or  threatened  to  do
   so.  Equally, Ms Licht expressed serious concerns  about  DB's  mother's
   ability to cope without the appellant without any consideration  to  the
   fact that she had been coping, by that stage, for two years.


76. Unlike Judge Feeney, we do not feel able to attach weight to Ms  Licht's
   conclusions notwithstanding the  obvious  shortcomings  in  her  report.
   Judge Feeney attached particular significance, in severing the  problems
   from the conclusions, to the self-assessment questionnaires completed by
   DB and his mother, which suggested  severe  mental  health  problems  of
   various  types.   We  are  unable  to  adopt  the  same  approach.   The
   assessment which a mental health expert must conduct is a holistic  one,
   and  the  self-reported  symptoms  do  not  justify  a   conclusion   in
   themselves; it remains for the expert to assess what is reported and  to
   reach conclusions based on the picture as a whole.  Where the expert  is
   not provided with relevant material, and where the reasoning process  in
   the  report  is  defective,  the  ultimate  conclusion  is   necessarily
   undermined.  We do not consider it appropriate to attach  weight  to  Ms
   Licht's conclusion that DB currently presents a suicide risk or that the
   risk would increase in the event that the appellant was removed.   Those
   conclusions have no proper foundation and  do  not  withstand  scrutiny.
   Considering her report in the round and in the context of all the  other
   evidence in the appeal, we are not prepared to attach any weight to  it.




77. It is nevertheless demonstrably the case that DB is a 14  year  old  boy
   with behavioural problems which have led to his  exclusion  from  school
   and to the  school  arranging  further  intervention.   The  appellant's
   mother gave evidence about the appointments which she and  DB  currently
   attend. We were shown a letter dated 28 September 2018  which  indicated
   that a further referral to an Educational Psychologist  had  been  made.
   We accept that DB is currently receiving therapy from CAMHS, although we
   have been provided with no up-to-date material about the impact  it  may
   have had on his behaviour at school.  Since we have decided to attach no
   weight to Ms Licht's assessment, we consider for ourselves the impact of
   the appellant's deportation on DB.

78. In doing so, we must reach a view on the  current  relationship  between
   the appellant and his half-brother.  Matters have moved on  since  Judge
   Feeney heard the appeal at first instance.  The appellant was  still  in
   prison at that stage but he was released in January  this  year  and  we
   must make an assessment of the current relationship.  In  doing  so,  we
   have taken careful account of the material in the supplementary  bundle,
   and in particular the statements made by the appellant, his  mother  and
   DB.  The  appellant's  statement  makes  no  reference  to  his  current
   involvement in DB's life.  He explains his plans for the future and  how
   he felt to be reunited with his mother and DB after his imprisonment but
   says nothing about how he and  his  half-brother  have  rekindled  their
   relationship after such an absence.

79. The appellant's mother says that DB has changed  for  the  better  since
   the appellant was released from prison and that the appellant has been a
   role model for DB, who is now 'getting  his  head  down  more  with  his
   studies'.  In his own statement, DB says that he has previously  written
   two supporting letters (we have also read those) and that he was excited
   when the appellant was released.  He states that the  appellant  is  his
   mentor and his best friend and that he is loving, caring and thoughtful.
    He suggests that the appellant is like the father he lost in 2012.   He
   explains that the  appellant  has  taught  him  proper  values  and  the
   consequences of taking the wrong path in life.  He says that  he  cannot
   afford any more disappointment; he is now in a happy place and that they
   are all together as a family.

80. The appellant was asked a number of questions at the hearing  about  his
   current involvement in DB's life.  This critical evidence did not appear
   in the recent witness statements and it was necessary for us  to  ask  a
   number of clarificatory questions in order to make a  properly  informed
   assessment of DB's best interests.  It is clear that the appellant lives
   with his mother and DB but it is equally clear to us that he  sought  to
   mislead us about his involvement in DB's life,  and  in  particular  his
   mental health treatment.  The appellant stated that DB had  had  'little
   meetings' about his mental  health  and  that  he  (the  appellant)  had
   attended one or two of these meetings with DB and his  mother  in  2019.
   He initially stated that he had been to only one such meeting,  although
   he could not remember where it was or the name of the professional  with
   whom they met.  He then said that he had merely travelled there with his
   mother and DB, and had not been into the meeting itself.  He  then  said
   that he had taken DB and his mother to another  such  meeting.   On  the
   first occasion, they had taken a taxi and on the second occasion he  had
   arranged for a friend to drive them.   He  said  that  the  meeting  was
   somewhere in Croydon.  He  then  said  that  there  were  other  'little
   meetings' with the people who had referred DB to a psychiatrist and that
   there had also been two of these meetings since  he  had  been  released
   from prison.  These meetings took place in Bermondsey.  He said that  he
   had been to these meetings as well.  As with the other meetings, he  did
   not actually go inside and was there to 'support'.  He did not know  the
   name of the professionals involved and was  not  sure  who  was  in  the
   meeting.  He then changed his evidence, stating that he did  not  go  to
   these meetings at all and that he was there to support his mother and DB
   when they returned.


81. The appellant's mother gave a very different  version  of  events.   She
   said that she had been to see the Educational  Psychologist  in  October
   2018 and had then been to see the family GP for  a  referral  to  CAMHS.
   The GP is in Rotherhithe and DB had been referred to CAMHS in Camberwell
   Green.  DB had been  to  CAMHS  three  times  in  2019,  with  the  last
   appointment taking place on Monday 10 June  2019.   She  said  that  the
   appellant had not attended any of these sessions since his release.   We
   find that the appellant gave evidence which was  inconsistent  with  his
   mother's  about  this  subject  because  he  wanted  to  overstate   his
   involvement in his brother's life.  The truth, as his mother stated,  is
   that the appellant has not attended any of these meetings with  DB.   We
   consider  that  he  was  actually  rather  dismissive   of   the   CAMHS
   appointments, referring to them as 'little meetings' throughout.  Whilst
   he lives with DB, it is quite apparent that he has taken little interest
   in the ongoing attempts to address DB's behavioural difficulties in  the
   six months after his release.

82. Having heard from the appellant  and  his  mother  at  some  length,  we
   considered him to be a thoroughly unsatisfactory witness.  He sought  to
   tailor his evidence in order to portray a  closer  relationship  between
   himself and  DB  than  exists  in  reality.   Taking  a  step  back  and
   considering the evidence as a whole, we consider the reality  to  be  as
   follows.  The appellant lived with DB from his birth in 2005 to a  point
   in 2007 when he moved to Leicester with his then partner.  He lived with
   her for three years or so, at which point  he  returned  to  the  family
   home.  DB would have been around five years old at the time.

83. The appellant was living with his mother and DB when DB's father  passed
   away in 2012.  The appellant and DB became closer in the period  between
   DB's father's death and the appellant's imprisonment in  2016.   Letters
   and statements made by family and  friends  speak  to  the  relationship
   during that period and record that the appellant  cared  for  DB  whilst
   their mother was at work.  DB nevertheless suffered Adjustment  Disorder
   during this period and it was DB's mother who  secured  assistance  from
   CAMHS and ensured that DB received appropriate support.

84. The appellant was imprisoned in 2016  but  DB's  behavioural  issues  at
   school manifested themselves in 2018. We cannot be certain of the  cause
   of those issues because Ms Licht's report is not deserving of weight and
   because there is no further evidence  from  CAMHS,  the  school  or  the
   family GP in which the cause of the problems is  explored.   Because  we
   doubt that the appellant and DB are as close as has been  suggested  and
   in light of the considerable delay between the appellant's  imprisonment
   and the behavioural problems coming to  the  fore,  we  doubt  that  the
   appellant's absence from the family home was  the  dominant  cause.   We
   also note, in that regard, that DB continues  to  receive  support  some
   months after the appellant's release.  Whilst the appellant's mother and
   his Probation Officer report that DB's behaviour has improved, there  is
   no evidence from a medical professional or from the school,  whether  to
   confirm that improvement or the causes of it.


85. On balance, we consider  it  to  be  in  DB's  best  interests  for  the
   appellant to remain in the family home but we do not consider that to be
   overwhelmingly so.  DB has suffered bereavement in the past and he has a
   relationship  with  his  brother  but  the  claim  that  his   behaviour
   deteriorated  dramatically  in   2018   because   of   the   appellant's
   imprisonment is not borne out.  Nor is the  claim  that  he  would  harm
   himself in the appellant's deportation.  We take into  account  that  DB
   was diagnosed with Adjustment Disorder following the death of his father
   and this may exacerbate the adverse effects of deportation; however, his
   mother is demonstrably responsible and caring.  She has  done  all  that
   she could in the past to ensure that he is properly cared  for  and  she
   will continue to engage with CAMHS and other agencies in order to ensure
   that DB is able to make the most of his education.


86. There are other matters which must weigh in the  appellant's  favour  in
   the balance sheet assessment required  by  s117C(6)  of  the  2002  Act.
   Whilst these are matters to which reference is  made  in  the  statutory
   exceptions to deportation, it is well  established  that  they  are  not
   'ring-fenced'  thereafter  when  considering  whether  there  are   very
   compelling circumstances over and above those exceptions which  outweigh
   the public interest: JZ (Zambia) [2016] EWCA Civ 116; [2016] Imm AR 781.
    We heed the guidance in the Strasbourg authorities, as we are  required
   to do by [38] of NA (Pakistan).


87. The first matter is the appellant's length of residence in  the  UK  and
   his ties to this country.  He arrived in the UK as a child and  received
   most of his education here.  He has worked and he has had  relationships
   in the UK.  At [31] of JO & JT [2010] EWCA Civ 10; [2010]  1  WLR  1607,
   Richards LJ (with whom  Toulson  and  Mummery  LJJ  agreed)  said  that,
   although the Maslov [2009] INLR 47 principle did not apply in terms to a
   migrant who had not been lawfully present since childhood, such presence
   is nevertheless a weighty consideration in the balancing exercise.

88. The second matter is the difficulty the  appellant  will  experience  on
   return to Jamaica.  As we have recorded above, Mr Moriarty did not  seek
   to dispute the assessment made by the FtT in this regard, which was that
   there would be a number of difficulties but  not  the  very  significant
   obstacles required by the statutory exceptions.  The  appellant  has  no
   family there.  He has no support network.  He has  no  familiarity  with
   the way in which adults carry on their lives  in  that  country,  having
   left as a boy.  Judge Feeney was presented with  a  report  by  Luke  de
   Noronha regarding the difficulties generally faced by deportees from the
   UK who have been outside Jamaica  for  many  years.   For  the  detailed
   reasons she gave at [46]-[58], she accepted  what  was  said  by  Mr  de
   Noronha about the general difficulties encountered by  such  individuals
   but she did not accept that this particular appellant would be unable to
   find employment and accommodation, bearing in mind the  life  experience
   and skills on which he would be able to draw.

89. Mr Jarvis made  various  criticisms  of  Mr  de  Noronha's  report.   In
   particular, he submitted that he had failed to  provide  transcripts  of
   the interviews he had carried out with  deportees  and  others.   Whilst
   that appears to be correct, the report is otherwise well researched  and
   logical.  Mr Jarvis did not attempt to suggest that it would be easy for
   the appellant to readjust to life in Jamaica after such a  long  absence
   and we consider that the conclusions reached by  Judge  Feeney  in  this
   regard are balanced and considered.  Without a  support  structure,  the
   appellant will necessarily struggle.  He is  eligible  to  apply  for  a
   small amount of financial  assistance  from  the  respondent,  which  Mr
   Jarvis said would be �750 if it was granted.   We  do  not  consider  it
   appropriate to attach weight to this submission  because  we  were  told
   that there was no certainty that the  support  would  be  provided.   In
   fact,  Mr  Jarvis  stated  that  the  appellant  would  be  prima  facie
   ineligible due to his offending but that a discretion  was  nevertheless
   available to the respondent.  Due to the uncertainty of the  award,  the
   safest course is to discount it from our assessment and simply to  state
   that we endorse the conclusions reached by Judge Feeney in  relation  to
   the extent of the appellant's difficulties upon return.


90. We note that the appellant has committed no further  offences  since  he
   was released from prison.  Although he is currently assessed to  present
   a medium risk of reoffending, his Offender Manager considers  it  likely
   that this will be decreased to a low risk at his next assessment.  As Mr
   Jarvis submitted,  however,  rehabilitation  does  not  ordinarily  bear
   material weight in favour of a foreign  criminal  in  this  context:  RA
   (Iraq) [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC), at [32]-[33].  Mr Moriarty  accepted  that
   to be correct.

91. Against these factors, all of which militate in the  appellant's  favour
   under s117C(6), we consider the factors in  favour  of  the  appellant's
   deportation.  We can consider  s117B  comparatively  briefly,  since  Mr
   Jarvis accepted that the appellant can speak English and that there  was
   no reason to doubt that the appellant (who is dependent upon his mother)
   was financially independent in the Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58; [2018] 1 WLR
   5536 sense.  These are the therefore neutral matters.   The  potentially
   relevant aspects of s117B are sub sections (1), (4) and (5).  The latter
   two subsections require us to have regard to the principles that  little
   weight should be given to a private life acquired whilst an individual's
   status is precarious and to a family life acquired when an individual is
   unlawfully present in the UK.  We have regard to those  principles.   Of
   greater significance in this appeal, to our  mind,  is  s117B(1),  which
   states that the maintenance of effective immigration control is  in  the
   public interest.  This appellant has no leave to remain at  present  and
   cannot conceivably meet the Immigration Rules.  It was for  this  reason
   that Mr Jarvis  submitted  -  and  we  accept  -  that  the  appellant's
   deportation pursues what Richards LJ described as a 'double aim' in JO &
   JT (op cit).

92. S117C(2) requires us to consider the seriousness of the  index  offence,
   because the more serious the offence, the greater the public interest in
   deportation.  We have set out a  detailed  account  of  the  appellant's
   conspiracies above.  The seriousness of those offences is  primarily  to
   be gauged by the sentence imposed but the ultimate conclusion is for the
   court or Tribunal at this stage: Barry [2018] EWCA  Civ  790,  cited  at
   [29]-[30] of RA (Iraq).  In our view, the imposition of  a  sentence  of
   six years' imprisonment reflects a  very  serious  offence,  as  do  the
   sentencing remarks of HHJ Henry.  The appellant was part of  a  type  of
   criminality which brings addictive drugs and  all  of  their  associated
   suffering to communities which were previously  less  affected  by  that
   scourge.  He was prepared to enforce his demands with threats of extreme
   violence which terrified a vulnerable woman.  He continues to  deny  his
   involvement  in  the  drug-dealing  aspect  of  the   conspiracy.    The
   Strasbourg Court has explained on more than one occasion that  it  views
   the  supply  of  drugs  particularly  seriously  by  foreign   nationals
   particularly seriously: Baghli v France [1999] ECHR  135,  for  example.




93. The authorities which underline  the  weighty  public  interest  in  the
   deportation of a serious offender are legion.  In  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
   EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR 1192, Lord Dyson MR stated that  the  scales
   are heavily weighted in favour  of  deportation  for  this  category  of
   offender.  That approach was approved in  Hesham  Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60;
   [2016] 1 WLR 4799, the continuing  relevance  of  which  (following  the
   introduction of  Part  5A  NIAA  2002)  was  recently  explained  in  JG
   (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 982.  That  public  interest  is  particularly
   high when the appellant's offence was  so  serious  and  when  there  is
   plainly a need to recognise the deterrent effect of deportation in cases
   of this nature: MS (Phillipines) [2019] UKUT 122  (IAC),  analysing  the
   continuing application of OH (Serbia) [2008] EWCA Civ  694  post  Hesham
   Ali.

94. Both representatives took us  to  authorities  in  which  the  Court  of
   Appeal had or had not endorsed the conclusions of the Tribunals below on
   the facts of the cases before them.  Mr Jarvis took  us  to  WZ  (China)
   [2017] EWCA Civ 795, in which Sir Stanley Burnton (with whom  Flaux  and
   Linblom LJJ agreed) stated that the facts in that case were incapable of
   overcoming the public interest in  the  deportation  of  the  particular
   appellant,  who  was  a  medium  offender.   He  said  that  deportation
   necessarily results in the break-up of the  offender's  family  if  they
   stay in the United Kingdom: [14].  For his part, Mr Moriarty took us  to
   Garzon [2018] EWCA Civ 1225, in which  the  Court  of  Appeal  upheld  a
   decision of UTJ Frances, who had herself upheld a decision of the First-
   tier Tribunal  that  there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  which
   engaged paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.  Counsel  conceded  that
   the Secretary of State's challenge to the decision of the FtT was one of
   perversity.  McFarlane LJ (with whom Sales  LJ  agreed)  held  that  the
   Tribunal had not erred in its approach to the appeal; that the  decision
   was one that was open to it on the facts of  that  case;  and  that  the
   perversity challenge was not made out.


95. We derive little assistance from these decisions because  they  turn  on
   the facts of the individual cases before the  court.   Even  if,  as  Mr
   Moriarty submitted, the facts in Garzon bear  some  resemblance  to  the
   facts in this appeal, the balancing exercise in each case  is  intensely
   fact specific and all the court confirmed was that it was  open  to  the
   FtT to reach the conclusion that it did on  the  fact  of  that  (medium
   offender's) case.  The court did not purport to establish any  point  of
   principle.


96. We have  already  referred  to  another  authority  which  came  to  our
   attention shortly after the  hearing:  JG  (Jamaica).   That  case  also
   concerned a serious offender whose principal  submission  was  that  his
   deportation was so clearly contrary to his  son's  best  interests  that
   there were very compelling circumstances  which  outweighed  the  public
   interest in deportation.  Again, however, the decision turns on its  own
   facts, and we note in particular that  the  appellant  was  the  primary
   carer of the child in question.

97. Ultimately, therefore, we come to  a  balancing  exercise,  taking  into
   account the findings of fact we have made and the  legal  principles  we
   have set out at some length.  Balancing those matters which militate  in
   the appellant's  favour  against  those  which  militate  in  favour  of
   deportation, we find the latter to prevail by a considerable margin.  We
   accept that the appellant's deportation will be contrary  to  his  half-
   brother best interests, but not to the  extent  suggested.   We  do  not
   accept that  DB's  current  problems  were  caused  by  the  appellant's
   imprisonment  or  that  they  will  be  significantly  worsened  by  the
   appellant's deportation.  He will remain in  the  UK  with  his  primary
   carer  and  will  receive  appropriate  support  for   his   behavioural
   difficulties, both from CAMHS and the school, with whom  his  mother  is
   able and willing to engage.  The appellant will  find  it  difficult  to
   adjust to life in  Jamaica  but  he  will  be  able  to  surmount  those
   problems.  There is nothing on the facts of this case  which  approaches
   the very compelling circumstances required  in  order  to  outweigh  the
   public interest in the appellant's deportation, which  is  rendered  all
   the weightier by the nature and seriousness of his offence.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date: 19 July 2019

Mark Blundell
Judge of the Upper Tribunal.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 19 July 2019

Mark Blundell
Judge of the Upper Tribunal.

