
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/00994/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 April 2021                   |On 28 April 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     CM

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Mr C Brown, instructed by Maya Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is a national of Zimbabwe with date of  birth  given
    as 16.6.80, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 22.9.20, dismissing
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    19.9.19, to refuse his human rights claim and to maintain the  decision
    to deport him from the UK made following his  criminal  conviction  for
    serious drug-dealing offences for which he was sentenced to a  term  of
    33 months' imprisonment.

 2. Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    21.10.20. However, when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  granted   permission   on
    11.11.20, on the basis that it is arguable that the  judge  erred  when
    assessing 'unduly harsh', when considered in the light of the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, giving
    guidance on KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53  and  the  term  'unduly
    harsh' found in s117C(5) of the 2002  Act  and  paragraph  399  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The grant of permission was on a ground not  pleaded
    by the appellant in the grounds of application for permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  Upper  Tribunal  has
    also received and I have  taken  into  consideration  the  respondent's
    skeleton argument, dated 15.1.21.

 4. HA (Iraq) was promulgated on 4.9.20, a few days before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal hearing and is not  referenced  in  the  decision.  The
    point relied on in the grant of permission is set out between [51]  and
    [58] of HA, guidance as to  the  meaning  of  'unduly  harsh',  in  the
    context in that case where the appellants contended that the effect  of
    deportation on their  children  would  be  'unduly  harsh'  within  the
    meaning of Exception 2 in s117C(5) of  the  2002  Act.   At  [51]  Lord
    Justice Underhill considered the essential point that the criterion  of
    undue harshness sets an  elevated  bar  and  carries  a  must  stronger
    emphasis than mere undesirability. The various synonyms, some of  which
    were cited by Judge Handler at [64] of her decision, were  said  to  be
    helpful. However, it was "important not to lose sight of the fact  that
    the hurdle which it sets is not as high as that  set  by  the  test  of
    "very compelling circumstances"  in  section  117C(6)....The  statutory
    intention is evidently that the hurdle  representing  the  unacceptable
    impact on a partner or child should be set somewhere between the  (low)
    level applying in the case  of  persons  who  are  liable  to  ordinary
    immigration removal... and the (very high) level  applying  to  serious
    offenders," (HA paragraph [52]).

 5. At [53] Underhill LJ stated, "It  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  an
    exercise of the  kind  required  by  section  117C(5)  that  Parliament
    intended that tribunals should in each case make an informed evaluative
    assessment of whether the  effect  of  deportation  of  the  parent  or
    partner on their child or  partner  would  be  "unduly  harsh"  in  the
    context of the strong public interest in  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals; and further exposition of that phrase will never be of  more
    than limited value."

 6. At [56] Underhill LJ agreed that a touchstone of whether the degree  of
    harshness goes  beyond  "that  which  is  ordinarily  expected  by  the
    deportation of a parent" may be misleading if used incautiously; "there
    is no reason in principle why cases of "undue" harshness may not  occur
    quite commonly. Secondly, if tribunals treat the essential question  as
    being "is this level of harshness out of  the  ordinary?  they  may  be
    tempted to find that Exception 2 does not apply  simply  on  the  basis
    that the situation fits into some  commonly-encountered  pattern.  That
    would be dangerous.  How  a  child  will  be  affected  by  a  parent's
    deportation will depend on  an  almost  infinitely  variable  range  of
    circumstances and  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  a  baseline  of
    "ordinariness"."

 7. It is important to note that at [57] Underhill  LJ  concluded  on  this
    point, "Tribunals considering the parent case under Exception 2  should
    not err in law if in each  case  they  carefully  evaluate  the  likely
    effect of the parent's deportation on the  particular  child  and  then
    decide whether that  effect  is  not  merely  harsh  but  unduly  harsh
    applying KO (Nigeria) in accordance with the guidance at paras. 50-53
    above."

 8. Mr Brown's submissions to me largely ignored the grounds as pleaded and
    focused on the grant of permission's reference to HA. His three  points
    were advanced as follows:

      i. That the judge misdirected herself as the legal  test  as  to  what
         constitutes 'unduly harsh';

     ii. That it is unclear from the  decision  whether  any  relevance  was
         given to the immigration status of the partner, JD,  who  had  been
         granted exceptional leave to remain;

    iii. That the judge's assessment of  the  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 best interests of the children
         ignored the opinion or intentions of the elder child, IM.

 9. It should first be noted that the appellant represented himself at  the
    First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing and whilst he  and  his  partner  JD
    gave oral evidence, no other evidence written or oral was submitted. In
    the premises, I agree with Mr Tan's submission that Mr Brown's reliance
    on (ii) above is entirely speculative. No information was  provided  to
    the First-tier Tribunal as to why JD had been granted exceptional leave
    to remain and even before me, Mr Brown was himself  unable  to  provide
    that information. In the premises, nothing  can  turn  on  the  alleged
    failure to take into consideration JD's immigration status. No error of
    law is disclosed by this ground.

10. Similarly, the argument raised by Mr Brown that the judge  should  have
    enquired into the wishes or intentions of IM, then 10 years of age,  is
    made without any evidence having been put before the judge  other  than
    the oral testimony of the appellant  and  his  partner,  and  does  not
    feature in the grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal.  In
    reality, it is speculation on Mr Brown's part what the child might have
    said and indeed whether or not that was or  was  not  canvassed  during
    oral evidence. It is  clear  from  [66],  [72]  and  elsewhere  in  the
    decision that the judge  made  a  careful  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the children in which the  observation  is  made  that  no
    evidence was presented that either child  would  be  unable  to  go  to
    Zimbabwe, the judge having noted visits  there  by  their  mother.  The
    judge could only act on the evidence put before her.  She  reached  the
    unsurprising conclusion  that  it  would  be  in  the  children's  best
    interests to remain in the family unit with both parents. However,  the
    judge concluded on the evidence that this  could  be  achieved  if  the
    family moved to Zimbabwe.  The ground as advanced  is  speculative  and
    fails to identify a material error of law.

11. In relation to the primary ground of the judge's  assessment  of  undue
    harshness, Mr Brown accepted that there was an elevated bar but  argued
    that the wording used by the judge at [64] of the decision implied that
    judge raised the bar  too  high.  The  judge  correctly  referenced  KO
    (Nigeria) noting that an evaluation of the consequences and  impact  of
    deportation was required in the undue  harshness  assessment,  focusing
    entirely on the family  member  concerned.  Mr  Brown  pointed  to  the
    judge's statement, "Furthermore, the addition of  the  adverb  "unduly"
    raises an already elevated standard still higher," which  he  submitted
    was a "hint" that the judge misdirected herself and applied a threshold
    more than the elevated one referred to  by  the  Court  of  Appeal.  He
    effectively submitted that on that evidence the Upper  Tribunal  should
    conclude that too high a bar was set by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.
    Reliance was also made on the judge's  finding  at  [68]  that  if  the
    appellant left for Zimbabwe and the children remained in the  UK,  they
    would suffer "significant distress"; an argument made  in  the  written
    grounds, that this should be equated to being unduly harsh.

12. However, in  the  passage  criticised  the  judge  was  but  citing  KO
    (Nigeria).  I  do  not  accept  the  submission  that  a   finding   of
    "significant distress" equates to 'unduly harsh', as the grounds and Mr
    Brown's submissions imply. Considering the decision as a whole, I  find
    that there is no evidence that the judge applied too high a bar or that
    she  effectively  applied  a  test   as   high   as   very   compelling
    circumstances. The judge was correct to  note  that  the  test  was  an
    elevated one. It is one that required  the  appellant  to  establish  a
    degree of harshness going beyond a threshold acceptable level. That  he
    did not do, particularly given the absence of supporting  evidence.  As
    Underhill LJ noted at [55] of HA, the evaluation involves an assessment
    of best interests of the children,  which  I  am  satisfied  the  judge
    proceeded to make, setting  out  the  various  considerations  and  her
    reasons for the conclusions reached.

13. In summary, I am satisfied  that  Judge  Handler  followed  the  course
    Underhill LJ considered would lead to no  error  of  law  by  carefully
    evaluating the likely effect of the appellant's deportation on each  of
    the two children and then decided whether that effect  was  not  merely
    harsh but unduly harsh, applying as she did the guidance in KO. In  the
    premises, no error of law is disclosed by this ground.

14. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that it must be set aside.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       20 April 2021




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       20 April 2021

