
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00819/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2021                      |On 19 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                    M A H
                        By his Litigation Friend T C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. This decision is a remaking of MAH's appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision dated 9 May 2018 to deport  him.   The  appellant  brings  his
    appeal under Articles 3 and 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR).

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Morocco, born on 20 May 1966.

 4. The appellant maintains that he came to the UK on 17 February 1985 with
    a visit visa.  The respondent maintains that there is no record of  any
    involvement with the immigration authorities  until  2001  but  accepts
    that a criminal conviction in 1986 indicates  that  the  appellant  was
    present in the UK at that time.  Nothing before me suggested other than
    that the appellant has been in the UK  since  at  least  1986  and  the
    respondent did not argue otherwise in the proceedings before me.

 5. At some point, the appellant  formed  a  relationship  with  a  British
    national, married and had two children.  However, his relationship with
    his family appears to have foundered during the 1990s and  he  has  not
    had contact with them for many years.  There  is  a  reference  in  the
    appellant's mental health records to  involvement  with  mental  health
    services in 1995 but no details of this.

 6. It is undisputed that the appellant was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain (ILR) in 2001.  The basis for that grant is unclear.  Ms  Fisher
    maintained that it could be inferred that the  grant  of  ILR  in  2001
    showed that the appellant must have had legal status earlier than that,
    possibly continuous legal status since 1985. Without more  evidence,  I
    did not find that this was a conclusion that I could draw and proceeded
    on the basis of the history set out here.

 7. The psychiatric evidence provided, considered  in  more  detail  below,
    sets out that the appellant  was  unwell  and  homeless  for  extensive
    periods after 2001. Details of the appellant's contact with St Mungo's,
    a homelessness charity, are recorded in paragraph 86 of the  report  of
    Dr Bargiela and indicate that the appellant was  involved  sporadically
    with mental health services, including detentions in  a  mental  health
    hospital in 2007 and 2008.

 8. The appellant also amassed a very extensive criminal history, albeit of
    relatively minor non-custodial offences.   Between  1986  and  2017  he
    received 73 convictions for 124 offences, including 5 offences  against
    the person, 2 offences against property, 54 theft and kindred offences,
    10 public disorder offences, 31 offences relating to police, courts and
    prisons and 20 drug related offences. It is not contentious  that  this
    forensic history is closely  associated  with  the  appellant's  mental
    disorder.

 9. The respondent was aware of the appellant's convictions  but  in  2007,
    2010, 2013, 2016 and on two occasions in 2017  decided  not  to  pursue
    deportation action.  However, following convictions on 16 October 2017,
    30 October 2017 and 20 November 2017  for  breach  of  an  Anti-Social
    Behaviour Order (ASBO), the last of which led to a sentence of 14 days'
    imprisonment,  the  respondent  commenced  deportation   action.    The
    appellant was served with a decision to deport on 28 November 2017 made
    under section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971, his  deportation  being
    deemed to be conducive to the public good.   In a decision dated 9  May
    2018, the respondent refused the appellant's human rights claim.

10. After the appellant completed his 14-day prison  sentence  in  November
    2017, he was kept in immigration detention. He was still  in  detention
    on 17 May 2018 when he was served with the decision dated  9  May  2018
    refusing his human rights claim. The appellant did not appeal  at  that
    time.

11. In August 2018 the appellant was still in prison and was encountered in
    detention by Duncan Lewis Solicitors. Acting pro bono, on 12  September
    2018 the legal representatives  attempted  to  lodge  an  out  of  time
    appeal. They applied for legal aid funding  to  pay  the  fee  for  the
    appeal but discovered that the  appellant  had  funds  held  by  Social
    Services under an appointeeship which precluded him from being  granted
    public funding. Despite extensions of time to allow for the fee  to  be
    paid  being   granted   by   the   First-tier   Tribunal,   the   legal
    representatives were unable to comply and the appeal was  closed  on  8
    November 2018.

12. By December 2018, however,  the  appellant  had  instructed  his  legal
    representatives privately and on 7 January 2019 they submitted a second
    out of time appeal against the decision of 9 May 2018.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal accepted that appeal  as  in  time  in  a  decision  dated  19
    February 2019.  It is that appeal that continues here.

13. On 6 March 2019 the appellant was discharged  from  detention.  He  was
    discharged to no fixed abode, became street homeless and did not remain
    in contact with his legal representatives.

14. The appellant's appeal was listed for a Case Management Review (CMR) in
    the First-tier Tribunal on 26 March 2019.   His  legal  representatives
    attempted to have the CMR adjourned as they were not  in  contact  with
    the appellant and not in funds to represent  him.   The  CMR  proceeded
    with a representative from  the  legal  representatives  attending  pro
    bono.  The First-tier Tribunal  declined  to  adjourn  the  substantive
    hearing which was listed for 16 May 2019.   The  legal  representatives
    came off  the  record  on  7  May  2019  where  they  remained  without
    instructions from the appellant.

15. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal on 16 May 2019. There was no
    appearance by or for  the  appellant.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    proceeded with  the  hearing,  finding  that  the  appellant  "has  not
    provided any  explanation  for  his  nonattendance".   The  appeal  was
    dismissed in a decision dated 31 May 2019.

16. As set out in a letter dated 6 June 2019 from Duncan  Lewis  Solicitors
    to the First-tier Tribunal, on 17 May 2019 they were approached by  the
    Outreach Team at St Mungo's who informed them that  the  appellant  had
    been  found  sleeping   rough   in   Leicester   Square.    The   legal
    representatives made contact with the appellant and went back on record
    as acting on 31 May 2019.  They requested  a  copy  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision in order to prepare an out-of-time appeal and  lodged
    the appeal on 23 August 2019. The application was accepted  as  in-time
    by the First-tier Tribunal  and  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal granted on 4 October 2019.

17. By the time that permission was granted, the legal representatives were
    having difficulty taking instructions from the appellant  and  concerns
    arose  over  his  capacity.  The  legal  representatives   obtained   a
    Certificate of Suitability for a Litigation  Friend  dated  31  October
    2019.  The  Certificate  indicated  that  the  Official  Solicitor  had
    consented to act for the appellant on the basis that he was a protected
    party. By the time of a CMR in the Upper Tribunal on 3  December  2019,
    however, it became apparent  that,  albeit  the  appellant  remained  a
    protected party because of his lack of capacity, the Official Solicitor
    was not able to represent him.

18. The legal representatives,  with  the  assistance  of  an  organisation
    called Migrants Organise, found a Litigation Friend for the  appellant,
    Ms ten Caten.  At a further CMR hearing on 20 January 2020  proceedings
    were further delayed, however. Firstly, the legal  representatives  had
    not  finalised  funding  for  the  Litigation  Friend.  Secondly,   the
    appellant was still  homeless  and  was  unwell,  having  been  without
    medication for his mental disorder since March 2019.

19. In anticipation of funding for the Litigation  Friend  being  available
    from HMCTS, an error of law hearing was listed  for  April  2020.   The
    Covid-19 pandemic then intervened and the hearing was adjourned.

20. On 13 August 2020 the  Litigation  Friend  provided  a  Certificate  of
    Suitability confirming that she was able to represent the appellant. An
    error of law hearing was listed for 20 January 2021.  As set out in  my
    error of law decision issued on 21 January 2021, at  that  hearing  the
    respondent  conceded  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal. The re-making  of  the  appeal  was  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal following the presumption set out in paragraph 7 of Part 3  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement dated 11 June 2018.

21. At a CMR on 14 April 2021 the respondent consented to  the  grounds  of
    appeal being extended to include Article 3 ECHR and the Upper  Tribunal
    agreed to this variation of the grounds.   Both  parties  were  granted
    permission to adduce further medical evidence.

22. A hearing for the remaking of the appeal was listed for 20  July  2021.
    For that hearing, the respondent provided a position paper dated 7 July
    2021 and materials on  medical  treatment  available  in  Morocco.  The
    appellant provided a consolidated bundle (CB) comprising 360 pages  and
    a supplementary bundle (SB) comprising 51 pages.

MAH's Medical Issues

23. The appellant's psychiatric history is set out in a number  of  reports
    from the mental health professionals who have treated him whilst he has
    been in the UK. The materials included reports from Dr  Bargiela  dated
    20 September 2019, Dr Rahman dated 3 April 2021, Dr Hall dated 31 March
    2021 and Ms Siddal dated 26 May  2021.  The  reports  are  all  closely
    consistent and it was not disputed before  me  that  they  set  out  an
    accurate assessment of the appellant's mental  disorder  and  treatment
    needs. As it is the most detailed, the information  set  out  below  is
    taken from the report of Dr Rahman dated 3 April  2021  unless  another
    source is specified.

24. Dr Rahman indicates that limited psychiatric notes are available  prior
    to 2010. The limited materials referred to admissions  to  hospital  in
    1995, 2005 and 2007. There is an  a reference to an admission  in  1983
    which remains unexplained, the appellant not claiming to have  been  in
    the UK at that time. By August 2010 the appellant  had  been  diagnosed
    with paranoid schizophrenia and was being treated with a zuclopenthixol
    decanoate depot injection every 3 weeks.  The  reports  indicated  that
    from 2010 to 2017 the appellant was under  the  care  of  a  number  of
    community  teams,  including  the  Joint  Homelessness  Team  and   the
    Community Rehabilitation Team. The records showed a persistent  history
    of significant problems with selfcare, minimal engagement  and  ongoing
    concerns about drug use.  It was also  noted  that  the  appellant  had
    received a number of injuries related to  his  involvement  with  drugs
    including a fractured jaw and in 2015 sustained bilateral hip fractures
    after being run over.

25. In 2017 the appellant was living in supported accommodation, subject to
    an ASBO related to begging which he repeatedly breached. As above,  the
    appellant was then imprisoned for 2 weeks in November 2017 following  a
    further breach of the ASBO. He was then kept in  immigration  detention
    until 6 March 2019. He was treated by  prison  mental  health  services
    with whom the Community Rehabilitation Team liaised. Community services
    were not informed of the appellant's release from prison, however, and,
    as above, he was released to no fixed abode on 6 March 2019.

26. The reports from the mental health professionals  and  from  St  Thomas
    Hospital showed that after his release from prison in March  2019,  the
    appellant suffered a number of physical and mental health crises. After
    his release from prison, the appellant was homeless. He was encountered
    by outreach workers from St  Mungo's  in  May  2019.  He  resumed  some
    contact with his legal representatives that  month  and  the  materials
    also showed that he was referred to mental health services but was  not
    able to engage. He  remained  homeless  and  his  mental  disorder  was
    untreated. Ms Sibbald, the appellant's Care Coordinator, describes this
    period in paragraph 8 of her report dated 26 May 2021.

         "He requires support with engaging health and psychiatric services.
         Since being released from his last prison sentence in  March  2020,
         he resumed rough sleeping.  He did not even remember to go  to  the
         day centre that could have supported him, he  was  unable  to  keep
         appointments, attend day centres, or engage with homeless  outreach
         workers and with the Joint Homelessness Team.   His  mental  health
         unravelled  very  quickly,  he  was  living  a  chaotic  life,  was
         destitute and sleeping rough - he was not even able to  maintain  a
         regular sleep site."

    The reference in the second sentence should be to March 2019, not March
    2020.

27. This period of untreated mental  illness  and  homelessness  led  to  a
    physical health crisis. On 21 January 2020 the appellant  was  admitted
    to St Thomas Hospital with hyperthermia and hypoxia,  thought  to  have
    been precipitated by a pneumonia. On admission to hospital,  he  had  a
    heart attack. A letter dated 14  May  2021  from  Dr  Webb,  Consultant
    Cardiologist in  the  Cardiology  Department  at  St  Thomas  Hospital,
    confirmed that the appellant's heart stopped during this  incident  and
    he was resuscitated after two cycles of  cardiopulmonary  resuscitation
    (CPR) and taken to the intensive care unit. Dr Webb set  out  that  the
    appellant  experienced  a  "profound   cardiovascular   insult".    She
    indicated that the cause of the cardiac arrest was "most likely due  to
    the significant hyperthermia with a chest infection, on the  background
    of iron deficiency, anaemia and  nutritional  depletion."   The  letter
    includes Dr Webb's stark statement that "if he  had  not  received  the
    care he did, he would not have survived."

28. Dr Webb also indicated that tests conducted  after  the  appellant  had
    been resuscitated indicated that  the  appellant  had  a  "moderate  to
    severe" impairment in his heart function.  The  appellant  was  put  on
    daily medication to support his heart.  He was prescribed eplerenone 25
    mg, furosemide 40 mg, bisoprolol 7.5 mg, and ramipril 5 mg.   Following
    a period of consistent medication, the impairment  to  the  appellant's
    heart function had reduced to "mild" impairment by March 2021.  Dr Webb
    confirmed that the appellant required ongoing medication as without  it
    his heart function would deteriorate again.

29. On admission to St Thomas Hospital in January 2020, the appellant  also
    presented  as  significantly  mentally   unwell,   expressing   tactile
    hallucinations,  persecutory  beliefs  and  being  significantly  self-
    neglecting. His presentation was consistent with the  records  held  by
    mental health services and he was detained under s.2 of  the  MHA.   He
    absconded from the hospital after the section was made but returned and
    was transferred to a mental health unit at the Gordon  Hospital  on  19
    February 2020.

30. The appellant then absconded again and this led to  the  section  being
    discharged on 23 March 2020 as he could  not  be  located.   He  became
    homeless again and on 7 October 2020  was  arrested  by  police  having
    reportedly spat in the face of a member of the public.   He  was  again
    assessed under the MHA  and  again  detained  under  s.2  of  the  MHA,
    initially being detained at HMP Wandsworth and then  being  transferred
    to a mental health ward at St Charles Hospital on 14 October  2020.  He
    presented as acutely unwell,  remaining  manic  and  labile  throughout
    October 2020.

31. As a result of the seriousness of his presentation, the  appellant  was
    transferred to a Psychiatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) at  St  Charles
    Hospital on 6 November 2020. Dr Rahman was  his  Responsible  Clinician
    whilst he was in the PICU. Such  was  the  extent  of  the  appellant's
    relapse that he continued to present as extremely unwell  on  the  PICU
    even after depot  antipsychotic  medication  was  introduced,  smearing
    faeces across his bedroom wall on 8 November 2020, being involved in  a
    fight with another patient on 9 November 2020 which led to police being
    called, expressing grandiose delusional ideas and fluctuating mood.  It
    was during this period of detention on the PICU that his diagnosis  was
    amended to that of a schizoaffective disorder.   As  a  result  of  his
    continued serious relapse, the dosage of his  zuclopenthixol  decanoate
    depot was increased to 300 mg  every  2  weeks.   He  continued  to  be
    unwell, spitting  unprovoked  at  his  Consultant  Psychiatrist  on  18
    November 2020. On 19  November  2020  he  smashed  a  phone  and  rapid
    tranquilisation medication was required.  In view of  his  labile  mood
    his mood stabiliser medication, sodium valproate was also increased.

32. On 2 December 2020 the appellant complained of a sharp chest  pain  and
    in light of his cardiac history he was taken to A  &  E  at  St  Mary's
    Hospital for an urgent review.  He  absconded  from  St Mary's  whilst
    being investigated although  he  later  returned  voluntarily  and  was
    transferred back to the PICU.

33. The appellant was transferred to a general  mental  health  ward  on  5
    December  2020  as  his  mental  state  and  behaviour  had   moderated
    sufficiently. On 7 January 2021 he was given leave under  s.17  of  the
    MHA but did not return to the ward. On 8 January 2021 he  was  admitted
    to St Mary's Hospital having suffered a collapse.  He was diagnosed  as
    experiencing an opioid overdose and pneumonia. On admission  he  had  a
    reduced respiratory rate.  He was provided with medication and  cleared
    for discharge back to St Charles Hospital.

34. Once back at St Charles, a  care  plan  leading  to  discharge  to  the
    community was prepared which included a Community Treatment Order (CTO)
    made under s. 17A of the MHA. The conditions of the  CTO  included  the
    appellant accepting his depot antipsychotic medication and living in 24-
    hour supported accommodation. If the conditions of  the  CTO  were  not
    met, the community Responsible Clinician had the power  to  recall  the
    appellant to hospital and revoke the CTO leading to a further period of
    detention in hospital. The care plan, intended to assist the  appellant
    to remain stable in the community, included  a  keyworker  to  see  him
    daily, a Care Coordinator from a community team, support from drug  and
    alcohol services and a  neurocognitive  assessment  due  to  what  were
    considered to be "likely cognitive problems".

35. The appellant was discharged from hospital on the  CTO  on  15  January
    2021 to the King George Hostel and continues to live there now.

36. On discharge, the appellant's care was  transferred  to  a  Responsible
    Clinician in the community, Dr Bellew.  Dr  Rahman's  report  sets  out
    details of Dr Bellew's review of the  appellant  on  4  February  2021.
    After the appellant was discharged  to  King  George  Hostel,  concerns
    arose as he did not return some nights and was noted to be drowsy.   He
    denied illicit drug use but a urine drug screen conducted on 28 January
    2021 was positive for illicit drugs. The appellant told Dr Bellew  that
    he wanted to be "clean" which was thought to be a reference to his drug
    use.  He was advised of the danger of his illicit drug  use  given  his
    heart condition.  The appellant did not think  that  he  had  a  mental
    disorder and could not identify any benefit from his depot  medication.
    He was, at best, ambivalent about the usefulness of his medication  and
    whether he would continue with it were he not obliged to do so  by  the
    CTO.  His history did not show that he  actively  refused  or  resisted
    medication, however, and he was found to be compliant,  albeit  without
    capacity.

37. Dr Bellew confirmed that  the  appellant  continues  to  require  daily
    support to supervise his mental and physical health and his medication.
    Ongoing ECG monitoring was stated to be "particularly  important  given
    his cardiac problems" and was to be repeated in 6 weeks in the event of
    there being no cardiology review  within  that  period.  Dr  Hall,  the
    appellant's current community Responsible Clinician provided a  similar
    professional view to those of Dr Rahman and Dr  Bellew  in  her  report
    dated 31 March 2021.

38. The current situation is that the appellant's schizoaffective  disorder
    is being treated with an antipsychotic in the form of a depot injection
    of zuclopenthixol decanoate 300 mg once every 2 weeks and an oral  mood
    stabiliser of sodium valproate 2g once daily.  As Dr Bargiela notes  in
    her report, depot medication  is  used  where  someone  is  "unable  or
    unwilling to take daily medication, normally because they  either  lack
    capacity or lead a chaotic lifestyle".

39. In addition to pharmacological treatment the appellant is being treated
    with a high level of specialist psychiatric input. In paragraph  86  of
    his report Dr Rahman sets out:

         "Mr [MAH]'s substantial care needs are  currently  met  through  an
         assertive mental health and social care  team  (Joint  Homelessness
         Team).  The team works with  third  sector  suppliers  of  24  hour
         supported accommodated to [MAH] and have linked him with  community
         drug services.  He receives daily  visits  by  a  carer  to  ensure
         compliance with oral medications.

    Dr Rahman confirms in paragraph 21 of his report that, in  addition  to
    daily visits from a key worker to supervise medication  compliance  and
    support the appellant with his basic tasks  of  daily  living  such  as
    feeding himself, the appellant  has  regular  meetings  with  his  Care
    Coordinator, Ms Sibbald, and is reviewed by his  community  Responsible
    Clinician every few months to monitor his mental state and  review  his
    medication.

40. In paragraph 87 of his report Dr Rahman states:

         "Mr [MAH]'s mental health needs are managed under Section 17A (CTO)
         in order to ensure compliance with depot antipsychotic  medication,
         without  which  he  is  highly  likely  to  remain  compliant  with
         treatment and likely to relapse in his mental health."

    This sentence must have been intended  to  state  that  it  is  "highly
    unlikely" that the appellant will be compliant with  treatment  without
    the support of the CTO as it otherwise makes no sense  when  read  with
    the remainder of Dr Rahman's report and the other psychiatric evidence;
    see paragraph 96 set out below, for example.

41. In paragraph 95 Dr Rahman states:

         "In my clinical opinion, the lack of psychotropic treatment  on  Mr
         [MAH]'s mental state would have been significant and  would  highly
         likely lead to a deterioration in his mental health.  Patients with
         severe, chronic  and  longstanding  psychotic  illness,  as  in  Mr
         [MAH]'s  case,  usually  demonstrate  a   gradual   insidious   and
         significant  decline  in  their  mental  state  if  they  are   not
         administered regular psychotropic medication.

         In my opinion, an important  cause  of  Mr  [MAH]'s  mental  health
         relapse in October 2020 was secondary to the lack  of  psychotropic
         treatment alongside the lack of community mental health support and
         use of recreational substances following his  release  from  Prison
         (sic)."

42. Dr Rahman continues in paragraph 96:

         "Mr [MAH] requires substantial care for his chronic mental illness.
          His complex mental health  needs  are  currently  met  through  an
         assertive  mental  health  and  social   care   team,   the   Joint
         Homelessness  Team.   The  team  monitors  his  mental   state   in
         compliance with treatment, works with third sector suppliers of  24
         hour supported accommodation, liaises with drug services to provide
         Mr [MAH] with support with his drug use and arranges  daily  visits
         by a carer to ensure compliance with oral  medicines.   Mr  [MAH]'s
         mental health needs require him to be  managed  under  Section  17A
         (CTO) in order to ensure compliance with  mental  health  treatment
         without which he will highly likely relapse in his mental state.

         Mr [MAH] also suffers from severe, complex physical health  issues.
         His physical health requires  ongoing  monitoring  by  his  GP  and
         secondary care services.   In  view  of  the  cardiometabolic  side
         effect profile of antipsychotic medications, it is  essential  that
         Mr [MAH]'s antipsychotic medication is carefully monitored  by  his
         GP with regular blood tests and other investigations to ensure  the
         cardiac safety of the prescribed treatment".

43. In paragraph 98 Dr Rahman sets out:

         "Given his complex mental health needs,  current  financial  status
         and lack of social support in Morocco, I do not  believe  Mr  [MAH]
         will be able to seek the required  medical  and  community  support
         that he requires if his  mental  health  deteriorates  in  Morocco.
         This will put him at high risk of suffering a relapse of his mental
         illness and further deterioration of his physical health"

    and continues in paragraph 100:

         "If Mr [MAH] does not receive  medical  treatment  for  his  mental
         health, he is highly likely to  suffers  (sic)  a  relapse  of  his
         Schizoaffective Disorder that will require treatment in a  hospital
         setting.  When suffering a relapse, Mr [MAH]  poses  a  significant
         risk to his own  health  and  safety,  the  safety  of  others  and
         increase (sic) his risk of vulnerability and exploitation.    If Mr
         [MAH] does not receive medical treatment for his  physical  health,
         he is highly likely  to  suffer  a  serious  deterioration  in  his
         physical health, including the risk of death.  He  suffers  from  a
         significant physical health illness  and  has  suffered  a  cardiac
         arrest in the past.  Mr [MAH] suffers from heart failure with a low
         ejection fraction that will deteriorate further and  cause  serious
         physical health complications if he does  not  receive  appropriate
         medical treatment and support."

44. Dr Rahman's concerns for the appellant's mental and physical health  if
    he is not able to obtain the high level of care he  currently  receives
    were supported by appellant's Care Coordinator, Ms Sibbald. Ms  Sibbald
    is an  Approved  Mental  Health  Professional  (AMHP)  working  in  the
    Westminster Joint Homelessness Team.  Her  report  dated  26  May  2021
    confirms the long history of a serious psychotic  illness,  history  of
    substance abuse  and  of  homelessness.   In  paragraph  4  Ms  Sibbald
    indicates that the appellant:

         "... has a history  of  poor  engagement  with  mental  health  and
         substance  use  services  and  of  self-neglect,  he   requires   a
         supportive environment which provides 24 hour  staffing.   He  also
         needs an assertive approach from mental health services."

45. Ms Sibbald notes that the CTO was  put  in  place  because  there  were
    concerns "that he may not continue with his medication" or engage  with
    the team and that  "he  may  need  to  be  at  short  notice  for  more
    treatment".  In paragraph 7 Ms Sibbald  confirms  the  "high  level  of
    support"  provided  by  the  appellant's  current  accommodation.   She
    confirms  that  in  addition  to  her  support,  the  appellant  has  a
    psychiatric nurse who assists him  with  his  depot  medication  and  a
    keyworker who attends daily to ensure, amongst other matters,  that  he
    takes his medication, in particular his heart medication.

46. In paragraph 9 Ms Sibbald continues:

         "Mr [MAH] is a vulnerable man who is unable to manage his  life  in
         the community without a high degree of support and  prompting.   In
         terms of taking his medication - he requires daily supervision from
         a carer.  His keyworker also prompts him to eat when he forgets  to
         do so and supports him to manage his personal care and environment;
         she also organises and reminds  him  to  attend  appointments  with
         regards to his physical and  mental  health  and,  indeed,  attends
         these with him.  I am not sure how [MAH]  would  cope  without  the
         current support he is getting; I think he  would  struggle  without
         financial support and prompting and both his medical  and  physical
         health would deteriorate."

47. Ms Sibbald goes  on  to  set  out  other  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    vulnerability in the absence of a  high  support  psychiatric  care  in
    paragraph 11 of her report:

         "Mr [MAH] is very prone to exploitation.  He gets very confused  at
         times and finds it hard to keep focus.  It is easy to persuade  him
         to depart with his money; people pray on him.  When he had Leave to
         Remain he was eligible to claim welfare benefits and  did  so.   Mr
         [MAH] was also then - under the care  of  Community  Mental  Health
         Services and his finances were subject to an appointeeship  managed
         by Westminster Client affairs - because  he  had  no  capacity  to
         manage his benefits and they wanted to ensure  that  his  rent  was
         paid and that he was not exploited by drug dealers  and  gave  them
         all the money as soon as his benefits were paid.  This remains  the
         case today.  I refer to exhibit EX3 again, which confirms  that  in
         2012 Mr [MAH] was assessed as needing support with his housing  and
         was under an appointeeship because he was being exploited by others
         and was unable to manage his own finances."

    Exhibit EX3 is a care plan from 2012.

48. Ms Sibbald states in paragraph 12:

         "Without intensive and structured support  from  services  such  as
         ours, Mr [MAH] would be unable to maintain accommodation or  manage
         his finances and would also be unable  to  manage  his  mental  and
         physical health.  Given  that  he  has  a  cardiac  condition,  his
         physical health would be at risk.  I recall that in  January  2020,
         when Mr [MAH] was admitted to St Thomas, he very nearly died  of  a
         heart failure."

49. The medical evidence sets out a consistent and unambiguous  picture  of
    the appellant's longstanding diagnosis  of  a  chronic,  remitting  and
    relapsing mental disorder, complicated  by  illicit  drug  abuse.  When
    untreated, he becomes floridly unwell and psychotic to  the  extent  of
    requiring admission to hospital under section, including periods  in  a
    PICU.  In relapse he is unable to manage the most  basic  rudiments  of
    day-to-day life such as feeding himself, unable to  contact  or  engage
    with mental health services and  has  become  destitute  for  extensive
    periods and extremely vulnerable to harm and exploitation.  Even  after
    receiving consistent  and  intensive  pharmacological  and  therapeutic
    support over the last 10 months, he remains "a vulnerable  man  who  is
    unable to manage his life in the community without  a  high  degree  of
    support and prompting" and remains "very prone to exploitation".  As  a
    result, he continues to require 24-hour supported accommodation,  close
    supervision and monitoring in  order  to  ensure  compliance  with  his
    medication and ensure that his basic daily needs,  such  as  nutrition,
    are met and that he engages with  drug  therapy  services  and  remains
    safe.  He  requires  particularly  close  supervision  for  the   daily
    medication for his heart condition without which he would be vulnerable
    to another crisis such as that which  occurred  in  January  2020.  His
    physical  health  also  requires  ongoing  monitoring  by  his  GP  and
    secondary care services.

Medical Treatment in Morocco

50. The  respondent  did  not  dispute  the  evidence  on  the  appellant's
    diagnosis  and  treatment  needs.  Her  position  was  that  sufficient
    treatment would be available in Morocco such that the  appellant  would
    not face "a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in health resulting
    in intense suffering" or "a significant reduction in life expectancy".

51. In support of her argument, the respondent relied on materials at pages
    338 to 360 of CB  and  further  materials  enclosed  with  her  written
    submissions dated 7 July 2021.

52. The first document relied on by  the  respondent  is  an  article  from
    "European Psychiatry" from April 2017 entitled "Mental health and human
    rights in Morocco: The urgent need for  a  new  policy".   The  article
    indicates:

         "Structures  are  insufficient   and   inadequate   in   terms   of
         geographical distribution, architecture and equipment.  There is  a
         big shortage of medical and paramedical staff and  little  interest
         is given to vulnerable  groups.   Nevertheless,  huge  improvements
         have also been achieved through  time  with  mental  health  issues
         becoming  a  cornerstone  of   the   ministerial   programme,   the
         involvement of the NGOs, the construction of  new  facilities,  the
         implementation of an information gathering system and the  presence
         of a substance use policy."

53. The respondent also provided an article from "Morocco World News" dated
    4 August 2020 describing a  government  proposal  for  social  security
    cover to be extended  to  all  Moroccans.  The  intention  is  for  the
    planning stage of the project to be completed by the beginning of  2022
    after which  there  will  be  "gradual  implementation".   The  article
    indicates that the plan  "is  set  to  include  all  Moroccans  in  the
    Compulsory Health Insurance (AMO) programme."

54. The respondent also provided a Response to an Information Request (RIR)
    dated 19 February 2020  on  the  availability  of  methadone  treatment
    programmes in Morocco.  The response indicates that there  has  been  a
    drug abuse and methadone substitution treatment  programme  in  Morocco
    since at least 2010 in at least one  institution  and  that  "addiction
    treatment units are operating in several rehabilitation centres in  the
    nine cities of Casablanca, Rabat, Tangier, Tetouan,  Marrakech,  Oujda,
    Agadir, Fez and Meknes."  It is reported that "27,620 drug addicts have
    been treated in rehabilitation centres and 1,629 others given methadone
    maintenance treatment.

55. The respondent also provided a RIR  entitled  "Morocco:  Treatment  for
    mental health"  dated  1  November  2018.  Commenting  on  the  general
    healthcare system in paragraph 2.1.1, the RIR states that "the Moroccan
    health system is generally well developed and well run in  the  cities,
    while the countryside is less well equipped". There  are  also  private
    hospitals offering high-quality services  in  cities  but  outside  the
    cities facilities are "basic and oldfashioned".

56. In paragraph 2.2.2, again referring  to  general  healthcare,  the  RIR
    refers to primary healthcare centres  providing  access  for  free  and
    being located in all Moroccan districts.  Only a national ID is  needed
    to obtain treatment from a primary healthcare centre. They offer  "free
    emergency medical treatment that include  tests,  medicine,  ambulance,
    nurses or an overnight stay in public hospitals".  The  same  paragraph
    indicates that:

         "There are no free consultations in the public hospitals.  Patients
         have to pay between MAD [Moroccan dirham] 100 and  MAD  150  for  a
         consultation by a generalist and between MAD 200 and MAD 250 for  a
         consultation by a specialist.  Only the  emergency  treatments  are
         free".

57. The RIR goes on in to address mental  health  provision,  referring  in
    paragraph 3.1.1 to a MedCOI response dated 17 May 2017.   MedCOI  is  a
    project funded by the European Refugee Fund in  assist  European  Union
    members to obtain medical country of  origin  information.  The  MedCOI
    response dated 17 May 2017 states that short term psychiatric  clinical
    treatment is available from a psychiatrist  in  public  facilities  but
    outpatient treatment only in private facilities.  In-patient  treatment
    by  a  psychologist  and  forced  admittance  is  available  in  public
    facilities.  There is a reference to psychiatric treatment  by  way  of
    assisted living/care at home by  a  psychiatric  nurse  in  the  public
    system.  This  is  stated  to   be   "Partly   available;   Only   with
    authorisation: Hospital psychiatrist".  Psychiatric long-term  clinical
    treatment for chronic psychotic patients is stated to be  available  in
    public facilities.

58. The November 2018 RIR goes on to indicate that the 2017 MedCoi response
    "noted that states: psychiatric treatment  in  the  form  of  sheltered
    housing (e.g. for chronic psychotic patients) was not available  (their
    emphasis)".

59. In her position statement dated 7 July 2021, the respondent  sought  to
    rely on a further RIR dated 18 June  2021  entitled  "Morocco:  medical
    treatment for paranoid schizophrenia and heart failure"  and  a  report
    entitled "The Economy of Mental Health: Inequalities in Access to  Care
    in Morocco" by Dr Charlotte Hajer which would appear to be from 2015.

60. The RIR dated 18 June 2021  was  obtained  specifically  for  MAH.   In
    paragraph 1.1.1 it confirms the availability of  some  psychiatric  and
    psychology treatment in public health facilities, specifying that  such
    treatment is  available  in  particular  hospital  in  Sale.  The  same
    facility is stated  in  paragraph  1.2.1  to  have  oral  antipsychotic
    medication  available  in  the  form   of   olanzapine,   aripiprazole,
    paliperidone, lorazepam and  zolpidem.   In  paragraph  1.2.2  the  RIR
    indicates that in-patient, outpatient and  follow  up  treatment  by  a
    psychiatrist and a psychologist are available at the public hospital in
    Sale and that in-patient treatment by a psychologist was also available
    in Rabat.

61. In paragraph 1.3.1 the response sets out that a RIR  dated  4  February
    2020 indicated that fluphenazine decanoate  and  haloperidol  decanoate
    depot medication were available from private facilities in Morocco.

62. Paragraph 1.4.1 of  the  June  2021  RIR  also  refers  to  in-patient,
    outpatient, follow up by a cardiologist and surgery, including  cardiac
    surgery and heart valve surgery being carried out in public  facilities
    in Morocco.

63. The respondent also provided the report from Dr Hajer which was undated
    but appeared from the contents to be from 2015. Dr Hajer indicates that
    "a majority of Moroccans who suffer from mental illness  still  do  not
    receive adequate care - and many never get to  see  a  psychiatrist  at
    all".  She refers to "a lack of availability and a marked inequality of
    access to the resources that do exist".  She states that  "good  mental
    healthcare in Morocco generally remains difficult to obtain for any but
    those who belong to the country's upper socio-economic classes".

64. Dr Hajer considers the distribution  of  healthcare  facilities  to  be
    "spare and uneven".  She  estimates  the  total  number  of  practicing
    psychiatrists in Morocco to be 350 "which translates into  a  ratio  of
    about one specialist per 100,000 people".  She indicates that  some  of
    these psychiatrists run private practices while others are connected to
    27  public  institutions  for  mental  healthcare  which   comprise   a
    combination of psychiatric wards within general hospitals,  specialised
    mental health facilities, and psychiatric teaching hospitals.

65. As regards the number of beds available in mental health facilities, Dr
    Hajer states:

         "In efforts, once again, to decentralise the  nation's  network  of
         mental health resources and  favour  regional  community  treatment
         over large urban institutions, the number of beds available at each
         of these institutions has been deliberately limited or even  scaled
         back".

    She goes on to state that the government has not had the  resources  to
    meet this bed closure programme with an expansion of mental  healthcare
    facilities across the country.  As a result, the 27 public institutions
    provided no more than approximately 1,900 beds  for  mental  healthcare
    nationwide which amounted to less than 1 per 17,000 people.

66. Dr Hajer also refers to limitations  on  the  treatment  available  "by
    virtue of Morocco's national health insurance law". She  explains  that
    there is a basic universal healthcare system, the Assurance de  Maladie
    Obligatoire (AMO) which covers anyone employed in the public or private
    sector. There is also a supplementary system, the  Regime  d'Assistance
    Medicale aux  personnes  Econonomiquement  Demunies  (RAMED)  which  is
    "available for anyone who cannot pay for healthcare on his or  her  own
    and is ineligible for the AMO". Dr Hajer indicates that:

         "Mental healthcare, however is included neither in the AMO  nor  in
         the RAMED.  Coverage for psychiatric services would require payment
         into a more expansive - and therefore more  expensive  -  insurance
         policy, which is out of financial reach for many of those  most  in
         need of assistance.  Once again, a tragic  paradox  ensues:  mental
         healthcare is more costly for those who are less able to pay."

    Dr Hajer's view is that those with limited socioeconomic resources  are
    "at risk of receiving insufficient  treatment'".  She  also  identifies
    that psychiatric problems are commonly stigmatised in Morocco.

67. In her conclusion Dr Hajer states that the "problem of  unequal  access
    to mental healthcare is particularly acute".   She  refers  to  efforts
    being made to improve "both the quality  and  quantity  of  psychiatric
    resources in Morocco but concludes that 'further work is  necessary  to
    truly render mental healthcare available  to  all  who  need  it".   Dr
    Hajer's ends her report with her view that:

         "Only when psychiatric services are incorporated into both AMO  and
         RAMED coverage, and when  hospital  payments  are  administratively
         decoupled from one's designation to a particular ward, will  mental
         healthcare truly be available to all."

68. The appellant provided a country  expert  report  from  Ms  Katja  Zvan
    Elliott.  Ms Elliott is an academic specialising  in  Moroccan  gender,
    family and societal relationships, human rights and people's access  to
    those rights, as well as political and legal reforms since  2006.   She
    indicates in paragraph 3 of her report that  her  current  research  is
    "with low income people about their experiences with 'being  poor'  and
    the issue of lack of access to quality healthcare services.

69. Mr Avery suggested that less weight should be placed  on  Ms  Elliott's
    report as her expertise is not in the field of mental health  provision
    in Morocco. I saw some force in Mr Avery's submission  but  only  to  a
    somewhat limited extent. Ms Elliott does have experience and  expertise
    regarding aspects of the healthcare system in  Morocco,  including  the
    funding systems. Her report makes clear that much of what she  says  on
    mental health care is taken from  other  sources  to  which  she  makes
    specific reference, those sources including the report  from  Dr  Hajer
    which was also provided by the respondent. She also relies on a  report
    from Morocco's National Human Rights Council  (CNDH)  entitled  "Mental
    Health and Human Rights: Urgent Need for New Policy" issued in December
    2012 and a report from Dr Stefania Pandolfo from 2018 entitled "Knot of
    the Soul: Madness, Psychoanalysis, Islam".  Nothing about those sources
    suggested  that  they  were  not  reliable  or  without  the  requisite
    expertise. There were no particularised challenges to the  contents  of
    Ms Elliott's report and it did not appear to me  that  the  information
    she set out on mental health treatment diverged  in  any  material  way
    from the other evidence before me, including that relied  upon  by  the
    respondent.

70. In paragraph 6, like Dr Hajer, Ms Elliott indicates that  the  Moroccan
    government operates the  RAMED  system  but  that  lower  socioeconomic
    groups still find it difficult to benefit from this:

         "However, many women I talk to in the Listening Centre as  well  as
         my current interviewees confirmed that they either have not applied
         for the RAMED card or have not renewed it.  Cards  are  only  valid
         for three years after which individuals have to resupply all of the
         required documents,  which  necessitate  knowledge  of  what  these
         documents are, photos of oneself and their family  members,  and  a
         number  of  Certificates   issued   by   different   administrative
         buildings.  To obtain these Certificates, people have to know or be
         able to ask about the procedure, they need  money  to  travel  from
         their homes to the municipalities and once there, between different
         administrative buildings, time to do that but also IDs."

71. In paragraph 7 Ms Elliott sets out that:

         "All of my interviewees also complain that in public hospitals  the
         medical staff would not admit them or give them  information  about
         the services they provide unless they paid a "fee", i.e. give  them
         a bribe."

72. From paragraph 7 to 17 Ms Elliott sets out a commentary on  psychiatric
    care in Morocco, placing heavy reliance the report from Dr  Hajer,  the
    CNDH report and Dr Pandolfo's report.  The CNDH Report  states  that  a
    notable feature of mental health provision  in  Morocco  is  the  "poor
    quality of the  medical  and  non-medical  services  offered  to  those
    receiving psychiatric care and the living conditions to which they  are
    subjected during hospitalisation".  The CNDH report states that:

         "The total number of medical and paramedical staff for  psychiatric
         care is seriously inadequate and falls far  short  of  meeting  the
         universally established and recognised norms in this area".

73.  CNDH  also  identify  that  in  theory  there  should  be  psychology,
    outpatient therapy, occupational therapy and social  workers  allocated
    to psychiatric units but that "Very few institutions have even  one  of
    these specialists, and even fewer have all of them."  The  same  report
    states that admission to hospital is not easy due to  overcrowding  and
    that "Care is generally basic" with the "latest  generations  of  drugs
    are unavailable and drugs are  often  not  stored  in  accordance  with
    accepted  standards".   CNDH  also  observed  that  "dysfunctionalities
    observed in relation to hygiene are numerous  and  seriously  prejudice
    the right of patients to  decent  accommodation  which  protects  their
    dignity".  Further,  "pathways  to  reintegration  are  virtually  non-
    existent, which frequently means that the therapeutic process comes  to
    a complete halt."  Paragraph 15 sets out comments made by CNDH  on  the
    "acute lack of psychiatrists  and  psychiatric  units  in  the  private
    sector".

74.  In paragraph 17 Ms Elliot sets out the likely  cost  of  some  of  the
    medications that have been prescribed for the  appellant.  The  country
    evidence as a whole confirms that this medication would have to be paid
    for if not covered by the two health  insurance  schemes  available  in
    Morocco. Where Ms Elliott does not indicate her source  for  the  costs
    provided, however, I was not able to accept the  specific  amounts  set
    out. It would appear that some of the appellant's heart medications are
    available in Morocco, specifically eplerenone, furosemide, ramipril and
    bisoprolol  (the  latter  two  being  referred  to  by  Ms  Elliott  as
    "Runipril" and "Biseprolol").

75. I asked Mr Avery whether anything in  the  materials  showed  that  the
    appellant's depot injection of zuclopenthixol decanoate  was  available
    in Morocco. He confirmed that he did not think that  there  was.  There
    was also no reference to the availability of sodium valproate.

Discussion

76. There was agreement  that  the  correct  test  to  be  applied  to  the
    appellant's Article 3 ECHR medical claim  is  that  identified  by  the
    Supreme Court in AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD  [2020]  UKSC  17.   The  Supreme
    Court accepted that the European  Court  of  Human  Rights  (ECtHR)  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867 redefined what comes within  the
    "other very exceptional cases" category beyond the D v UK 24  EHRR  423
    and N v UK 47 EHRR 885 "deathbed" cases.

77. The Supreme Court confirmed that in paragraph 183 of  the  judgment  in
    Paposhvili the ECtHR identified that  a  real  risk  in  the  receiving
    country of being exposed to either "a serious, rapid  and  irreversible
    decline in health resulting in intense  suffering"  or  "a  significant
    reduction in life expectancy" could meet the Article 3  threshold;  see
    paragraph 22.

78. The Supreme Court also confirmed that an appellant's evidence had to be
    capable of demonstrating "substantial" grounds for  believing  that  it
    was a "very exceptional case" because of a "real" risk of subjection to
    "inhuman" treatment.  An appellant had to put forward a case which,  if
    not challenged or countered, would establish a violation of Article  3.
    It was open to the returning state to seek to challenge or counter  the
    evidence by dispelling any "serious" doubts raised by  the  appellant's
    evidence; see paragraph 33.

79. It is my conclusion that this appellant meets the high threshold for  a
    finding of an Article 3 ECHR breach were he to be deported to Morocco.

80. The evidence on the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's  chronic  mental
    health problems and heart condition is very clear.  There is no serious
    discrepancy in any of the documents provided from any  of  the  medical
    professionals who have dealt with MAH.  His profile is  not  merely  of
    someone who suffers from  a  serious  relapsing  and  remitting  mental
    disorder that responds to medication. Even when  treated  with  optimal
    medication, he presents consistently as unable  to  manage  even  basic
    daily living skills and requires a high level of assertive,  specialist
    support to maintain any quality of life. The history  shows  that  when
    this level of support is not in place, the appellant becomes unable  to
    comply  with  his  medication  or  engage  with  services  and  becomes
    seriously ill, homeless, destitute and vulnerable  to  exploitation  by
    others. Without his daily heart medication and  regular  monitoring  of
    his heart condition he is at risk of another  potentially  fatal  heart
    attack.

81. The country materials on provision for mental health care in Morocco do
    not show that the appellant's needs will begin to be met.  He  will  be
    entirely isolated on return to Morocco, not having lived there  for  37
    years. Mental health treatment is not available through the  government
    AMO or RAMED schemes.  Only  emergency  treatment  is  covered  by  the
    insurance schemes and other treatment has to be  paid  for.  Without  a
    great deal of professional psychiatric support, the  appellant  is  not
    capable of enrolling on either of the  insurance  schemes,  negotiating
    any kind of bureaucracy or accessing any kind of medical  treatment  or
    support. He is not capable of obtaining an income so cannot pay for any
    treatment or medication. Nothing in the materials shows that  the  high
    level of assertive support he needs to prevent a deterioration  to  the
    level seen in 2019/2020 would be available even if the appellant  could
    pay for it and manage to access it. The respondent's RIR from  November
    2018 states that sheltered housing  for  psychiatric  patients  is  not
    available, for example.

82. In my judgment, the appellant's history shows that on return to Morocco
    he will become homeless and destitute immediately, be unable to  access
    even the limited treatment that is available or engage with any kind of
    services that might be  available  to  offer  basic  support.  He  will
    experience a serious relapse, become  psychotic,  extremely  vulnerable
    and self-neglecting and be at risk of death from a heart attack  as  he
    will not be able to access  medication  or  monitoring  for  his  heart
    condition. The prospects for MAH on return would be so bleak that it is
    my view that he would face both  "a  serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
    decline in health resulting in intense suffering"  and  "a  significant
    reduction in life expectancy".

83. It is also my conclusion that where that is so he  would  also  face  a
    disproportionate breach of his rights under Article 8 ECHR.   This  has
    to be the case where, albeit he may not meet the  statutory  exemptions
    to deportation, the extremity of his  position  on  return  amounts  to
    "very compelling  circumstances"  capable  of  outweighing  the  public
    interest.

84. For all of these reasons, I find that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    under Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR.



Decision

The appeal is allowed under Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR.


Signed: S Pitt                                   Date: 15 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
