
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00557/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 6th November 2019                 |On 21st November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                ms simar kaur
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Rashid of Counsel, instructed by Murria
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of India born on  15th  August  1952.   She
    was 67 years of age at the date of her appeal hearing.  She had come to
    the United Kingdom on 22nd July 2006 upon a visitor's  visa  but  since
    19th January 2007 has overstayed her leave.  Her partner Mr Bariana  is
    a British citizen originally from India aged 73 years at  the  date  of
    decision.  Seemingly he entered into a relationship with the  appellant
    towards the end of 2015.

2.   On 2nd May 2018 the appellant applied for permission to remain  on  the
    basis of her private and family life, such an application being refused
    by the respondent on 24th December 2018.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi on 24th May 2019.  The Judge
    looked at the situation circumstances of both  the  appellant  and  her
    partner and concluded that the appeal was to be dismissed.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision. Permission to  do
    so was granted and thus the matter comes before the Upper Tribunal  and
    before myself to determine the issue as to error of law.  The  position
    of the respondent is set out cogently in the decision of refusal.   The
    appellant is a long term overstayer and therefore does not fall  within
    the protection of the Immigration Rules.  Consideration  has,  however,
    been given to the requirements of EX.1 and  of  276ADE.   Consideration
    had been given therefore as  to  whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles  to  integration  into  India,  alternatively  insurmountable
    obstacles or whether there are any exceptional circumstances as set out
    in GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM.

5.   The focus of the appeal is the contention that, given the  difficulties
    which both the appellant and her husband would face in India, the  lack
    of family contact and the health of the  sponsor  partner  through  his
    Alzheimer's dementia,  there were indeed  insurmountable  obstacles  as
    envisaged under paragraph EX.1 to Appendix FM  for both  to  return  to
    India.  It is contended that the Judge failed to make specific findings
    on the issue of insurmountable obstacles such as to constitute an error
    of law.  It is contended that the Judge did not consider the  ambit  of
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

6.   The starting point of consideration is of course that the appellant  is
    a long term overstayer and that the relationship  was  conducted  since
    2015 in the knowledge of her precarious status.

7.   Although it is  accepted  that  the  relationship  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting one with a British national the overall context in which  it
    came to be conducted was of relevance, particularly  having  regard  to
    the public interest.

8.   A number of matters were raised at the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the issue of insurmountable obstacles.  The first being the
    contention by the appellant herself that she has no family to return to
    in India.  She says that her husband from  her  previous  marriage  was
    violent towards her and that her  three  children  who  live  in  India
    seemingly have disassociated themselves from her.  The Judge noted  the
    death certificate in respect of the appellant's husband and noted  that
    there  was  a  paucity  of  information  or  evidence  concerning   her
    relationship with her children other than what she had to say.

9.   There was no particular finding by the Judge one way or  the  other  on
    the presence or absence of the appellant's family support.   It is very
    easy for someone who does not wish to leave the United Kingdom to  make
    such claims.  It is difficult for a Judge in the absence of  any  other
    evidence  to  make  a  satisfactory  conclusion  on  that  matter.  The
    appellant however had lived in India for many  years  and  her  abusive
    husband is now dead.

10.  However the Judge did consider the situation  of  the  sponsor  partner
    with particular care.   It  is  common  ground  that  he  suffers  from
    Alzheimer's and it was his ill-health and his claimed inability to live
    in India that was a  focus  of  consideration.   The  Judge  noted  the
    medical evidence, in particular that at present the Alzheimer's was  of
    a mild nature.  It also noted significantly that  the  sponsor  partner
    had been in India in 2014, 2015 and 2018 and that  he  had  gone  there
    regularly and on his own to see the niece of his  first  wife  and  her
    relatives who provided accommodation for him.  He travelled  alone  and
    met people when he was in India.

11.  Mr Rashid submits that, although that  might  have  been  the  case  in
    2018, the Judge had to consider the  matter  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing in May 2019 at which time the sponsor had indicated that he was
    now unable to travel  to  India.   Because  of  his  condition  it  was
    indicated at the original hearing that his statement would  be  adopted
    into evidence and that he would not be questioned.  Mr  Rashid  submits
    that that was tantamount to an acceptance of his evidence.   I  do  not
    find that in common sense to be the case, it was a  pragmatic  decision
    that was taken.  Although Mr Rashid indicates that the statement of the
    sponsor husband suggests he was unable to now travel to  India  I  find
    little  evidence,  having  read  that  statement,   to   support   that
    contention.  His complaint was as set out  in  the  statement  that  he
    would not get the free treatment that he is now receiving as a  British
    citizen, also speaking of being on a disability allowance.  He contends
    that he has deep rooted  ties  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  that  his
    relationship would not be accepted in India or by the  wider  community
    in India.  He gives no basis for that contention.

12.  Thus the Immigration Judge  noted  that  his  condition  was  moderate,
    recognising that in  time  of  course  it  is  a  condition  that  will
    deteriorate.  The Judge noted that  he  has  extensive  family  in  the
    United Kingdom but concludes that he also has relatives and support  in
    India were he to return.  This is based particularly  on  his  frequent
    visits to India.  He has support in India with connections.

13.  It was noted in that context that the respondent considered that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles to the couple living in India as  both
    had family there.  The principles in Agyarko were set out in  paragraph
    30.  The Judge concluded that the sponsor has support in India  and  in
    the United Kingdom.  The appellant herself has formed connections  with
    people attending the local temple and could do so in India and would be
    provided with support in the context to assist her.  It was noted  that
    the appellant was a woman in relatively good health,she had  family  in
    India as did he.  Consideration was given also to the public interest.

14.  Mr Rashid submits that although the Judge set out a  number  of  issues
    to be explored she at no time seemingly made  the  overt  finding  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles.  Rather she went  on  to  look  at
    exceptional circumstances rather than to focus upon the  central  issue
    of insurmountable obstacles.  He submits  that  that  in  itself  is  a
    material error of law.

15.  It seems to me, however, that is to ignore the reasoning of the  Judge,
    which is clearly set out in the course of  the  determination.   It  is
    entirely  apparent  that  the  Judge  did  not  consider  there  to  be
    insurmountable obstacles to return, both because of the mild nature  of
    the illness of the sponsor and of  family  connections  that  would  be
    available.  Although the Judge did not expressly  set  it  out,  it  is
    clear that that is what the Judge had in  mind  from  the  remarks  and
    consideration as set out in paragraphs 24 to 30 of  the  determination.
    There is nothing there to indicate that the sponsor would now be unable
    to travel in the United Kingdom or to establish a family life with  the
    appellant there.  Clearly there would be considerable disruption to the
    sponsor's private and family life in the United Kingdom but that was to
    be expected given the precarious nature of the  relationship  which  he
    seemingly entered into in 2015.

16.  In terms of the allegation that the principles of  Chikwamba  were  not
    engaged with, it seems to me that this was not  a  case  where  it  was
    inevitable that the appellant would be granted leave to remain were she
    to apply to do so.  She has been a long time overstayer  and  there  is
    nothing  to  indicate  that  she  would  be  granted  leave  to   enter
    automatically were she to apply to  do  so.   That  the  sponsor  is  a
    British citizen is of course of importance but he chose to  enter  into
    the relationship knowing the lack  of  status  of  the  appellant.   Mr
    Rashid heavily relies upon the medical report from  the  Black  Country
    Partnership of 14th February 2019 as indicating a deterioration in  the
    condition of the sponsor.  Reference is made that he has developed  hip
    pain and he is now using a walking aid  some  days  of  the  week.   Mr
    Rashid submits that that shows that the  sponsor  is  now  in  a  worse
    condition.  It seems to me that that is of very marginal  relevance  in
    the overall consideration of his ability to return.  People of his  age
    may well use a walking stick.

17.  Overall therefore I find  that  the  decision  of  the  Judge  was  one
    properly open to be made.

18.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.   The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand, namely that the appellant's appeal  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 14 November 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

