


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/00892/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 29 January 2018                       |       On 14 February 2018        |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             duke collin dawson
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, instructed by Southwark Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 17  July  1972.  He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cockrill dismissing his appeal, from  outside  the  UK,
      against the respondent's decision to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation
      order previously made against him and to refuse and certify his  human
      rights claim under section 94(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002.


   2. The appellant entered the UK in April 2001 with leave to enter until 6
      May 2001 and  then  overstayed.  He  came  to  the  attention  of  the
      authorities in May 2003 when arrested and charged with  drugs  related
      offences. He was issued with papers as an  overstayer  on  14  January
      2004. On 30 January 2004 he was convicted of being knowingly  involved
      in the supply of Class A controlled drugs (heroin) and  was  sentenced
      to six years' imprisonment.  He was served with a notice of  intention
      to make a deportation order on 5 February 2007  and  appealed  against
      that decision, on the basis that  his  life  would  be  in  danger  in
      Jamaica and that he had an established family life in the UK with  his
      partner Jennifer Nugent and their son. On 2 May 2007 he completed  his
      custodial sentence and went into immigration detention. 25 May 2007 he
      was convicted of an  offence  under  section  35  of  the  Asylum  and
      Immigration (Treatment of Claimants) Act 2004. His deportation  appeal
      was dismissed on 4 June 2007. The Tribunal rejected his claim to be at
      risk on return to Jamaica and rejected his claim to have a  subsisting
      family life in the UK. He became appeal rights exhausted  on  12  June
      2007.

   3. On 9 July 2007 the appellant claimed asylum. His claim was refused  on
      4 October 2007. On 17 December 2007 he made submissions in regard to a
      fresh asylum and human rights claim. He was granted bail on 16 January
      2008. From 20 February 2008 he failed to report and was listed  as  an
      absconder. He came to light again on 22  February  2013  when  he  was
      encountered by the police and referred back to the Home Office and put
      into immigration detention. On 8 March 2013  the  appellant  submitted
      further asylum representations which were refused on 7 May 2013 and he
      was served with that decision together with a notice of  intention  to
      deport. He appealed against that decision, again on  grounds  that  he
      was at risk on return to Jamaica and that he had established a  family
      life in the UK with his now wife Jennifer Dawson (formerly Nugent) and
      their son Akeem. His appeal was dismissed on 20 September 2013.  Again
      his claim to be at risk on return to Jamaica was rejected  as  lacking
      in credibility and it was considered that  his  deportation  would  be
      proportionate. He became appeal rights exhausted on 4 November 2013.

   4. The appellant then made various further representations and claims for
      judicial  review  which  were  unsuccessful.  On  16  January  2014  a
      Deportation Order was signed against him. Prior to that, on 14 January
      2014 he had  made  further  submissions.  Those  were  treated  as  an
      application to revoke the deportation order and were refused on 6 June
      2014. His human rights claim was  refused  and  certified  as  clearly
      unfounded under section 94(2) of the 2002 Act, with an out of  country
      right of appeal.


   5.  The  appellant  did  not  leave  the  UK  but  made  a  request   for
      reconsideration on 11 August 2014 and a further application for  leave
      to remain on 22 December 2014. All  submissions  were  considered  and
      refused under paragraph 353 of the immigration rules in a decision  of
      26 August 2015.  Removal  directions  were  set  for  the  appellant's
      removal to Jamaica on 9 October 2015 but were deferred  when  he  made
      another judicial review claim on  the  basis  of  his  wife's  medical
      condition and his relationship with his son. The respondent considered
      all further submissions and documents produced for the judicial review
      and made a further decision on 3 November  2015.  The  appellant  then
      lodged another judicial review claim. Removal directions  were  re-set
      for 13 December 2015. The appellant then made further submissions on 7
      and 9 December 2015 in relation to  his  son's  mental  health.  Those
      submissions were rejected by the respondent on 10 December 2015  under
      paragraph 353 as not amounting to a fresh claim.  The  appellant  then
      made further submissions on 12 December 2015 which were refused on  13
      December 2015.

   6. The appellant was deported on 13 December 2015. On 8 January  2016  he
      lodged an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  6
      June 2014.


   7. In the decision  of  6  June  2014,  the  respondent  considered  that
      paragraph 398(a) of the immigration rules  applied  in  light  of  the
      appellant's previous conviction and  six  year  prison  sentence.  The
      respondent considered the appellant's reference in his representations
      of 14 January 2014 to the murder of his father in Jamaica in  February
      2001 but considered that that  would  not  have  created  a  realistic
      prospect  of  success  before  another   Tribunal.   The   appellant's
      representations  otherwise  focussed  on  the  deterioration  in   his
      partner's health and how that impacted upon their son. The  respondent
      considered that the appellant's partner's  medical  condition,  severe
      diabetes, and his relationship with his  son  were  addressed  in  the
      Tribunal's decision of 20  September  2013,  and  had  regard  to  the
      evidence produced post-dating that appeal. It was noted that  his  son
      was 16 years of age and was in his  last  year  at  high  school.  The
      respondent considered there  to  be  no  reason  to  depart  from  the
      decision previously made and that the appellant's  circumstances  were
      not exceptional and that his deportation would not breach Article 8.


   8. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lawrence
      on 12 January 2016. He considered that the  appeal  had  been  brought
      against the respondent's decision of 10 December 2015 and  found  that
      there was no right  of  appeal  and  that  the  appeal  was  therefore
      invalid. Judge  Lawrence's  decision  was  then  set  aside  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Martin in her  decision  of  21  April  2017  following
      clarification that the appeal was in fact against the  decision  of  6
      June 2014 and was thus a valid appeal. The appeal was then remitted to
      the First-tier Tribunal and came before Judge Page on 20  April  2017.
      Judge Page was unfortunately unaware of Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin's
      decision and considered that he had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal
      as Judge Lawrence's decision had not, he  believed,  been  set  aside.
      Judge Page's decision was, in turn, set aside by the Upper Tribunal on
      31 July 2017 and the appeal was remitted once again to the  First-tier
      Tribunal and was listed for hearing.


   9. On 29 August 2017 the appellant made a request for a direction  to  be
      given to enable him to return to the UK to give oral evidence  at  his
      appeal hearing, further to the decision in Kiarie and Byndloss, R  (on
      the applications of) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2017] UKSC 42. The Tribunal issued  directions  in  response,  on  15
      September 2017, requiring the respondent to advise of steps  that  she
      proposed to take. The respondent responded by way of  a  letter  of  2
      October 2017, asserting that the appellant's case was not the same  as
      the cases in Kairie and Byndloss as his claim had  been  certified  as
      clearly unfounded under section 94(2) of the 2002 Act  and  not  under
      section 94B and that it  was  not  necessary  for  there  to  be  oral
      evidence from the appellant.


  10. On 6 October 2017  a  written  request  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant for an adjournment of the pending hearing on 10 October 2017
      to enable his legal representatives to prepare evidence for the appeal
      following the grant of legal aid funding on 3 October 2017  and  their
      being instructed on 4 October  2017.  It  does  not  appear  that  the
      Tribunal considered the request before the appeal hearing.


  11. The appeal then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill  on  10
      October 2017. A renewed adjournment request was made  by  counsel  for
      the appellant on the grounds that legal aid had only just been granted
      and, as a result, his representatives had not had a proper opportunity
      to prepare the case and there were no witness statements and no up-to-
      date medical evidence for the appellant's partner. The  judge  refused
      to adjourn the proceedings. The appeal proceeded and  the  appellant's
      partner, now referred  to  as  Jennifer  or  Jenepher  Williams,  gave
      evidence before the judge. The judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had
      previously claimed to be gay, a claim rejected by the Tribunal in  his
      previous appeal, but that the appeal before him  did  not  raise  that
      issue and focussed on the health needs of the appellant's partner  and
      the impact on the appellant's son of his absence. The judge  concluded
      that the appellant did not come  anywhere  near  showing  particularly
      compelling or compassionate circumstances.  He  was  not  at  risk  on
      return to Jamaica and the situation of his partner in  regard  to  her
      health concerns was not exceptional.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
      respondent's decision was not disproportionate, that  the  refusal  to
      revoke the deportation order did not breach his human rights and  that
      the appellant's partner's  state  of  health  was  not  sufficient  to
      justify the  revocation  of  the  deportation  order.  He  accordingly
      dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

  12. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on the grounds that the judge had unlawfully refused  the  adjournment
      request and that there had been a breach of  natural  justice  as  the
      appellant had had no previous sight  of  the  respondent's  letter  in
      response to the appellant's request to be able to attend his  hearing;
      that the judge had failed to take relevant evidence  into  account  in
      regard to the appellant's partner's difficulties  with  travelling  to
      Jamaica; and that the  judge's  reasoning  on  the  interests  of  the
      community was irrational.


  13. Permission was granted on 17 November 2017 on  all  grounds  but  with
      specific reference to the judge's refusal  to  grant  the  adjournment
      request.

Appeal Hearing

  14. At the hearing before me,  the  parties  made  submissions.  Ms  Brown
      expanded upon the grounds of appeal. She referred to the fact that the
      Tribunal had not responded to the written  adjournment  request  of  6
      October 2017. She submitted that there were numerous reasons  why  the
      appeal should not have proceeded, including the fact that instructions
      had only just been received from the appellant a day or two before the
      hearing and there had been no time to prepare a written statement from
      him. The judge was wrong to say that there had been adequate  time  to
      prepare a statement from the appellant, when he was illiterate, he was
      wrong to say that the case was an old one  when  the  lodging  of  the
      appeal had been recent, and he was  wrong  to  say  that  the  funding
      application had been made late when it  had  been  made  in  September
      2016. Ms Brown referred to the fact that the respondent's letter of  2
      October 2017 had  not  been  seen  previously  by  the  appellant  and
      submitted that there had therefore been no opportunity to  respond  to
      it. She submitted that the judge had failed to  take  account  of  all
      relevant evidence and had failed to consider the reasons given by  the
      appellant's wife for not being able  to  travel  to  Jamaica.  I  then
      sought clarification about the legal aid application and  funding  and
      Ms Brown agreed that the funding application made  in  September  2016
      had been a previous application  which  lapsed  when  the  appeal  was
      dismissed and she was unable to say when the  recent  application  had
      been made.

  15. Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge had given full and  proper  reasons
      for refusing to adjourn the appeal and his conclusions  were  properly
      open to him. In response Ms  Brown  submitted  that  the  hearing  was
      unfair as the appellant had not given evidence himself.


Consideration and findings

  16. The appellant's grounds of appeal are, in my view, without any  merit.
      There is no basis for concluding that the appellant did not  have  the
      benefit of a fair hearing in  terms  of  the  principles  set  out  in
      Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418. Nothing  relevant  or
      material arises from the fact that a written adjournment  request  had
      not previously been considered by the Tribunal and in  any  event  all
      matters were  fully  considered  by  Judge  Cockrill.  Judge  Cockrill
      clearly had the written adjournment request before him as he  referred
      to it at [48], but in any event it takes matters  no  further  forward
      for the appellant.

  17. The grounds assert that there was a lack of adequate  opportunity  for
      the appellant's representatives to  prepare  for  the  appeal  hearing
      given the recent grant of legal aid. However that was a  matter  fully
      considered by the judge  who  properly  observed,  and  provided  full
      reasons for concluding, that that did  not  prevent  the  appeal  from
      being considered in full.  As  the  judge  noted,  the  focus  of  the
      appellant's case was on his family life ties to the UK and his  wife's
      medical condition and  he  properly  observed  that  he  had  all  the
      necessary evidence in that respect. He had  before  him  a  bundle  of
      documents containing a statement from the appellant's wife Ms Williams
      and also had the benefit of Ms Williams' presence and oral evidence at
      the hearing. He also had a statement from the  appellant's  son  Akeem
      who was not in any event intending to attend the hearing as he was  at
      university. He had the benefit of  recent  medical  evidence  for  the
      appellant's wife.


  18.  The main point made by Ms Brown was that there was no  evidence  from
      the appellant himself before the Tribunal and that that in itself gave
      rise to an unfair  hearing.  However  the  appellant  had  given  oral
      evidence before the Tribunal in his two previous appeals and had  made
      various  representations  since  then  and  there  was,  and  is,   no
      suggestion of anything material  that  he  could  have  added  to  the
      evidence previously given  and  to  the  evidence  which  was  already
      available before the judge from his wife. The respondent had  provided
      a  proper  response  to  the  Tribunal's  directions  as  to  why  the
      appellant's presence at the hearing was not required under  the  terms
      of the  judgment  in  Kairie  and  Byndloss.  Furthermore,  the  judge
      properly found that there had been ample opportunity for  a  statement
      to be produced by the appellant.  There  was  no  satisfactory  reason
      given in the grounds or by Ms Brown as to why a  statement  could  not
      have been  taken  from  the  appellant  in  the  six  days  after  the
      solicitors were instructed, even if he was illiterate and outside  the
      UK. Neither was there any evidence to suggest  that  the  last  minute
      grant of legal aid was due to any delay by the  legal  aid  agency  as
      opposed to a late application by the appellant  or  his  wife  and  Ms
      Brown was unable to say when the most recent application  for  funding
      had been made. The appellant's wife was  clearly  knowledgeable  about
      making such an application, having previously made  one  in  September
      2016 which then lapsed when the earlier appeal  was  dismissed.  There
      was also no proper reason given as to why the appellant in fact needed
      solicitors to prepare a statement for him and why he  could  not  have
      prepared one himself with some assistance in Jamaica. In short,  there
      was no satisfactory reason  for  the  absence  of  evidence  from  the
      appellant himself and no satisfactory reason why the absence  of  such
      evidence rendered the proceedings unfair or prejudiced  the  appellant
      in any way. Accordingly it seems to me that the  judge  was  perfectly
      entitled to refuse the adjournment request and  to  proceed  with  the
      appeal and I fail to see how there was any unfairness in his  decision
      to do so.

  19. The remaining grounds were addressed in less detail by  Ms  Brown  and
      clearly the focus of the appellant's case before me was on the refusal
      to adjourn the proceedings.  As for ground 2, I have  addressed  above
      the submissions made in relation  to  the  respondent's  letter  of  2
      October 2017 and I find no merit in the assertion that any  unfairness
      arose from the appellant not having had sight of the letter  prior  to
      the hearing, as is alleged, nor  indeed  from  his  absence  from  the
      hearing.


  20. As for the assertion in ground 3 that the judge failed to have  regard
      to relevant evidence, it is plain that that was not the case and  that
      the judge had full and careful regard to all the evidence. The grounds
      suggest that the judge's finding at [55], as to the reasons given  for
      the appellant's wife not being able to travel to Jamaica, ignored  her
      significant health problems and the impact of her health  difficulties
      on her ability to travel. However that was clearly not the case as the
      judge went on at [56] to consider the evidence as to  her  ability  to
      travel and in any event gave detailed and careful consideration to her
      health problems at [54] and [57]. There is no merit in  the  assertion
      in the grounds that  the  judge's  conclusions  in  that  regard  were
      unreasonable or perverse. On the  contrary  the  judge  was  perfectly
      entitled to reach the conclusions that he did for  the  reasons  fully
      and properly given.


  21. Neither is there any merit in the  assertion  in  ground  4  that  the
      judge's reasoning in regard to the  interests  of  the  community  was
      irrational. The judge considered  all  relevant  matters  when  having
      regard to the provisions of paragraph 390 and 391 of  the  immigration
      rules and was perfectly entitled to consider the matters that  he  did
      at [52] when assessing the interests of the community. The judge  went
      on, in that  paragraph  and  at  [53],  and  in  accordance  with  the
      provisions of paragraph 390,  to  consider  the  appellant's  personal
      circumstances and interests and to consider  whether  there  were  any
      compassionate circumstances. The judge was perfectly aware of the fact
      that  the  appellant's  offence  had  been  committed  several   years
      previously and  that  he  had  not  offended  since  and  specifically
      referred to that at [47], noting also that the passage of  time  since
      the offence was largely due to the appellant  having  absconded  after
      being granted bail. The judge  plainly  had  regard  to  all  relevant
      matters, taking account of factors in the appellant's favour and those
      against him and was  fully  entitled  to  conclude  that  he  had  not
      demonstrated that his circumstances were  sufficiently  compelling  or
      compassionate to outweigh the public interest in his deportation.

  22. For all of these reasons I find no merit in the grounds of appeal. The
      appellant had the benefit of a full and fair hearing with all  matters
      properly considered by the judge. The judge's findings and conclusions
      took account of all the evidence, were supported by  cogent  reasoning
      and were entirely open to him on the evidence before him.  Accordingly
      I find no errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.  I  uphold  the
      decision.

DECISION

  23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.







Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 February
2018
