
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal number: HU/00373/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 April 2021                     |On 29 April 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                             DALJIT SINGH JOHAL

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:      Mr  T  Aitkin,  instructed  by  Jasvir  Jutla  &  Co
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


1. The appellant, who is a national of India with date  of  birth  given  as
   15.4.80, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  7.4.20  (Judge  Ennals),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 18.12.19, to refuse  his  application  made  on
   18.10.19 for Leave to Remain in the UK on the basis of family  life  with
   his British  citizen  partner  and  on  the  basis  of  very  significant
   obstacles to integration in India pursuant to  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
   Immigration Rules.

2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  on  26.8.20.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge  Owens  granted  permission  on  23.9.20,  considering  it
   arguable that "the judge made a  material  misdirection  in  law  in  his
   approach to Article 8 ECHR outside of the rules, by failing  to  consider
   cumulatively whether the appellant's spouse's employment as a senior care
   worker, her strong ties to the UK including children  and  grandchildren,
   her previous history of domestic violence and mental health  problems  as
   well as her close relationship with her injured mother would mean that  a
   refusal of leave would result in 'unjustifiably harsh consequences'  such
   that refusal would not be proportionate in accordance (with) [68] to [71]
   of CL v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925." Judge Owens considered to be weak the
   first ground  asserting  a  failure  to  make  findings  on  whether  the
   appellant arrived in the UK  in  2002  or  2011,  but  did  not  restrict
   permission.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

4. In the main, the grounds are little more than an  elaborate  disagreement
   with the findings and decision. Evidently, the author of the grounds  has
   trawled the decision looking for areas  of  potential  criticism  without
   considering the validity of the overall decision. Lewison LJ in Fage  UK
   Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5 at [114] explained the caution
   to be exercised  by  appellate  courts  in  interfering  with  evaluative
   decisions of first instance judges. At [114] to [115], the  Lord  Justice
   said this:

      "114.  Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned, by  recent  cases
      at the highest level, not to interfere with findings of fact by  trial
      judges, unless compelled to do so. This applies not only  to  findings
      of primary fact, but also to the evaluation  of  those  facts  and  to
      inferences to be drawn from them."

5. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  522  at  [12],  LJ  McCombe  stated,
   "Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when
   a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining  why  he  has
   reached a particular decision, of seeking  to  burrow  out  industriously
   areas of evidence that have been less fully dealt with  than  others  and
   then to use this as a basis for saying the judge's  decision  is  legally
   flawed because it did not deal with a particular matter more fully. In my
   judgment, with respect, that is no basis on which  to  sustain  a  proper
   challenge to a judge's finding of fact." I find that the present case  is
   such an exercise in seeking areas which are allegedly  less  fully  dealt
   with.

6. I am satisfied that there is no merit in the first ground. The  appellant
   claimed to have arrived in the UK in 2002 but the respondent states  that
   their first evidence of presence in the UK is from  2011.  At  [12],  the
   judge stated, "I am not sure that a lot turns on exactly how long he  had
   been here." The grounds argue that the 9-year different is  "relevant  to
   the consideration of insurmountable obstacles, very significant obstacles
   and proportionality outside of the rules." However, the fact remains that
   the appellant's presence in the UK has always been unlawful; he has never
   had leave and the relationship he formed with his partner  was  knowingly
   entered into by both parties  whilst  his  immigration  status  was  both
   precarious and unlawful, for which reason little weight is to be given to
   that relationship in the public interest considerations  outside  of  the
   Rules pursuant to s117B of the 2002 Act. Insofar as the difference  of  9
   years may potentially be relevant, that relevance  is  at  best  marginal
   only to the issues raised and the grounds fail to demonstrate that  there
   is in fact any materiality, or that otherwise the decision could or would
   have been different. It is clear from [17] of the decision that the judge
   considered whether there were very significant obstacles to  integration.
   As Mr Tan pointed out, the grounds make no challenge to  the  finding  at
   [22] that there would not be very significant obstacles  to  integration.
   In the premises, no error of law is disclosed by this ground.

7. The second ground argues that  in  the  consideration  of  insurmountable
   obstacles and article 8 outside the  Rules,  "the  judge  has  failed  to
   properly consider how relocating to India or  being  separated  from  the
   appellant would impact the appellant's wife and her mental health in  the
   light of what she has suffered in the past." As put by Mr Aitken  in  his
   oral submissions, the judge failed to have "sufficient regard", which  is
   an argument as to weight, which is a  matter  for  the  judge.  The  past
   referred to is that she was allegedly in a previous abusive  relationship
   whilst left  her  suffering  anxiety  and  depression.  Contrary  to  the
   grounds, it is clear from [14] and elsewhere in  the  decision  that  the
   judge made a careful consideration of all of the evidence, including  the
   partner's health and other circumstances, before reaching  any  findings.
   At [10] the judge confirmed having considered all of the evidence  before
   embarking on the fact-finding  exercise.  At  [24]  the  judge  confirmed
   having taken account of the health of both the appellant  and  his  wife,
   and the health and care needs of her mother. The mental health  was  also
   considered but for the reasons given the judge concluded that "her mental
   health problems are so significant as to be a weighty factor." The  judge
   referred at [14] to the GP letter (AB41),  which  in  a  single  sentence
   states only that as of February  2020  she  was  undergoing  therapy  and
   medical treatment for depression and anxiety. No indication was  made  of
   any prescribed medication. The judge was entitled to  consider  this  was
   not a weighty factor, effectively noting that  the  evidence  to  support
   this aspect of the claim was weak. In the premises, it  is  difficult  to
   argue that insufficient regard was had to the evidence.  I  am  satisfied
   that no error is disclosed by this ground.

8. The third ground also discloses no error of law. It is submitted that  at
   [21] the judge erred by considering the appellant's ability to return  to
   India and apply for entry clearance from there  as  part  of  the  EX1(b)
   insurmountable obstacles consideration. However, as submitted by Mr  Tan,
   the conclusion on insurmountable obstacles was reached  at  [20]  of  the
   impugned decision and the observation at [21] is a  different  matter,  a
   point validly made that  the  appellant's  wife  evidence  was  that  her
   earnings were sufficient to meet the Appendix FM minimum income financial
   threshold, so that the appellant could apply  for  entry  clearance  from
   India.

9. The fourth ground criticises the decision at [24] where, in  relation  to
   the care the appellant's wife provides for her mother, the judge  pointed
   out that the Rules make no specific provision for the  care  of  disabled
   relatives. As Mr Tan pointed out, before considering  article  8  outside
   the Rules, it was incumbent on the judge to consider the extent to  which
   the Rules were met. It is argued that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
   properly consider the "rights of the appellant's  British  wife  and  the
   care she provides for her mother which is a material consideration and to
   which the Immigration Rules are not relevant." Contrary to  the  grounds,
   the judge gave very  careful  and  detailed  consideration  to  the  care
   provided by the appellant's wife to her mother.  This  is  referenced  at
   [14], [19] and [24] of the  decision.  At  [24]  the  judge  did  make  a
   cumulative assessment, referring back to previous  findings,  considering
   the circumstances in the round. No error of  law  is  disclosed  by  this
   ground.

10. Finally, the grounds argue that the judge's  proportionality  assessment
   "failed  to  properly  set  the  appellant's  side  of  the  scales   and
   cumulatively consider the appellant's  private  and  family  life  giving
   appropriate weight to the rights of his wife and her family."  As  stated
   above, it is clear from [24] that a cumulative  assessment  was  made.  I
   note that this ground is pleaded in the most general terms and lacks  the
   particularity required. It is clearly no more than a general disagreement
   with the findings and conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal. No error of
   law is disclosed by this ground.

11. In the premises and for the reasons set out above, I find  no  error  of
   law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.

      I make no anonymity direction.


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
        Date:    20 April 2021


