
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00935/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2019                 |On 15 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     JC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Divaris, Counsel instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In an error of law decision promulgated on 27 August 2019, I found that
    a decision of Judge EMM Smith of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on
    30 April 2019 involved the making of an error of law and set it  aside,
    with certain findings of fact preserved.   The  judge  had  allowed  an
    appeal by the appellant, JC, against a decision of the respondent dated
    21 December 2018 to refuse to revoke a deportation order  made  against
    him.  The appeal had been allowed on the basis that it would be "unduly
    harsh" on his British son, and four  step-children  (two  of  whom  are
    British), were he to be deported.

 2. I found an error of law in the judge's analysis of the  "unduly  harsh"
    issue.  I directed that the matter be re-heard in the upper Tribunal in
    order to determine the best interests of the five children involved  in
    this case, and whether it would be unduly harsh for them to remain here
    without the appellant, in the event his deportation  were  to  proceed.
    It was in those circumstances that the matter came before me.

Factual background

 3. The factual and procedural background to this matter were  set  out  at
    [3] to [7] of my error of  law  decision,  which  is  annexed  to  this
    decision.  Those paragraphs state:

         "3.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom in January 1999 as  a
         student and later qualified as a  nurse.  His  leave  was  renewed,
         culminating in a grant of indefinite leave to  remain  in  February
         2010. On 7 October 2011, the appellant pleaded guilty to an offence
         of making a false representation  to  make  gain  for  himself,  in
         respect of �34,212.  He  was  committed  to  the  Crown  Court  for
         sentence, where he was sentenced to 16  months'  imprisonment.  His
         partner at the time, who had been complicit in the fraud,  received
         a suspended  sentence.  The  appellant  had  falsified  timesheets,
         dishonestly inflating the  number  of  hours'  work  for  which  he
         claimed from  his  employer,  [Alternative  Futures,  a  care  home
         charity[1]].

         4.   On 21 June 2012,  the  respondent  made  a  deportation  order
         against the appellant under section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007.
         The appellant appealed against that decision, and  his  appeal  was
         initially dismissed by Judge Levin in a decision promulgated on  10
         September  2012.  The  appellant  appealed  against  Judge  Levin's
         decision to this Tribunal, but his appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge
         Hanson in a decision promulgated on 14 May  2013.  The  appellant's
         then partner, with  whom  he  had  been  sentenced  for  the  false
         representation offence, subsequently developed cancer.  On  27  May
         2014,  the  respondent  suspended  removal   action   against   the
         appellant, on account of his then partner's  reliance  on  him  for
         support.

         5.   On 14  October  2015,  the  respondent  sought  to  recommence
         removal action against the appellant. He  was  required  to  resume
         reporting to the respondent but did not do so immediately.  It  was
         not until 14 February 2018, when  he  made  the  application  which
         triggered the present proceedings, that the appellant complied with
         the reporting requirements to which he was subject. In  late  2015,
         the appellant began a new  relationship,  this  time  with  a  lady
         called SB. SB had resided in the United Kingdom since 2005 and  had
         four children of her own from a  previously  abusive  relationship.
         She has indefinite leave to remain. In 2005, she was  diagnosed  as
         HIV positive, and continues to receive treatment in respect of this
         condition.

         6.   On 8 March 2018, a child was born to SB, and the appellant  is
         the father. That child is a British citizen.

         7.   The applicant's latest application was based upon his  private
         and family life with SB, her four  children,  and  the  child  they
         share together. The appellant claimed to be their primary carer and
         contends that it would be unduly harsh for any of the  children  to
         accompany the appellant to Zambia,  or  for  them  to  remain  here
         without him."

 4. Having found that the judge erred in  relation  to  his  assessment  of
    whether the appellant's removal would be "unduly  harsh"  on  his  four
    step-children (two of whom are British) and his own British child, that
    represents the sole issue for my consideration in this decision.

Legal framework

 5. See [13] to [16] of my Error of Law decision  for  an  outline  of  the
    legal framework applicable to the making of deportation orders.

 6. As to the revocation of deportation orders, pursuant to paragraphs  390
    and 390A of the Immigration Rules,  the  underlying  assessment  to  be
    conducted when considering the revocation of  a  deportation  order  is
    substantively identical to  the  threshold  for  making  a  deportation
    order.  See:

         "390. An application for revocation of a deportation order will  be
         considered in the light of  all  the  circumstances  including  the
         following:

             (i) the grounds on which the order was made;

             (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;

             (iii)  the  interests  of   the   community,   including   the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;

             (iv)  the  interests   of   the   applicant,   including   any
             compassionate circumstances.

         390A. Where paragraph 398  applies  the  Secretary  of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors."

Evidence and documents

 7. The  appellant  did  not  seek  to  rely  on  any  additional  live  or
    documentary evidence at the remaking hearing.  Mr  Divaris  provided  a
    helpful skeleton argument, which I have considered.

Discussion

 8. The essential issue in this case relates to whether it would be  unduly
    harsh for the five children involved to remain in this country  in  the
    absence of the appellant. That issue must be  determined  in  light  of
    their  best  interests,  followed  by  a  consideration  of  the  wider
    statutory framework for the deportation of foreign criminals.

 9. In my Error of Law decision, I preserved the judge's findings up to and
    including his paragraph [41].  Some of those findings  were,  in  turn,
    findings preserved from the earlier decision of Judge Levin. In summary
    (and where relevant), the findings of the  judges  below  that  I  have
    preserved for the purposes of my assessment are as follows:

          a. The appellant was awarded a degree in adult  nursing  and  had
             been employed as a nurse; the defence to which  the  appellant
             pleaded guilty was committed because  the  appellant  and  his
             then partner, M, had been living beyond their means  following
             the  purchase  of  their  house;  the  offence  to  which  the
             appellant pleaded guilty was "very serious" because the  fraud
             was against a charity,  and  therefore  deprive  that  charity
             funds; the appellant is a  foreign  criminal,  as  defined  by
             section 32 of the UK  Borders  act  2007;  the  only  possible
             exception engaged under the UK Borders act 2007 would be  that
             the appellant's deportation would breach his rights to private
             and family life under article 8 of the ECHR; there was (at the
             time of judge Levin's decision) a "real risk" of the appellant
             reoffending [27];

          b. The appellant continued to pose a risk of reoffending  at  the
             hearing  before  Judge  Levin,  and,  although  he   had   not
             reoffended by the time the matter  came  before  Judge  Smith,
             there was no evidence that  the  appellant  had  acquired  any
             insight into his actions [29];

          c. The appellant was now in a genuine and subsisting relationship
             with SB, a citizen of Malawi who  holds  indefinite  leave  to
             remain, having previously been recognised as  a  refugee.   SB
             has four children from a previous relationship [31];

          d. The appellant and SB have a son  together;  he  is  a  British
             citizen [31];

          e.  The  appellant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with each of the five children (his son, and SB's
             four children) [31], [41];

          f. The appellant is not allowed to work and, therefore, he is the
             primary carer for all five children while SB works [41];

          g. SB has been HIV-positive since 2005;

          h. The appellant's private life since  the  deportation  decision
             attracts little weight as his immigration status has, at best,
             been precarious;

          i. SB looked after her four children on her  own  before  meeting
             the appellant. There was no evidence that she could  not  then
             cope. The appellant's involvement in the  lives  of  all  five
             children was, in part, attributable to the fact he  is  unable
             to work. His involvement was not exclusive, as SB worked part-
             time. She too was engaged in the lives of  her  children.  The
             appellant shared responsibility for the children but  was  not
             their "primary carer" (see [41]);

          j. The appellant would  be  able  to  reintegrate  into  life  in
             Zambia, and is, therefore, unable to satisfy the private  life
             exception in paragraph 399A.  There was no suggestion that the
             appellant satisfied Appendix FM or the private life provisions
             of the rules in his own capacity (see [35]).

10. I have reached the findings of fact set out  in  this  decision  having
    considered the evidence in the round, by  reference  to  the  preserved
    findings from the judges below, and my own analysis of the evidence.

Best interests of the children

11. This case involves the best interests  of  five  children,  and  it  is
    necessary first to consider their best interests.  In doing so, this is
    an assessment which incorporates no consideration of the misconduct  of
    the appellant. It is a  free-standing  analysis,  unencumbered  by  any
    consideration of the adverse immigration history, or criminal offending
    of the appellant.

12. The details  of  the  children  are  as  follows  (dates  of  birth  in
    brackets):

         A    (19 May 2006)              Malawian
         B    (28 October 2008)     Malawian
         C    (12 April 2012)            British
         D    (14 March 2014)            British
         E    (8 March 2018)             British

    Children A - D are SB's.  E is the appellant's biological son with  SB.
    The appellant enjoys a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with all five children.

13. The appellant relied before Judge Smith on a report by  an  independent
    social worker, Diana Harris, dated 3 April 2019  (the  header  on  each
    page of the report dates it as 3 April 2018, but it is clear  from  the
    date given in the conclusion of the report, by reference to the overall
    chronology of the case and the appeal, that it was produced on 3  April
    2019). Although the standard directions had been issued  ahead  of  the
    hearing before me, which include provision concerning  the  ability  of
    the parties to rely on new evidence before this Tribunal, there was  no
    evidence updating the position since the decision of Judge Smith.

14. Ms Harris's report concludes that it is in the best  interests  of  all
    five children to remain in the United Kingdom, with the  appellant.  Mr
    Divaris submits that I should adopt that approach.

15. I agree that the best interests of each of  the  children  are  (i)  to
    remain here; and (ii) for the appellant to remain here with them.

16. In the refusal letter, the respondent accepts at [21], [26], [30], [34]
    and [38] in relation to each of the five children respectively that  it
    would be unduly harsh for them to leave the United Kingdom to reside in
    Zambia.  There has been no suggestion that it  could  be  in  the  best
    interests of any of the children  concerned  for  them  to  leave  this
    country for Zambia.

17. In light of the preserved findings of fact, and as demonstrated by  the
    appellant's statement, it is  clear  that  the  appellant  performs  an
    important role in the lives of each of the children. He  is  active  in
    not only their childcare while SB is at work, but  plays  an  important
    part in facilitating their education, through taking them to school and
    through providing broader support and encouragement.  For  example,  in
    relation to child B, the appellant is described in a  letter  from  her
    teacher that he, "has consistently been  a  stable  and  positive  role
    model for [B]: supporting and encouraging her throughout school..."  In
    relation to children C and D, the appellant is described as  performing
    an "active role" in their education,  and  as  having  helped  them  to
    adjust moving from their previous school to their  current  educational
    setting.

18. The appellant attends church with SB and  the  children  and  has  been
    described by the pastor of the church as a  "family  orientated  person
    who loves his family tremendously". The pastor added, "we cannot afford
    to miss him and the family in the church..." See the  letter  dated  28
    February 2019 from Pastor KA at Annex 5 of Ms Harris's report.

19. Some of the analysis in the Harris report is of less  assistance.  Much
    of it concerns the impact upon the children of a  prospective  move  to
    Zambia or Malawi, concluding in robust terms that the children  do  not
    want to leave and that it would not be appropriate for them  to  do  so
    (for example, see [2.2], [2.3],  [2.4],  [9.b],  [9.d],  [9.k],  [9.l],
    [9.n], [9.o]).  Unfortunately, those aspects of  Ms  Harris's  analysis
    are of less assistance, given it  is  common  ground  that  it  is  not
    expected that the children  would  be  expected  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, as outlined above.

20. Other aspects of the Harris report  are  at  odds  with  the  preserved
    findings of fact reached by Judge Smith.  For  example,  at  [2.1],  Ms
    Harris concludes that the appellant  is  the  "primary  carer"  to  the
    children. Judge Smith, by contrast, found  that,  while  the  appellant
    plays an active and extensive role in the lives of the children, he  is
    not their  primary  (as  in  sole)  carer,  and  that  he  shared  that
    responsibility with SB: see [41]. However, for present  purposes,  that
    is a distinction which is of little relevance. It  is  clear  that  the
    appellant's  role  in  the  family  provides  vital   childcare   which
    facilitates  SB's  employment  and  good,  in  time,   facilitate   her
    undertaking further study or training.

21. At [8.7], Ms Harris  notes  concerns  raised  by  SB's  Clinical  Nurse
    Specialist that, in the appellant's absence, she would lose the support
    she currently enjoys from him, which would have a corresponding  effect
    upon her health. She would most likely have to "stay at home  and  look
    after her children", with the ensuing impact on her ability to work  or
    study for a future career. SB is also concerned that, in the absence of
    the appellant in such challenging, changed, domestic circumstances  she
    may experience difficulties in adhering to her medication regime.  This
    paragraph of the report appears to  be  based  on  a  letter  from  the
    clinical nurse dated 10 January 2019, at Appendix 6 to the report.

22. The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53 recently endorsed the approach of  the  Court
    of Appeal in EV  (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 to determining  the  best  interests  of
    children.  At [58], the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) held:

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world. If one parent has no right  to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

23. The "real world" context of the present matter is  that  the  appellant
    does not have the right to remain here, but that the mother of all five
    children, SB does.   It  is  only  to  that  limited  extent  that  the
    immigration status of the appellant is even indirectly relevant to this
    assessment. As it is common ground that it would be "unduly  harsh"  to
    expect any of the children to leave the United Kingdom for Zambia,  the
    answer to the "ultimate question" posed by the Court of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines) is that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  five
    children in this case to follow the appellant to Zambia.  Their  mother
    is settled here, and three of the children are British. The  other  two
    are not citizens of  Zambia,  but  citizens  of  Malawi.  Although  the
    appellant is expected to leave  the  United  Kingdom  for  Zambia,  the
    preserved analysis of the Harris report, taken  with  the  respondent's
    acceptance that the removal of the  children  would  be  unduly  harsh,
    combines to lead to the inescapable conclusion that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom, and that
    their best interests are to remain here.

24. Given the role of the appellant in the  lives  of  all  five  children,
    including his role in the life of his own son, it follows that it is in
    the  best  interests  of  all  of  the   children,   individually   and
    cumulatively, for the appellant to remain in this country with them. If
    he were to leave, children A to D would  be  deprived  of  their  step-
    father, and child E would be deprived of his  biological  father.  This
    would have a corresponding impact on the family as a whole,  and  would
    make life difficult for SB, which in turn would have an impact  on  the
    children. SB would be without childcare, meaning, at best, the children
    would have to be cared for by  someone  other  than  their  father;  at
    worst, it may mean that SB is no longer able to work, and may therefore
    become reliant on public funds for her subsistence.

Unduly harsh

25. Having arrived at that assessment, it is now necessary to turn  to  the
    issue of whether the appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" on
    either the children, or on SB (or both).  This consideration is central
    to the availability to  the  appellant  of  Exception  2  contained  in
    section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act, and  paragraph  399(a)(ii)(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

The children

26. By definition, the analysis of what is "unduly harsh"  is  a  different
    assessment to what the best interests of the children are.

27. As I noted at [25] of my error of  law  decision,  whether  deportation
    would be "unduly harsh" requires consideration  of  whether  there  are
    additional factors, over and above the normal impact of deportation.  .
     "One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
    necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation  of  a
    parent..."  See  KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53  at  [23]:  there  is  a  certain  amount  of
    harshness that is "due".  At [27] of KO, the Supreme Court endorsed the
    formulation of the test by this tribunal in  in  MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC), which
    was in these terms, at [46]:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis   of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

28. Applied to the facts of this case, I do not consider that  the  removal
    of the appellant would have an "unduly harsh" impact  on  the  children
    remaining here in his absence. While I note the difficulties  that  the
    removal of the appellant would inevitably present for the wider family,
    and the fact that his removal would conflict with the best interests of
    each of the children individually and their collective  best  interests
    cumulatively, the specific impact would not result in consequences  for
    any of the children, together or individually, that  would  be  "unduly
    harsh". The consequences of the appellant's removal described carefully
    in the report of Ms Harris, taken with the preserved findings of  Judge
    Smith, did not reveal a "degree of harshness going  beyond  what  would
    necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation  of  a
    parent."

29. I find that the consequences of the appellant's deportation  would  not
    stray into the  elevated  threshold  territory  of  something  that  is
    "severe, or bleak", when augmented to the "elevated standard" which  is
    "still higher" (see MK at [46]).  The  removal  of  the  emotional  and
    educational support provided by the appellant to each of the  children,
    and to SB, plus his childcare assistance, along with his role at church
    and in the community, are all natural consequences of  the  appellant's
    deportation.  There are no distinctive features of  the  family's  life
    which would render deportation unduly harsh.

30. As Judge Smith found, SB had been able to cope on her own with her four
    children  before  she  met  the  appellant.   She  may  have  to   make
    alternative childcare arrangements, and may even  have  to  change  her
    working pattern, but having to do so would not take  the  situation  in
    relation to the children into the territory of "undue"  harshness.   If
    SB were to be a single mother to the five children, life would be  very
    different.  She was able to cope,  as  Judge  Smith  found,  with  four
    children.  There is no suggestion from the  material  presented  to  me
    that she would not additionally be able to cope now that child E  would
    also be present.  Children A - D  are  now  older,  and  A  and  B,  in
    particular, are at an age where they  can  be  expected  to  provide  a
    greater degree of assistance around the house.

31. Although Ms Harris notes that SB's nurse is concerned that SB would not
    be able to take her medication in the absence of  the  appellant,  SB's
    own witness statement is silent on the issue.  She does  not  describe,
    for example, how  the  appellant's  assistance  is  essential  for  her
    maintaining her medication regime. She writes at [9] that since she met
    the appellant, she has been able to maintain her  health  checks  every
    three  months  but  provides  no  additional  details  as  to  why  the
    appellant's role in this respect is indispensable.

32. Mr Divaris highlighted the summary in  his  skeleton  argument  of  the
    importance of family life between parents and children, and how  it  is
    not normal for a parent/child relationship to be carried on in anything
    other than a face-to-face context: see [15] of the appellant's skeleton
    argument, drawing upon  LD  (Article  8  -  best  interests  of  child)
    Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC) (a non-deportation case  -  see  [18]  -
    which predates Part 5A of the 2002 Act).  At [21], LD held:

         "Families normally live together. Family life consists of the inter-
         dependent bonds between spouses  or  stable  partners  and  between
         parents and children with particular strength being placed upon the
         interests and welfare of minor  children.  It  is  not  normal  for
         family life to be enjoyed by correspondence and  occasional  visits
         (even  assuming  that  there  were  no  obstacles  to  such  visits
         following this immigration decision)..."

    I do not find the above authority to be of  significant  assistance  in
    the present context. Plainly, family life can thrive and  develop  when
    maintained face-to-face in a way that is simply not possible  when  one
    party is in another country. The citation  of  authority  to  establish
    that proposition is not necessary (as the  headnote  to  LD  (Zimbabwe)
    confirms, the case was reported for different reasons).  The removal of
    such opportunities is, by definition, inherent to the  "due"  harshness
    that is expected in a deportation situation.

33. Drawing the above analysis together, therefore, I find to  the  balance
    of probabilities standard, that it would not be unduly harsh on any  of
    the children, individually or cumulatively, for  the  appellant  to  be
    deported.  Specifically, it would not  be  unduly  harsh  for  them  to
    remain here in his absence.

Unduly harsh: SB

34. SB is a "qualifying partner" for the purposes of section 117C(5) of the
    2002 Act.  If it would be unduly harsh on SB for the  appellant  to  be
    removed, then Exception 2 is also  capable  of  being  engaged.   Judge
    Smith noted that  the  report  of  Ms  Harris  was  silent  as  to  the
    difficulties SB had experienced prior  to  her  relationship  with  the
    appellant.  No attempt had been made to provide  any  form  of  updated
    report had of the remaking hearing before me.

35. SB holds indefinite leave to remain, having previously been  recognised
    by the United Kingdom as a refugee, on account  of  events  which  took
    place in Malawi. I have very few details about the  Refugee  Convention
    basis upon  which  she  was  recognised  as  a  refugee.   There  is  a
    suggestion in  the  letter  from  SB's  clinical  nurse  specialist  at
    Appendix 6 to the report of Ms Harris that she was raped by her brother-
    in-law when she was 17 years old, but it  is  not  clear  whether  that
    incident formed the basis of her subsequent recognition as  a  refugee,
    or whether there was some other basis.  The relationship that SB was in
    before commencing a relationship with the appellant was abusive. Again,
    other  than  brief  references  to  this  prior  relationship  history,
    including in the  representations  dated  18  February  2018  from  the
    appellant's solicitors to the respondent, there are  very  few  details
    about what happened previously, and whether there is any ongoing impact
    with SB. She writes in her statement at B 66 that the previous  abusive
    relationship entailed mistreatment for 6 to 7 years.

36. It is unfortunate that there are  no  further  details  concerning  the
    prior history of SB, and whether there is  an  ongoing  impact  on  her
    physical and mental health from what has taken place in the  past.  She
    writes  at  [12]  that  her  health  difficulties  leave  her   feeling
    "extremely fatigued" and that she is "struggling to cope". There is  no
    medical  evidence  demonstrating  the  extent  of  her  ongoing  health
    problems, other than the letter from her clinical nurse  specialist  at
    Appendix 6 of Ms Harris's report, which demonstrates that her condition
    is being managed through medication.

37. What is needed in order to demonstrate that the appellant's deportation
    on Ms Harris would be unduly harsh is something to demonstrate that the
    impact upon her would result in a degree of  harshness  exceeding  that
    which is "due". While the appellant's removal will have consequences on
    SB, and her children, which will be tragic from the perspective of  the
    family, there is nothing in the materials before me which  demonstrates
    that that impact goes beyond that which necessarily  -  and  sadly  and
    inevitably - flows from the deportation of foreign criminals.

38. I have considered whether the past history of SB could possibly merit a
    different conclusion on this issue. In the absence of evidence  of  the
    sort outlined above, it is not possible for me to do so.

39. I find, therefore, that it would not be "unduly harsh" on  SB  for  the
    appellant to be removed.

Very compelling circumstances?

40. It is also necessary for me to consider, pursuant to  section  117C(6),
    whether there are "very compelling circumstances", over and  above  the
    considerations outlined in Exception 2, which would outweigh the public
    interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.   Although  the
    legislation appears only to apply section 117C(6) to foreign  criminals
    sentenced to four years or more, pursuant to NA (Pakistan) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [25], offenders
    such as this appellant have the ability, in principle,  to  attempt  to
    satisfy subsection (6).

41. For the reasons given under my analysis of whether the removal  of  the
    appellant would be unduly harsh for the children and SB remaining  here
    in his absence, there are no further reasons  revealed  by  either  the
    submissions advanced before me, or the  extensive  bundle  prepared  on
    behalf of the appellant, when taken  with  the  preserved  findings  of
    fact, which enables me to reach this conclusion. I have considered  all
    matters outlined in the submissions advanced orally and in  writing  by
    Mr Divaris, and there is nothing which merits a conclusion along  these
    lines.

42. I find, therefore, that the appellant cannot defeat the public interest
    in deportation under section 117C(6).

Other public interest considerations

43. I note that the appellant speaks English and would be capable of  being
    employed as a nurse (a shortage occupation),  and  thus  there  is  the
    potential to  be  financially  independent.  These  are  considerations
    attracting neutral weight under section 117B (2) and (3)  of  the  2002
    act. They do not render the appellant's removal disproportionate.

44. I have also considered the age of the appellant's conviction, which was
    eight years ago. He has not offended since, and thus as the  appearance
    of having been rehabilitated. This is a factor  of  minimal  relevance:
    see RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]  UKUT
    00123 (IAC) at [33]:

         "...the fact that an individual has not committed further offences,
         since release from prison, is highly unlikely to  have  a  material
         bearing, given that everyone  is  expected  not  to  commit  crime.
         Rehabilitation will therefore normally do no more  than  show  that
         the individual has returned to the place where society expects  him
         (and everyone else) to be. There is, in other  words,  no  material
         weight which ordinarily falls to be given to rehabilitation in  the
         proportionality balance (see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for
         the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256, paragraphs 48 to 56)."

     It follows that the appellant's apparent rehabilitation is  of  minimal
    relevance.  In any event, as Judge Smith found, there was  no  evidence
    that he had acquired  any  understanding  of  the  seriousness  of  his
    conduct.

Conclusion

45. In conclusion, therefore, the appellant is a "foreign criminal" for the
    purposes of section 117D(2)(c)(iii) of the  2002  Act.   Under  section
    117C(3), the public interest requires his deportation, unless Exception
    1 or 2 applies.  He is  unable  to  avail  himself  of  either  of  the
    exceptions contained in subsections (4) and (5), and there are no "very
    compelling circumstances" over and  above  those  considerations  which
    would render his deportation disproportionate (section 117C(6), nor are
    there "exceptional circumstances"  for  me  to  find  that  the  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation order are outweighed  by  other
    factors (paragraph 390A of the Immigration Rules).

46. Although the best interests of the children are a primary consideration
    in this jurisdiction, they are not the  paramount  consideration.  They
    are capable of being outweighed  by  the  cumulative  weight  of  other
    factors.    The  effect  of  the  considerations  in  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  in  particular  section
    117C(5), and also the public interest in the maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls (section 117B(1)) is that the public  interest  in
    deportation is  capable  of  outweighing  the  best  interests  of  the
    children concerned, unless the impact of deportation upon them would be
    "unduly harsh".  As I have found, the appellant's deportation will  not
    be unduly harsh on either SB or any of the children.

47. The deportation of the appellant would not place the United Kingdom  in
    breach of its obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.  The automatic deportation provisions of the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007 are engaged and none of the exceptions applies.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  revoke  his
deportation order is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]               Date 8 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.

Signed [pic]               Date 8 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00935/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     JC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Rendle, Counsel instructed by UK Migration
Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Larlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, but for convenience I will
    refer to the parties as  they  were  described  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge EMM Smith allowing the appellant's appeal against a
    decision of the respondent to refuse his  human  rights  claim  and  to
    refuse to revoke a deportation order to which he was subject.

 2. At the hearing, I informed the parties that the appeal was  successful,
    provided a summary of my reasons, and directed that the matter would be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for the decision of Judge  Smith  to  be
    remade.  I now provide my detailed reasons.

Factual background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom in January 1999 as  a  student
    and later qualified as a nurse. His leave was renewed, culminating in a
    grant of indefinite leave to remain in  February  2010.  On  7  October
    2011, the appellant pleaded guilty to an  offence  of  making  a  false
    representation to make gain for himself, in respect of �34,212. He  was
    committed to the Crown Court for sentence, where he was sentenced to 16
    months' imprisonment. His partner at the time, who had  been  complicit
    in  the  fraud,  received  a  suspended  sentence.  The  appellant  had
    falsified timesheets, dishonestly inflating the number of  hours'  work
    for which he claimed from his employer, [Alternative Futures[2]].

 4. On 21 June 2012, the respondent made a deportation  order  against  the
    appellant under section 32 of the UK Borders Act  2007.  The  appellant
    appealed against that decision, and his appeal was initially  dismissed
    by Judge Levin in a decision promulgated  on  10  September  2012.  The
    appellant appealed against Judge Levin's decision to this Tribunal, but
    his appeal was dismissed by Judge Hanson in a decision  promulgated  on
    14 May 2013. The appellant's  then  partner,  with  whom  he  had  been
    sentenced for the false representation offence, subsequently  developed
    cancer. On 27 May 2014, the respondent suspended removal action against
    the appellant, on account of his then partner's  reliance  on  him  for
    support.

 5. On 14 October 2015, the respondent sought to recommence removal  action
    against the appellant. He was  required  to  resume  reporting  to  the
    respondent but did not do so immediately. It was not until 14  February
    2018,  when  he  made  the  application  which  triggered  the  present
    proceedings,  that  the   appellant   complied   with   the   reporting
    requirements to which he was subject. In late 2015, the appellant began
    a new relationship, this time with a lady called SB. SB had resided  in
    the United Kingdom since 2005 and had four children of her own  from  a
    previously abusive relationship. She has indefinite leave to remain. In
    2005, she was diagnosed as  HIV  positive,  and  continues  to  receive
    treatment in respect of this condition.

 6. On 8 March 2018, a child was born to  SB,  and  the  appellant  is  the
    father. That child is a British citizen.

 7. The applicant's latest application  was  based  upon  his  private  and
    family life with SB, her  four  children,  and  the  child  they  share
    together. The appellant claimed to be their primary carer and  contends
    that it would be unduly harsh for any of the children to accompany  the
    appellant to Zambia, or for them to remain here without him.





The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The First-tier Tribunal made findings  of  fact  which  have  not  been
    impugned in these proceedings. The judge  noted  that  there  had  been
    several developments following  the  appellant  earlier  appeal  before
    Judge Levin (see [31]). He found that the appellant performed an active
    role in providing care for the five children, although  was  not  their
    primary carer. It was common ground that it would be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect any of the children to relocate to Zambia. The  judge  found  no
    reasons  to  depart  from  Judge  Levin's  earlier  findings  that  the
    appellant would be able to reintegrate into life in Zambia.

 9. At [41], the judge found that there was no evidence  that  SB  had  not
    been able to cope looking after her four children as  a  single  mother
    before she met the appellant.   The  judge  noted  that,  although  the
    appellant currently is actively involved in the day to day care for all
    five children, he is unable to work due to the immigration restrictions
    placed on him, presumably meaning he had the time  to  do  so.  In  any
    event, he was not the primary carer, as SB only worked  part-time,  and
    was able to assist with the childcare when she was not working  outside
    the home.  The judge found that the appellant shared responsibility for
    the children but was not primary carer.

10. The judge rightly recognised and applied the principle  that  the  best
    interests of the children are a primary consideration, noting that  the
    children cannot be blamed for their  father's  conduct.  At  [43],  the
    judge outlined a report by an independent social worker. He noted  some
    gaps in the analysis of the report,  in  particular  the  lack  of  any
    references to the previously abusive relationship that SB had with  her
    former partner.

11. At [44], the  operative  reasoning  of  the  judge  which  led  to  the
    appellant's appeal being allowed was as follows, with emphasis added:

         "[44]    Hesham Ali requires the court to set out a  balance  sheet
         approach to article 8 which includes the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign  offenders  and  I  must  also  balance  the
         requirements of whether the facts now as opposed to how  they  were
         before Judge Levin in regard to one of the  exception  [sic]  under
         section 33 [of the UK Borders Act 2007], would have  led  to  Judge
         Levin finding that the fact of the appellant's private  and  family
         life are an exception. The appellant has a subsisting  relationship
         with a qualifying partner  and  a  child  and,  therefore,  I  have
         assessed whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant  to  be
         removed from the UK. This is a finally [sic] balanced decision  and
         having accepted that the appellant  committed  a  serious  crime  I
         factor in that in the eight years since his conviction he  has  not
         further offended. He is a qualified nurse and  has  worked  in  the
         past.

         [45] Having considered all the facts before me I am satisfied  that
         it be disproportionate to remove the appellant from the UK and that
         the public interest does not now require his removal."



Permission to appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    the basis that it was arguable that the judge had erred,  "in  relation
    to whether the fact individually or cumulatively mean that it would  be
    unduly harsh to remove the appellant."

Legal framework

13. This is an appeal brought under Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.  The essential issue  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether it would be disproportionate for purposes of Article  8(2)  for
    the appellant to be removed.  If removal would be disproportionate, one
    of the exceptions to the automatic deportation provisions contained  in
    the United Kingdom Borders Act 2007 would be engaged.  Part 13  of  the
    Immigration Rules issued by the  Secretary  of  State,  and  the  legal
    framework  enacted  by  Parliament,  in  particular  Part  5A  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  set  out  the  public
    interest considerations in connection with the deportation  of  foreign
    criminals.

14. Of relevance for present purposes, paragraph 398(b) provides  that  the
    deportation of those (such as  this  appellant)  who  have  received  a
    sentence of imprisonment for at least 12 months,  but  less  than  four
    years, is "conducive to the public good".  Paragraph 398(b) states:

         "(b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of  less  than  4  years  but  at  least  12
         months...

    Paragraph 399(a) features an exception  to  the  above  principle.   It
    applies where:

         "(a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i) the child is a British Citizen... [and]

                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported..."

15. Section 117C of  the  2002  Act  mirrors  the  above  provisions  on  a
    statutory basis.  It  provides  that  the  deportation  of  a  "foreign
    criminal"  (that  is,  a  person  sentenced  to  a  single  period   of
    imprisonment of at least 12 months) is in the public  interest,  unless
    one of two statutory exceptions apply.  Section  117C(5)  is  relevant.
    In the following provision, "C" means the "foreign criminal":

         "(5) Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

16. It is settled law that the best interests of the child  are  a  primary
    consideration when considering whether removal of  an  appellant  under
    Article 8 would be proportionate, see ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  and
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74  at
    [10] per Lord Hodge.

Discussion

17. Weight is normally a matter for the judge.  This Tribunal should resist
    the temptation to interfere with a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    simply because it disagrees with it.   Mr  Rendle  initially  submitted
    that the judge gave clear reasons for allowing the  appeal.   At  [25],
    the judge had said that he considered all the evidence before  reaching
    his  decision,  he  submitted.   He  analysed  the  contents   of   the
    independent  social  worker's  report   and   considered   the   family
    circumstances before reaching a conclusion that was open to him on  the
    facts.

18. The difficulty  with  Mr  Rendle's  submissions,  as  he  realistically
    recognised as the hearing progressed, is that the judge did not analyse
    his  operative  finding  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
    disproportionate through the lens of either Part 13 of the  Immigration
    Rules, or either of the exceptions contained in  section  117C  of  the
    2002 Act.

19. While weight is indeed a matter for the judge, it is trite law  that  a
    Tribunal must (i) make findings  as  to  weight  by  reference  to  the
    relevant legal framework, and (ii) clearly disclose the reasons for the
    findings it makes  and  the  conclusions  it  reaches.   I  accept  the
    presenting officer's submissions that the judge failed to  comply  with
    these requirements.

20. Although the judge had set out the relevant legal  framework  at  [34],
    and correctly directed himself as to the applicable caselaw  (see,  for
    example, [40]), his operative analysis of the public interest  was  not
    conducted by reference to the public interest as set out in  the  rules
    and in Part 5A.

21. The judge correctly noted that the fact that the  appellant  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the British children concerned
    meant that he had to consider whether the appellant's deportation would
    be "unduly harsh".  See the emboldened words in the extract  from  [44]
    of the First-tier's decision, quoted at paragraph 11, above.  The judge
    said, "...therefore, I have considered whether it would be unduly harsh
    for  the  appellant  to  be   removed   from   the   United   Kingdom."
    Accordingly, the judge correctly directed himself that it was necessary
    to consider  whether  the  appellant's  deportation  would  be  "unduly
    harsh".

22. However, the judge did not go on to consider whether deportation would,
    in fact, be "unduly harsh", and if so on  what  basis.  The  very  next
    sentence in the judge's analysis simply refers to this being a "finally
    [sic] balanced decision", referring immediately to the appellant's lack
    of offending since the index offence.  Reading [44] and [45]  together,
    along with the remainder of the  decision  as  a  whole,  there  is  no
    operative analysis of the issue of undue  harshness  for  the  children
    concerned in these proceedings.

23. I accept that the judge had outlined the contents  of  the  independent
    social worker's report at [43],  noting  that  the  social  worker  had
    written about the "significant  negative  impact"  of  the  appellant's
    removal on SB and the children. The judge wrote that the report  had  a
    "significant impact" upon his consideration. However, he  did  not  say
    what the impact of the social worker's report was on  his  analysis  of
    the issue of whether deportation would be unduly harsh.  Despite noting
    that the report was to have a "significant impact" on his findings, the
    judge did not explain what that impact was.

24. In addition, the judge had earlier found (see [41]) that there  was  no
    evidence that SB had not been able  to  cope  with  her  four  children
    before she met the appellant.  The judge had  also  expressed  concerns
    about the absence of analysis - or any  references  at  all  -  in  the
    independent  social  worker's  report   to   the   previously   abusive
    relationship SB had been in.  That is significant when viewed alongside
    the judge's findings that, in the period  following  that  relationship
    (at what, on any assessment, must have been a difficult time  for  SB),
    SB had been able to cope with her four children, on her own.

25. The sad reality of deportation is that it wrecks  family  life.   There
    will be very few families where  deportation  of  a  father  or  father
    figure will not have a "significant  negative  impact"  (to  adopt  the
    judge's summary of the  independent  social  worker's  terminology)  on
    family life.  Simply reciting  that  fact  is  no  substitute  for  the
    careful analysis required.  "One is looking for a degree  of  harshness
    going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced
    with the deportation of a parent..."  See KO (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 at [23].  The judge simply
    did not analyse the extent to which a certain amount of harshness would
    be "due", and the extent to which any harshness present would go beyond
    what could be expected.

26. The judge has either skipped over the assessment of whether deportation
    would have an unduly harsh effect on the children,  or  conflated  that
    issue with  the  quite  separate  issue  of  the  appellant's  apparent
    rehabilitation in the period since his  conviction.   Either  way,  the
    judge does not appear to have engaged with the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant's removal would be unduly harsh by reference to the facts  of
    the case.

27. The remainder of the operative analysis conducted by the judge ascribed
    significance to the lack of recent offending  by  the  appellant.   The
    judge's references to the appellant being a qualified nurse and  having
    worked in the past appear to  be  a  reference  to  his  character,  or
    rehabilitation.  Those are, of course, factors which  are  relevant  to
    the public interest balancing assessment.  But they are  factors  which
    attract little  weight.   See  RA  (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";  offence:
    seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), Headnote (4),

         "Rehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material weight in  favour
         of a foreign criminal."

28. In isolation, referring to the rehabilitation of  the  appellant  would
    not be an error of law.

29. However, at [45],  the  judge  simply  stated  that  it  would  now  be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant from the United  Kingdom,  and
    the only factors cited in  favour  of  this  (other  than  the  passing
    reference to the need to assess undue harshness, unaccompanied  by  any
    operative assessment) related  to  rehabilitation  considerations.  The
    judge did not recall the significant public  interest  encapsulated  by
    part 13 of the Immigration  Rules,  or  the  near-mandatory  provisions
    contained in Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act.  Rather  than  applying  the
    established legal framework for the consideration of  what  amounts  to
    the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals as set  out
    in those provisions, the judge substituted his own consideration of the
    issue, arriving at a view of what amounts to  the  public  interest  in
    deportation which finds no  support  in  the  legislation.   The  judge
    treated rehabilitation as a determinative factor, rather than a  matter
    attracting little weight. While there is a small degree of  flexibility
    inherent to the way part Part 5A operates (the factors are, after  all,
    "considerations" to which a  court  must  "have  regard":  see  section
    117A(2)(b)), it was an error of law for the judge not to  have  express
    and due regard  to  those  considerations  in  reaching  his  operative
    findings.

30. I consider these errors to have infected the overall assessment of  the
    public interest to such an extent that the decision  needs  to  be  set
    aside.

31. The appropriate course is for the matter  to  be  reconsidered  in  the
    Upper Tribunal for consideration of what  the  best  interests  of  the
    children are, and whether it would be unduly  harsh  on  them  for  the
    appellant to be deported.   I preserve the findings of  fact  of  Judge
    EMM Smith up to [41]; they have not been impugned and I see  no  reason
    not to adopt them as the starting point for the future consideration of
    this matter in the Upper Tribunal.

Conclusion

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal featured an error of  law  such
    that it must be set aside for reconsideration in the Upper Tribunal, on
    the basis outlined above.

Anonymity

33. The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity.   Given  children
    are involved and given the nature of the contents of this decision  and
    the likely contents of a future decision, I maintain that order.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The decision of Judge EMM Smith is set  aside,  save
that the findings of fact up to and including paragraph 41 are preserved.

The matter will be relisted in the Upper Tribunal  for  fresh  consideration
of the best interests  of  the  children  and  whether  deportation  of  the
appellant would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under Article  8  of
the European Convention on Human Rights.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]                  Date 28 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


















-----------------------
[1] My Error of Law decision promulgated on 9 September 2019 incorrectly
stated that the appellant defrauded the NHS; this was based upon page 3 of
a letter dated 13 February 2018 from the appellant's solicitors to the
respondent, at page E3 of the appellant's bundle/page 56 of the
respondent's bundle.  The appellant later gained employment with the NHS,
but his conviction was in relation to Alternative Futures.  There is no
suggestion that the appellant has been involved in any crimes against the
NHS.  Pursuant to rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008, I have corrected this clerical mistake.
[2] See Footnote 1 to the Remaking Decision

