
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/00412/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision and Reasons         |
|On  5th September 2017                |Promulgated                          |
|                                      |On 21st September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                         MR ABDIMANAAN IBRAHIM HAJI
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Briddock, Counsel instructed by Wilson
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by Mr Abdmanaan Ibrahim Haji against  the  decision  of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge S Taylor, promulgated on the 18th  April  2017,
   to dismiss the appeal against the respondent's refusal of his application
   for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  private  and  family  life
   grounds.

2. The First-tier Tribunal judge  based  his  decision  upon  the  following
   factual matrix, which was not challenged by Mr Nath for the  purposes  of
   the instant appeal.

3. The appellant is a Kenyan national who was aged 25 years at the  date  of
   the First-tier Tribunal's decision. He entered the United  Kingdom,  aged
   15 years, in June 2005. He came with his parents and his younger brother,
   Sinan, who was aged 9 years at  that  time.  His  parents'  marriage  was
   unhappy and his father was often violent towards both his  wife  and  his
   children. This became so bad that, in early 2010, the appellant  and  his
   brother left the family home in Scotland and moved  to  London.  In  July
   2010, his father persuaded the appellant that  Sinan  should  join  their
   parents in Kenya. However, things  did  not  work  out  well,  and  Sinan
   returned to live with the appellant in the United Kingdom  a  few  months
   later. Neither the appellant nor his brother has  had  any  contact  with
   their parents since that time. Sinan was taken into the care of the local
   authority in 2014 because the appellant was struggling to  care  for  him
   due to losing his employment. Sinan was thereafter granted limited  leave
   to remain, following a successful  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  in
   September 2015. Sinan suffers from myocarditis and  rheumatoid  arthritis
   and now lives in his own accommodation, which is provided for him by  the
   local authority. The brothers continue to have a close  relationship  and
   the appellant visits Sinan several times a week. Other than  the  parents
   from whom they continue to be estranged, they do not have  any  surviving
   family members in Kenya.

4. Permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was
   granted  on  all  five  of  the  pleaded  grounds  following  a   renewed
   application to the Upper Tribunal. I shall consider them in turn.

5. The first ground is in two parts. Firstly, it is said that  the  Tribunal
   made an unsustainable finding by holding that there were  "no  more  than
   usual familial emotional ties" between the appellant and his brother such
   as to "engage Article 8"  [paragraph  19  of  the  Tribunal's  decision].
   Secondly, it is said that the Tribunal made an unsustainable  finding  by
   holding that "that the appellant has failed to demonstrate  that  he  has
   had a private  life  in  the  UK  which  would  engage  article  8  ECHR"
   [paragraph 20 of the Tribunal's decision].

6. Perhaps the first point to note  is  that  throughout  the  decision  the
   judge appears to elide and confuse the first two stages of the well-known
   analysis of Lord Bingham  in  Razgar  [2005]  UKHL  27.  He  states,  for
   example,  that  whilst  Article  8  "may  be  engaged  in  view  of  [the
   appellant's] relationship with his  sibling",  he  nevertheless  is  "not
   satisfied that the relationship is of such magnitude" as  to  engage  it.
   This seemingly contradictory reasoning appears to stem from a failure  to
   appreciate that the existence  of  'private  and  family  life'  and  the
   potential engagement of the operation  of  Article  8  are  separate  and
   distinct  questions.  Moreover,  once  private   and   family   life   is
   established, the  consequences  of  removal  will  almost  always  be  of
   sufficient severity to engage the potential operation of Article  8.  The
   very fact that the judge found that the appellant's  private  and  family
   life was not of  the  quality  he  considered  necessary  to  engage  the
   potential operation of Article 8 could, on one view of it,  be  taken  to
   imply its existance. However, it  is  clear  from  the  judge's  repeated
   references to "usual familial ties" that he in fact  concluded  that  the
   relationship between  these  particular  adult  siblings  was  not  of  a
   character that constituted family life at all. I have  therefore  treated
   the first ground as a challenge to the legality of that finding.

7. Mr Briddock relied heavily upon  the  difficult  circumstances  that  the
   appellant and his brother shared during their  childhood  (summarised  at
   paragraph 3, above) as the foundation for  his  submission  that  it  was
   perverse not to find that the relationship between the appellant and  his
   brother constituted 'family life'. However, the fact that  the  appellant
   had previously stood in loco parentis to his brother - a  fact  that  had
   apparently resulted in him being granted a limited  period  of  leave  to
   remain at that time - does not in my judgement make it an error of law to
   focus upon current circumstances in the assessment of family life  as  at
   the date of the hearing. So far as current circumstances were  concerned,
   Mr Briddock cited the evidence recorded at paragraph 12  of  the  judge's
   decision as support for his proposition that "the appellant  looks  after
   [his brother] when he is unwell including looking after his basic  living
   needs" [paragraph 12 of the renewed grounds of appeal]. However, it seems
   to me that this overstates the evidence  which,  as  it  is  recorded  at
   paragraph 12, was that the appellant "looked after him during his periods
   in hospital" and "gave him general support". I confess that I am  unclear
   as to how it was suggested that the appellant "looked after" his  brother
   at times when he was under the care  of  healthcare  professionals  in  a
   hospital. I am however in no doubt that such  care  as  he  was  able  to
   render in  such  circumstances  could  not  accurately  be  described  as
   "looking after his [brother's] basic living needs", and neither is it  an
   appropriate characterisation  of  the  reference  by  the  judge  to  the
   appellant providing "general support". Given that the appellant's brother
   was now  living  in  independent  accommodation  and  had  ceased  to  be
   financially dependent upon the appellant, I  am  satisfied  that  it  was
   reasonably open to the judge to hold that the existence of 'family  life'
   had not established.

8.  Nevertheless,  the  appellant's  close  relationship  with  his  brother
   clearly constituted 'private life'. It was accordingly an  error  of  law
   for the judge to hold otherwise. I shall consider the materiality of this
   error at a later stage.

9. The second and third grounds may be taken together. The second ground  of
   appeal is that, for the purposes of calculating whether the appellant met
   the threshold for engagement of paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules,
   the judge erred in attaching reduced weight to periods  of  residence  in
   the United  Kingdom  that  were  deemed  lawful  by  section  3C  of  the
   Immigration Act 1971. This  was  clearly  an  error  of  law  given  that
   residence is either lawful  or  it  is  unlawful.  There  is  nothing  in
   between. The third ground is that the judge failed to have regard to  the
   appellant's explanation for why he was unable to meet the requirement  of
   paragraph 276B to pass an English language test. The  judge  was  clearly
   wrong to state the appellant had not provided such an  explanation  given
   that he had stated in evidence that he could not afford to required  fee.
   The extent to which these errors were material  to  the  outcome  of  the
   appeal is considered at paragraph 12 (below).

10. The fourth ground is also in two parts. Firstly, it  is  said  that  the
   Tribunal erred in assuming that there was an  intermediate  threshold  of
   "exceptional circumstances" prior to consideration outside the  scope  of
   the Immigration Rules. Secondly, it is said that the  Tribunal  erred  in
   failing "properly" to consider the factors listed in section 117B of  the
   Nationality, Immigration, and Asylum Act 2002. So far as the  first  part
   is concerned, as I read the judgments in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387,
   the  requirement  is   for   "compelling"   rather   than   "exceptional"
   circumstances and so, to that extent, the Tribunal made an error of  law.
   It was however an immaterial error given that  the  second  part  of  the
   fourth ground is predicated  upon  the  Tribunal  having  considered  the
   appeal outside the Rules in any event. In this regard, it  is  said  that
   the Tribunal, at paragraph 20 of  its  decision,  did  not  consider  the
   factors  in  section  117B  "properly".  I   cannot   however   see   any
   justification for this complaint given that  the  judge  correctly  noted
   that he was enjoined by the subsection to attach little weight to private
   life that was established at a  time  when  the  appellant's  immigration
   status was (as the judge put it) "limited or uncertain", and any facility
   that the appellant may possess in the English language did not  have  the
   effect of enhancing his human rights and was thus a neutral factor.

11. The fifth and final ground is that the judge erred in  failing  to  have
   regard to the fact that the appellant had come to the United Kingdom as a
   child.  However,  whilst  Mr  Briddock  is  undoubtedly  correct  in  his
   submission that children cannot be held accountable for their immigration
   status (or lack of it) in the assessment of their  best  interests,  this
   ground is once again dependent upon historical fact rather  than  current
   circumstance. It thus suffers from the same weakness as I have  found  to
   be inherent in the submission that the existence of family  life  in  the
   past should inform the question of whether it continues to exist  in  the
   present (see paragraph 7, above). Moreover, to the extent that time spent
   as a child is relevant in considering the proportionality of  removing  a
   young adult from the UK, this is specifically catered  for  by  paragraph
   276ADE(v) of the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  specifically  considered
   this subparagraph at paragraph 16 of his decision and correctly concluded
   the appellant was unable to meet its requirements.

12. I turn now to consider the materiality of the errors that  I  identified
   at  paragraphs  8  and  9  (above).  As  I  have  previously  noted,  the
   combination of the period of the appellant's lawful residence in  the  UK
   and his relationship with his brother sufficed to  establish  a  'private
   life' upon which the adverse impact of removal was  clearly  such  as  to
   engage  the  potential  operation  of  Article  8.  However,  unless  the
   undoubted affect upon his private life  also  outweighed  the  legitimate
   public interest in the consistent application  of  immigration  controls,
   this appeal would in any event have been bound to fail. In my  judgement,
   the fact that the appellant may  have  been  in  a  position  to  make  a
   successful application for leave to remain under paragraph  276B  had  he
   had sufficient funds to take an English language test was of very limited
   relevance to the proportionality exercise under Article 8.  This  is  for
   two reasons. Firstly - by contrast with paragraph 276ADE and Appendix  FM
   of the Immigration Rules, which are expressed to represent the  Secretary
   of State's view of the operation  of  Article  8  (see,  especially,  the
   statement of purpose as GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM) - paragraph  276B  merely
   sets out threshold criteria for the potential exercise of  discretion  in
   favour of an applicant who has lawfully resided in the UK for a period of
   10 years. It does not purport to have any relevance to the  operation  of
   Article 8. Thus, whilst it is capable of  being  a  factor  that  carries
   weight in the assessment of a person's rights under Article 8, it  cannot
   be considered to be determinative of  them.  Secondly,  the  question  of
   whether the appellant would have passed  the  required  English  language
   test, had he had the funds to sit it, is a matter of a pure  speculation.
   The question of the proportionality of the appellant's removal  therefore
   fell to be considered, at least in the first  instance,  under  paragraph
   276ADE of the Immigration Rules; that is to  say,  by  reference  to  the
   existence or otherwise of "very significant obstacles to the  applicant's
   integration into the country to which he would have to g if  required  to
   leave the UK". That question was considered in detail  by  the  judge  at
   paragraph 16 of his decision  wherein  he  gave  cogent  and  sustainable
   reasons for answering it adversely to the appellant. I am also  satisfied
   that it was reasonably open to the judge to conclude that there  were  no
   additional  factors  that   were   sufficiently   compelling   to   merit
   consideration outside the Rules. I therefore conclude that the errors  of
   law that I have identified in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   were immaterial to the outcome of the appeal, and I therefore exercise my
   discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
   Enforcement Act 2007 not to set it aside.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date: 18th September 2017


Judge Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

