
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00037/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2017                         |On 27 July 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     m i
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on 27 October 2015  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to remove him to Sierra Leone  as  a
    Sierra Leonean citizen and to refuse him further leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom on Article 8 grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State now accepts that the appellant is a  citizen  of
    Nigeria, not Sierra Leone:  if she seeks to remove him there, she  will
    need to set fresh removal directions to Nigeria.

 3. Matters have moved on since the refusal letter on 24 February 2017,  in
    which the respondent maintained that the appellant was Sierra  Leonean,
    did not accept that the Sierra  Leonean  authorities  would  refuse  to
    issue a travel document, and did not accept that he  was  stateless  on
    that basis.  The respondent stated  in  her  refusal  letter  that  her
    investigations were continuing.

 4. On 25 May 2017, the respondent made a further decision and Mr  Whitwell
    applied for an adjournment  of  the  present  hearing,  based  on  that
    decision.  The further decision was made by  Mr  Chris  Bailey  at  the
    Leeds Immigration Enforcement Centre.  It reads as follows:

         "It is acknowledged that you claim to be a Sierra  Leone  national.
         However, it is noted that you provided no evidence to support  your
         claims apart from your claimed Sierra Leone birth certificate which
         has been confirmed as a false document.  You have been  interviewed
         by officials from the Sierra Leone Embassy on three  occasions  and
         they have advised that they do not  accept  you  as  one  of  their
         nationals.  You have failed to demonstrate sufficient knowledge  of
         Sierra Leone, your  claimed  country  of  origin  and  the  Embassy
         officials have been unable to identify any record relating  to  you
         or any of your  claimed  family  members.   The  Home  Office  have
         therefore been conducting enquiries into  your  true  identity  and
         nationality...".

    Pausing there, that is a plain statement that the Secretary of State no
    longer considers that this appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone.

 5. There are then two possibilities, either that he is stateless  or  that
    he is a citizen of somewhere else.  The letter continues:

         "Three visa applications  have  been  identified  relating  to  the
         holder of Nigerian passport C475681 [name given] born on  25  March
         1982.  The similarities to the name and  date  of  birth  you  have
         submitted to the Home Office are highlighted.  Furthermore, it  has
         been identified that visa applications were made on the same  dates
         of each application by various members of the Shittu family.  It is
         noted that you were interviewed on 29 March 2017 during  which  you
         confirmed that you are friends with  Akeem  Shittu  and  remain  in
         contact with him.  You also confirmed that your bail surety,  James
         Olubusola Agbonna is  married  to  Kudiratu  Shittu.   Our  records
         confirm that both Akeem Shittu  and  Kudiratu  Shittu  applied  for
         visas to enter  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  same  date  as  [the
         appellant]  on  at  least  two  occasions  each.   Based   on   the
         similarities between your claimed identity, the  aliases  you  have
         used with the details of the holder of Nigerian  passport  C475681,
         in tandem with your clear links to members of the Shittu family who
         made visa applications at the same time as the holder  of  Nigerian
         passport C475681, it is believed that you  are  [MEI]  born  on  25
         March 2982 in Benin City, Nigeria.  As a consequence, your  details
         will be updated to reflect this.  Arrangements will now be  put  in
         place for you to be interviewed by officials from the Nigeria  High
         Commission with the view of obtaining a travel document.   You  are
         urged to fully comply with this interview."

    The covering letter from Mr Whitwell sought an adjournment to obtain  a
    travel document enabling  the  respondent  to  effect  removal  to  the
    Federal Republic of Nigeria.

 6. The letter continues:

         "Given the procedural history of this  appeal  and  also  that  the
         appellant's nationality and  the  proposed  place  of  removal  are
         fundamental to the disposal of this appeal you may be of  the  view
         that the absence of a conclusion by the  Nigerian  High  Commission
         will render the hearing of  the  5  June  otiose  and  not  in  the
         interests of any of the parties to proceed.  It is  on  this  basis
         that I respectfully apply for an adjournment of six weeks in  order
         for such interview to be conducted and a response  to  be  received
         from the Nigeria High  Commission.   Alternatively,  I  invite  the
         Tribunal to consider whether such  hearing  on  5  June  should  be
         commuted into a pre-hearing review...".

 7. With respect to Mr Whitwell, that letter misses the point which  arises
    from the letter of 25 May 2017, which is that  the  removal  directions
    and the refusal letter are premised on the appellant being a citizen of
    Sierra Leone, that the appellant's defence has been that he has no such
    citizenship and that the respondent  now  accepts  that  he  is  not  a
    citizen of Sierra Leone.

 8. If the respondent wishes to remove the appellant to  Nigeria  she  will
    have to make a fresh decision on that basis and no  such  decision  has
    yet been made.

 9. For that reason, I declined to adjourn the present appeal and  I  allow
    the appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    remove him to Sierra Leone.

10. That does not grant him any Article 8 rights  or  status.   If  he  now
    wishes to pursue those rights he  will  need  to  make  an  appropriate
    application and in the meantime, the Secretary of State will  doubtless
    consider to  where  she  might  remove  him  and  make  an  appropriate
    decision, should that be her intention.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:         26 July 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
