
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2016                           |On 18 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                  MANUEL [P]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Naqvi of Irvine Thanvi Nata Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision dated  8  May
    2015 to refuse a human rights  claim  in  the  context  of  deportation
    proceedings. The respondent accepted that the appellant had  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with his youngest stepdaughter and
    his biological son, who are both  British  citizens.  Although  it  was
    accepted that he also had an older step-daughter, she was 18 years old.
    There was no evidence of  further  elements  of  dependency  that  went
    beyond normal emotional ties between adult relatives. For  this  reason
    the respondent did not accept that family life was  established  within
    the meaning of Article 8 of the  European  Convention.  The  respondent
    also  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with his wife, who is settled in the UK.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 18 April 2016.

3.    The appellant sought to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

       i) The judge failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the  family
          life between the appellant and his family members, including  his
          step-children. In finding that he did not have family  life  with
          his step-children the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons
          and/or failed to have regard to material evidence.

      ii) The decision contained numerous typographical errors, which  cast
          doubt on whether the judge gave anxious  scrutiny  to  the  human
          rights issues raised on the facts of the case, including evidence
          relating to the impact of removal  on  the  appellant's  autistic
          son.

4.    At the hearing Ms Fijiwala accepted that the decision  was  inadequate
    and disclosed errors of law, not least because the respondent  accepted
    that the appellant had a family life with his youngest step-daughter in
    the decision letter.

5.    I am also satisfied that the decision  involved  errors  of  law  that
    were material to a proper assessment of the appeal.

6.    The judge failed to apply the basic legal structure contained  in  the
    immigration rules in line with the guidance set out  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2014] 1 WLR  544.  The  judge  mentioned
    paragraph 398 and the exceptions to deportation but  then  stated  that
    the exception was that "removal would be in breach of his human  rights
    under Article 8 of the ECHR" [16].  Although  he  went  on  to  mention
    paragraphs 399 and 399A he failed to engage  with  the  relevant  legal
    tests set out in those exceptions [20].

7.    The judge failed to give reasons to support his bare finding that  the
    appellant did not have a family life with  his  two  step-children.  He
    failed to engage with the fact that the respondent accepted that  there
    was family life with the youngest step-child or with the evidence given
    by the appellant and other family members regarding the close nature of
    their relationships [19].

8.     Although  the  judge  mentioned  the   evidence   relating   to   the
    difficulties faced by the appellant's autistic son  [8]  he  failed  to
    engage with the evidence when assessing  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the UK without his father  or  whether
    it would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to Ecuador with  his
    father [19]. Having found that the  child  could  relocate  to  Ecuador
    (without reference to the correct legal test) the judge failed to  give
    any consideration to how relocation of the whole family would impact on
    the appellant's step-children  [19].  The  judge  failed  to  give  any
    consideration to the fact that the children are British citizens.

9.    The judge's assessment of the case was wholly inadequate  in  view  of
    the importance of the importance of the family  life  issues  involved.
    The typographical and  other  errors  merely  serve  as  an  additional
    illustration of the point. He failed to make findings  in  relation  to
    material aspects of the claim or to provide adequate  reasons  to  show
    that he considered the case within the relevant legal framework.

10.   I conclude that the decision involved the making of errors of law.  It
    was agreed that the appropriate course  of  action  would  be  for  the
    appeal to be  remitted  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 17 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan







