
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00063/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 June 2021                                |On 20 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                             DEREK RICKY THORPE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Lourdes, Counsel instructed by VR & Shaw
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  to  which  both   parties   have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams
      (V). A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party  expressed  any
      concern, with the process.

Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and  Tobago,  born  on  2  July
      1967.

   3. The appellant claims that he entered the UK  in  December  1998  as  a
      visitor and remained in the UK (without leave) thereafter.  He  claims
      that he meets  the  conditions  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the
      Immigration Rules, as he has accrued 20 years of continuous  residence
      in the UK.

   4. In a decision dated 4 December 2019, the  respondent  did  not  accept
      that the appellant has lived in the UK continuously for over 20 years.
      The respondent noted that the documentation supplied by the  appellant
      to corroborate his presence in the UK did not cover about half of  the
      years he claimed to have been in the UK.

   5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  his  appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rastogi ("the judge"). In
      a decision promulgated on 20 November 2020,  the  judge  rejected  the
      appellant's claim to have lived in the UK continuously for over twenty
      years and dismissed the appeal. The appellant is now appealing against
      that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   6. The judge refused an application by the appellant's representative for
      an adjournment in order to obtain a full copy of  the  appellant's  GP
      records. The judge explained in paragraphs 9 - 11 of the decision  why
      this application was refused. In short, the judge's reasons were:  (a)
      the application was made at the  conclusion  of  submissions,  (b)  no
      reason was given why the GP records had not been obtained  previously,
      (c) granting the application would have resulted in the hearing  being
      part heard and the need for a further hearing, and (d) it  was  by  no
      means clear that the GP records would be decisive  of  the  issues  in
      dispute.

   7. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and his sister. It appears
      from paragraphs 27 - 35, that the appellant and his sister were asked,
      in considerable detail, about the appellant's hospitalisation and
      illness (with TB) between 2000 and 2004. The judge found at paragraph
      35:

           "On the basis of the above analysis I am driven to the
           conclusion that neither the appellant nor his sister are
           reliable historians when recalling the chronology of the
           appellant's illness [between 2000 and 2004]. However, I did find
           them in general terms to be consistent in their narrative of the
           progression of the illness and in particular they both gave
           detailed and consistent evidence about the appellant's
           presentation upon falling ill for the second time and the
           difficulties the hospital had in diagnosing him due to his
           psychosis."


   8. The judge found it to be noteworthy that the medical records  did  not
      show any GP attendances between 2014 and 2019 despite there being oral
      evidence of both witnesses that he had  attended  the  GP.  The  judge
      noted that the appellant's claim to have had a foot operation in  2015
      was, however, corroborated by a letter. The judge stated in  paragraph
      43 that one possible explanation for the  absence  of  GP  attendances
      between 2014 and 2019 was that the appellant was not in the UK at that
      time.

   9. The judge noted that the appellant submitted  passports  covering  the
      entire period in question and that the only entry stamp to the UK  was
      on 29 December 1998.  The  judge  stated  in  paragraph  49  that  the
      appellant did not have leave to be in the UK and therefore  would  not
      have lawfully been able to re-enter  the  UK  without  securing  entry
      clearance. However, he found at paragraph 50 that the  passports  were
      of only limited evidential value. He stated:

           "I have considered the weight to be attached to the passports. I
           agree with [the respondent's representative] that the absence of
           entry and exit stamps cannot be converted into positive evidence
           of residence. For that reason they have limited evidential
           value."

  10. The judge concluded at paragraph 53 that:

           "[N]oting that there is presently seven of the 20 years for
           which corroboration has not been provided, and as I have not
           found the appellant and his sister to be wholly reliable
           witnesses, the appellant has failed to satisfy me that he has
           resided in the UK for a continuous 20 year period."

Grounds of Appeal

  11. The appellant advanced the following grounds:

        a. Having found, at paragraph 35, that the appellant and his sister
           were in general terms consistent in their narrative,  the  judge
           erred by dismissing the appeal on the basis that  the  appellant
           and his sister were not "wholly reliable witnesses".


        b.  The  appellant  produced  sufficient  documentary  evidence  to
           discharge the burden of  proof  that  he  has  been  in  the  UK
           continuously for over 20 years.

        c. The appellant was prejudiced by the judge  refusing  to  adjourn
           the hearing in order to allow the appellant to obtain and adduce
           his GP records.

        d. The judge erred by not attaching weight to  the  fact  that  the
           appellant had no way of lawfully re-entering the UK  during  the
           period covered by his passports.



Admission of GP records

  12. Mr Lourdes sought, at the commencement of the hearing,  permission  to
      rely on the appellant's GP records, which had been obtained  following
      the First-tier Tribunal hearing. Mr  Kotas  opposed  the  application,
      arguing that because  the  records  were  not  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal they were not relevant to whether an error of law was made. I
      refused to admit the records as Mr Lourdes was unable to identify  any
      reason they were relevant to whether the judge erred in law. I agreed,
      however, that if I found there to be an error of law,  they  would  be
      admitted for the re-making of the decision.


Analysis


  13. I do not need to consider all of the grounds because  I  am  satisfied
      that the judge erred by failing to adjourn the  hearing  in  order  to
      give the appellant an opportunity to obtain, and  submit,  a  complete
      set of his GP records. I reach this conclusion with  great  reluctance
      considering the circumstances in which the adjournment was  requested.
      As noted  by  the  judge  in  paragraphs  9-11,  the  adjournment  was
      requested towards the end of the  hearing  in  response  to  questions
      asked by  the  judge  and  without  any  explanation  as  to  why  the
      appellant's solicitors had failed to obtain  and  submit  the  records
      prior to the hearing.

  14. The importance of procedural rigour has been emphasised by  the  Court
      of Appeal (see, for example, Singh LJ in paragraphs 67-69 of  Talpada,
      R (On the Application Of) v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2018] EWCA Civ 841) and acceding to a request such as this
      is undoubtedly undermining of procedural rigour. However, the question
      that needs to be addressed is whether the appellant has been  deprived
      of a fair hearing. The test, as  explained  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
      fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), is that of fairness; and it can  be
      unfair to not adjourn a hearing even if that is  inconsistent  with  a
      proper regard for procedural rigour.

  15. The judge gave two reasons (in paragraph 53)  for  not  accepting  the
      appellant has lived in the UK for 20 continuous year. These are  that:
      (a) there was an absence of  documentary  evidence  corroborating  the
      appellant's presence in the UK  for  seven  of  the  twenty  years  he
      claimed to have been in the UK continuously;  and  (b)  the  appellant
      and his sister were not "wholly reliable witnesses". The finding  that
      the appellant and his sister  were  not  "wholly  reliable"  was  made
      despite the judge not making any adverse findings in respect of  their
      credibility (other than to note that they were not reliable historians
      about the chronology of the  appellant's  illness  in  2000  -  2004).
      Although I am sympathetic, given the importance of procedural  rigour,
      to the judge's decision to refuse to adjourn the hearing, I am of  the
      view that in this case, which turned on the documentary  evidence  and
      where the GP records (which could be obtained with relative  ease  and
      speed,  and  would  constitute  highly  reliable  evidence)  had   the
      potential to be determinative of  the  appeal,  fairness  required  an
      opportunity to be given to the appellant to obtain and submit them.  I
      therefore set aside the decision on the basis that the judge erred  by
      not adjourning the hearing.

  16. Although I reserved my decision on whether to set aside the First-tier
      Tribunal's decision, I invited the parties to  make  (and  they  made)
      submissions for the re-making of the decision. I am satisfied  that  I
      am in a position to  re-make  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  these
      submissions.

  17. The appellant's case, as argued before me by Mr Lourdes,  in  summary,
      is that there are two very strong items of evidence  that  corroborate
      his claim to have not left the UK since 1998.

        a. First, there are no entry stamps on his passports  (and  expired
           passports) between 1998  and  the  present,  other  than  on  29
           December 1998 which was when  he  entered  the  UK.  Mr  Lourdes
           submitted that if, at any  time  since  29  December  1998,  the
           appellant had left and re-entered  the  UK,  there  would  be  a
           record of this in his passports.


        b. Second, there are medical records confirming (and the respondent
           does not dispute) the appellant's presence  in  the  UK  between
           2000 and 2003; and since 2003 he has been a patient at the  same
           GP practice, where he  has  attended  appointments  on  numerous
           occasions. Reliance was placed on a  letter  dated  30  December
           2020  from  the  Brigstock  and  South  Norwood  Partnership  GP
           Practice, stating that the appellant has  been  registered  with
           them since June 2003 and  enclosing  a  printout  of  electronic
           records covering the period between May 2004 and 1 July 2020.

  18. Mr Kotas argued that the  appellant's  passports  did  not  constitute
      strong evidence: he submitted that  continuous  residence  in  the  UK
      cannot be established merely by presenting blank passports.

  19. Mr Kotas accepted that the GP print-out indicates that  the  appellant
      has seen a GP at least once every year apart from in the  years  2007,
      2010, 2016 and 2017. He also acknowledged that it was not  in  dispute
      that the appellant had been in  the  UK  between  2000  and  2003.  He
      submitted, however, that (a) it does not follow from the fact that the
      appellant visited a GP during the course of a year that he was in  the
      UK for the entirety of that year; and (b)  there  are  four  years  in
      respect of  which  no  corroborating  documentary  evidence  has  been
      produced; and (c) overall, there was a paucity of documentary evidence
      corroborating the appellant's presence in the UK even recognising  the
      difficulty that the appellant may have had in locating  documents.  Mr
      Kotas submitted  that  the  evidence,  considered  together,  was  not
      sufficient to establish that the appellant  has  resided  continuously
      for 20 years in the UK.

  20. The medical records adduced by the appellant show his presence in  the
      UK between 2000 and 2003 (as found in paragraphs  36  and  40  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal decision, and acknowledged at the  hearing  by  Mr
      Kotas), and that he saw a GP in all years between 2004 and 2020  other
      than 2007, 2010, 2016 and  2017.  This  evidence  does  not  establish
      beyond doubt that the appellant has been continuously in  the  UK.  As
      observed by Mr Kotas, seeing a GP once or twice a year does not mean a
      person spent the entirety of that year in the UK and  there  are  four
      years in which there is no corroborating documentary evidence  at  all
      to indicate the appellant's presence in the UK. However, I do not need
      to find it is certain the appellant has continuously been in  the  UK:
      the standard of proof is the balance of probabilities. In my view, the
      medical records establish that it is more likely  than  not  that  the
      appellant has not left the UK since 2000.

  21. I have reached this conclusion  without  relying  on  the  appellant's
      blank passports. The blank passports are not determinative, as  argued
      by Mr Lourdes, but  they  do  indicate  that  the  appellant  has  not
      lawfully exited and re-entered the UK, which supports his  claim  that
      he has not left the UK. This  evidence  reinforces  the  conclusion  I
      reached on the basis of the medical records.

  22. Continuous residence of 20 years is the only  condition  of  paragraph
      276ADE(1) in dispute. As I am satisfied that this condition is met, it
      follows  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      276ADE(1). The consequence of the  appellant  satisfying  a  route  to
      leave under the Immigration Rules - in this case paragraph 276ADE(1) -
      is that the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
      controls does not weigh against him in the Article  8  proportionality
      assessment. See TZ (Pakistan) and Another v Secretary of State for the
      Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 110.  I  therefore  allow  the  appeal
      under article 8 ECHR.


Decision

  23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside. I re-make the decision by allowing  the
      appeal.

|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |                                  |
|                                  |Dated: 6 July 2021                |

