
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00489/2016
                                                               HU/00503/2016
                                                               HU/00492/2016
                                                               HU/00499/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th March 2018                             |On 12th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                        Chhanda [M] (First Appellant)
                        Binda [s] (Second Appellant)
                          [B C s] (Third Appellant)
                         [B K s] (fourth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Murphy (instructed by J Stifford Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal relates  to  a  family  of  four,  parents  and  their  two
    children, all  of  whom  are  of  Bangladeshi  nationality.  The  third
    Appellant, the father, first entered the UK as  a  student  in  October
    2004.  He was  subsequently  joined  by  his  wife  as  his  dependent.
    Further leave was granted thereafter until 31st March 2009, also  as  a
    student and his dependant.  The couple then they had two children  born
    in the UK, the first on [ ] 2007 and the second on [ ] 2009.

 2. The father made a further application for a Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    visa in 2009 which was refused and their appeal  against  that  refusal
    was dismissed.  As a result they became appeal rights exhausted in  May
    2010.

 3. The couple then sought leave to remain, outside the Immigration  Rules,
    which was refused  without  a  right  of  appeal.   They  then  made  a
    subsequent application in 2014 on the basis of their family and private
    life.  That was also refused with no right of appeal  but  reconsidered
    and the decision maintained.

 4. The application under appeal was made in August 2015, also on the basis
    of their private and family life.  That was refused  on  15th  December
    2015 and that is the decision against which the  appeal  was  heard  in
    Hatton Cross on 20th June 2017 by Judge Walker.

 5. The Judge heard oral evidence and in a Decision and Reasons promulgated
    shortly thereafter dismissed the appeals.  He heard evidence only  from
    the Third Appellant, the father.  He set out the  law  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE and in relation to EX.1. of Appendix FM.  Appendix  FM
    EX.1. refers to a person  having  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a child who is a British citizen  or  who  has  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years preceding the  date  of
    application and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
    the UK.  There is a similar provision contained in paragraph 276ADE.

 6. The appeal rested largely on the situation with regard to the children.
     There is reference to the wife not giving evidence.  The  Judge  found
    that the children's first language was  Bengali,  English  being  their
    second language, albeit they are taught  in  school  in  English.   The
    Judge found there would be no significant obstacles to the  Appellants'
    integration into Bangladesh where they have extended family members  as
    well as the wife having family in India.  He did not find  it  credible
    that the family would not assist them and he did not find  it  credible
    that the children would have any difficulties.

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought and granted by  a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in January of this year on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the Judge had not properly assessed the  best
    interests of the children separately from their  parents  as  required.
    On the basis of what the Judge has said in the  Decision  and  Reasons,
    which is very short in terms of its findings, that  ground  is  plainly
    made out.  There  is  no  separate  consideration  of  where  the  best
    interests of the children lie, save  obviously  for  them  living  with
    their parents.

 8.  I have no hesitation in finding that the Judge made a  material  error
    of law in his treatment of the children in this appeal and setting  the
    decision aside. Mr Tarlow for the Secretary of State,  to  his  credit,
    did not strenuously argue to the contrary.

 9. It was also agreed by  the  representatives  before  me  that  I  could
    proceed to remake the decision.   There  was  no  interpreter  for  the
    Appellants, but  that  said,  there  was  no  necessity  to  hear  oral
    evidence.

10. The Appellants have sought to put into evidence today,  and  Mr  Tarlow
    has accepted that it does not present him  with  any  difficulty,  some
    further evidence, namely statements by the Third Appellant and his wife
    and a certificate of registration in relation to the eldest  child  who
    is now a British citizen.

11. The existence of children in Article 8  cases  has  been  said  not  to
    represent a trump card and there is a line of case law  saying  exactly
    that.  However, there is also a line of case  law  starting  with  Lady
    Hale's judgment in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 indicating that the best
    interests of children are a primary consideration, are not, as they are
    in  the  Family  Court,  a  paramount  consideration.   However,   they
    nevertheless have to be attached due weight and whilst their  interests
    can be outweighed by other matters, those matters have to be  carefully
    considered.

12. More recently the case of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 which was a
    judgment of Lord Justice Elias, looked at the question  of  considering
    the  best  interests  of  children  and  the  weight  to  be  attached,
    particularly to children who have been in the United Kingdom  for  more
    than seven years.  He was looking at the  matter  in  relation  to  the
    provisions of Section 117 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and in
    particular Section 117B(6).  Suffice it to say that the  provisions  in
    s.117B(6) replicate those contained in paragraph 276ADE  and  Ex.1.  of
    Appendix FM.  All the provisions provide that when considering  removal
    of a child who has been in the UK for seven years, consideration has to
    be given to whether it is reasonable  for  that  child  to  leave.   MA
    followed the rationale of an earlier case, MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA  Civ
    450 which had looked at deportation appeals.  MA established that, when
    considering   reasonableness   that   involved   an    assessment    of
    proportionality taking into account all matters, including the  conduct
    of the adults concerned.

13. In this case, other than the fact that the parents have not  had  leave
    since 2010, not for the want of trying, there is no criminal element in
    this case and there are now two children who have been in the  UK,  one
    for nearly eleven years, and one for seven years.  Lord  Justice  Elias
    at paragraph 49 of MA said:-

         "The fact that the child has been in the UK for seven  years  would
         need to be given significant weight in the proportionality exercise
         for two  related  reasons:  first,  because  of  its  relevance  to
         determining the nature and strength of the child's best  interests;
         and second, because it establishes as a starting point  that  leave
         should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
         contrary".

    He says that in relation to a child who has been here seven  years.  In
    this case there is one, not only who has been  here  seven  years,  but
    another who has been here more than ten years,  and  indeed  is  now  a
    British citizen.

14. In relation to whether it is reasonable to expect a British citizen  to
    leave the United Kingdom I refer to the recently published Home  Office
    guidance in relation to "Family Migration:  Appendix  FM  Section  1.0b
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes".
     On page 76 of that guidance it says:-

         "Where the child is a British citizen, it will not be reasonable to
         expect them to leave the UK with the applicant  parent  or  primary
         carer facing removal. Accordingly, where this means that the  child
         would have to leave the UK because, in  practice,  the  child  will
         not, or is not likely to, continue to live in the UK  with  another
         parent or primary carer, EX.1.(a) is likely to apply".

    It goes on to say that there are  circumstances  in  which  it  may  be
    appropriate to refuse to grant leave to parents of such a  child  where
    there are public interest considerations of such weight as  to  justify
    their removal, and that clearly was referring to the previous  guidance
    which talked about criminality.  There are  no  such  circumstances  in
    this case.  The British child therefore cannot be expected to leave the
    UK.  In relation to the other child who is not  British  there  are  no
    powerful reasons outweighing the best interest of that child which  are
    clearly to remain in the UK where she has lived her entire life. It  is
    not reasonable to expect either child in this case to leave the UK.

15. In this case the entire family are Appellants.   The  children  clearly
    cannot remain on their own and therefore the Secretary of  State's  own
    guidance, taken with the case law dictates that these appeals should be
    allowed.  On that basis the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and
    the appeal itself is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

16. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 6th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.

Signed                              Date 6th April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
