
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00751/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16 February 2018                    |On 23 February 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                Appellant
                                    -and-

                                 WISDOM [D]
                        (NO anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms Z. Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms. D. Fosuhene of Chancery CS Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1992, is a national of  Nigeria.  He
    entered the United Kingdom, as a visitor, on 17 October  2004  and  has
    had no leave to remain since that visa expired six months later.  Since
    25 May 2007 he has committed a number of offences.   He  also  suffered
    mental abuse from his father and his girlfriend, which  is  thought  to
    have led to increasing spells of mental illness.

2.   On 9 September 2015 he applied for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds but his  application  was  refused  on  22  December  2015.  He
    appealed against this decision on 31 December 2015 and his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean on 24 October 2017. She allowed
    his appeal on human rights grounds  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  3
    November 2017.

3.   The Secretary of State appealed against this decision  on  15  November
    2017 and First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan  granted  her  permission  to
    appeal on 19 December 2017.

Error of Law Hearing

4.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and  the  legal  representative
    for the Respondent made short oral submissions and I have  referred  to
    these, where relevant in my findings below.

Error of Law Decision

5.   Those acting for  the  Respondent  had  submitted  a  large  bundle  of
    documents  which  included  relevant  case  law,  psychiatric  reports,
    country reports, witness statements and written submissions  on  behalf
    of the Respondent and in his report Dr. Ogbeide had found him to be not
    fit to give evidence or  understand  the  tribunal  proceedings.  As  a
    consequence, he was not in court during the hearing.

6.   In his report, dated 15 October 2017,  Dr.  Ogbeide,  a  General  Adult
    Specialist  Registrar  Psychiatrist,  had  also  concluded   that   the
    Respondent suffered from a schizoaffective disorder, which was chronic,
    enduing, relapsing and remitting.  At the time of the appeal hearing he
    was being treated at the Allington Centre subject to sections 48/49  of
    the Mental Health Act.

7.    The  very  detailed  written  submissions   went   through   all   the
    circumstances  of  the  Respondent's  offending   behaviour   and   his
    psychological history. They also submitted that removing the Respondent
    to Nigeria would amount to a breach of Article 3 of  the  ECHR  in  the
    light  of  the  decision  in  Paposhvili  v  Belgium  (Application  No.
    41738/2010 in the Grand Chamber.  In the alternative, it was  submitted
    that his removal would amount to a breach of Article 8 in  the  context
    of MM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 279.

8.   The record of proceedings indicates that there was some  discussion  at
    the hearing as to whether the decision reached  by  the  Appellant  was
    unlawful in the light of  the  more  recent  psychiatric  evidence  and
    whether the appeal could be allowed to this  limited  extent.  However,
    the parties and the First-tier Tribunal  concluded  that  this  was  no
    longer an option. This was correct  in  the  light  of  the  repeal  of
    section 87 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and
    Greenwood (no.2) (para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 629 (IAC).  In  that
    case it was  confirmed  that  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  must  now
    "determine" a case and no longer has the power to remit a case  to  the
    Secretary of State for any purpose.

9.   The legal representative for the Respondent  submitted  that  the  HOPO
    was  given  time  to  consider  the  new  medical  evidence   and   the
    Respondent's Bundle by the Judge before the hearing commenced and  that
    she had then conceded the appeal. There is no mention in the record  of
    proceedings or the decision of a formal concession.

10.  In any event, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was under an obligation  to
    determine the appeal before  her.  The  legal  representative  for  the
    Respondent relied on the detailed written submissions  which  had  been
    submitted and the other documents in the Respondent's Bundle.  However,
    the First-tier Tribunal's findings were very limited. In  paragraph  13
    he noted that "the medical and psychiatric evidence from 2016 and  2017
    shows that the Appellant's mental health is a material  factor  in  his
    appeal". Then, at paragraph 14 of  the  decision,  he  found  that  the
    Respondent's  decision  was   not   one   which   can   be   considered
    proportionate".  He did not provide any reasons for these findings  and
    did not refer to the evidence with any particularity.

11.  It was not possible to just infer that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had accepted and  adopted  the  contents  of  the  written  submissions
    provided by those representing  the  Respondent.   In  any  event,  the
    written submissions addressed both Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR and any
    finding on proportionality would only have been relevant to a breach of
    Article 8.

12.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean failed  to
    give adequate reasons for her findings. In particular,  she  failed  to
    explain her assessment of more important pieces of the evidence and did
    not give the Appellant sufficient reasoning to clarify why and on  what
    basis the appeal had been allowed.

13.  For these reasons I am satisfied that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dean
    did make material errors of law in her decision and reasons.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dean.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 16 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


