
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00744/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 September 2019                  |On 27 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                          mr Behnam SULTANI ANWARI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladvand, Legal representative of MAAS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iran who appeals with  leave  against  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith, promulgated on  17  May
    2019 following a hearing at Taylor House on 22 February 2019.

 2. At that hearing the respondent had not been represented and  the  judge
    was concerned that she may have had insufficient information  on  which
    to make that decision.

 3. At paragraph 29 of her decision the judge records as follows:

         "After  the  hearing,  I  decided  it  was  appropriate  to   issue
         directions for further submissions to  be  made  in  light  of  the
         absence of a Presenting Officer at the hearing.  I  set  out  below
         the directions which were issued to the parties on 5 March 2019:


             To the Appellant and the Respondent:


               1. Further to the hearing of this appeal on 21 February  2019
                  when the respondent was not represented, the appellant and
                  respondent are invited to make  written  submissions  with
                  supporting evidence within 21 days on  the  issue  of  the
                  feasibility of the appellant's return to Iran in light  of
                  his claim to be undocumented.


               2. The parties are at liberty to apply  for  a  further  oral
                  hearing.


               3.  The  appellant  is,  in  any  event,  to  serve  a   full
                  respondent's bundle".


 4. It is not clear what is meant by the appellant being directed to  serve
    "a full respondent's bundle" but it does seem clear that the judge  was
    not happy to proceed on the basis of the submissions and evidence which
    she had by that stage heard.

 5. On 22 March 2019, that is within 21  days  of  the  directions  and  in
    accordance with the directions,  further  submissions  were  served  on
    behalf of the appellant.  Regrettably,  however,  it  seems  that  this
    document was not put before the judge because at paragraph  32  of  her
    decision (which was promulgated nearly two months later),  she  records
    that "No further submissions have been received from the  appellant  or
    from his representatives".

 6. Clearly, and this is accepted on behalf of the respondent  before  this
    Tribunal, this is a procedural error, because the submissions ought  to
    have been considered by the judge.

 7. It is right to record that the submissions are  not  especially  strong
    and it may well be that it would have been open to the  judge  to  give
    reasons  briefly  why  she  rejected  them,  but  however  weak   these
    submissions may have been, they ought to have been taken  into  account
    and they were not.  In these circumstances, especially as the judge had
    considered the case to be sufficiently finely  balanced  to  allow  the
    parties liberty to apply for a further oral hearing, I cannot say  that
    the procedural irregularity was so  immaterial  as  should  allow  this
    Tribunal to take no action with  regard  to  it.   A  party  should  be
    allowed to rely on submissions that have been made, and it will only be
    rarely if ever that a failure such as this will not be material.

 8. It follows that the decision will have to be remade and in my  judgment
    there will need to be a complete rehearing of  the  appeal.   In  these
    circumstances, it is appropriate to remit this case back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal so that the decision can be remade there and  I  will  so
    order.





Notice of Decision

 9. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge as containing
    a material irregularity (being the procedural error  that  the  further
    submissions which had been made on behalf of the appellant were not put
    before the judge) and direct that the appeal be remitted for  rehearing
    at Taylor House by any  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Griffith.  The hearing will be a de novo hearing with  no  findings  of
    fact retained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                    Date: 23 September 2019









