
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/00585/2016
                                                             & HU/00580/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21 March 2019                     |on 10 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                             & UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            ELHAM SHAKERIJAHROMI
                              & YASAMIN KHAKSAR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Istanbul
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  FtT  Judge  McManus,
    promulgated on 13 December 2017.

 2. The appellants are mother and daughter, citizens of Iran.  The sponsor,
    Hamid Reza Khaksar, was present at the hearing in the UT.  In  view  of
    the circumstances as they came further into the light, we allowed  time
    for consideration on behalf of  the  appellants,  through  their  legal
    representatives and the sponsor, whether to proceed with  the  appeals.
    They elected to press their case to a conclusion.

 3. The first appellant sought to enter  the  UK  as  the  husband  of  the
    sponsor, who had been granted leave  as  a  refugee.   She  provided  a
    certificate of their marriage on 20 May 2006.

 4. The ECO's refusal of that application, dated 27  November  2015,  notes
    that Elham Yazdani is present in the UK with her husband, the  sponsor.
    The ECO was not satisfied that the appellant was married  to  a  person
    with refugee status in the UK, that  the  appellant  intended  to  live
    together with the sponsor as his  spouse,  or  that  the  marriage  was
    subsisting.

 5. The second appellant's application was refused on the same  date.   For
    similar reasons, the ECO was not satisfied that the appellant was  part
    of the sponsor's family unit when  he  left  his  country  of  habitual
    residence to seek asylum, or that she was the child of a parent who was
    currently a refugee.

 6. At the FtT hearing the position was presented through the sponsor,  who
    said that his marriage to Elham Yazdani was a subsequent and  temporary
    one, which has since broken down, and that his marriage  to  the  first
    appellant was a subsisting one.

 7. The appellant has never been granted asylum in his own right, but  only
    as the husband of Elham Yazdani.

 8. The immigration rules provide at paragraph 278:

         'Nothing in these Rules shall be construed as allowing a person  to
         be granted entry clearance, leave to  enter,  leave  to  remain  or
         variation of leave as the spouse and civil  partner  of  a  man  or
         woman (the sponsor) if:

             (i) his or her marriage or civil partnership to the sponsor is
             polygamous; and

             (ii)      there is another person living who is the husband or
             wife of the sponsor and who:

                  (a)  is, or at any time since his or her marriage or civil
                  partnership  to  the  sponsor  has  been,  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; or

                  (b)  has been granted  a  certificate  of  entitlement  in
                  respect of the right of abode mentioned in Section 2(1)(a)
                  of the Immigration Act 1988 or an entry clearance to enter
                  the United Kingdom as the husband or wife of the sponsor.

         For the purpose of this paragraph a marriage or  civil  partnership
         may be polygamous although at its inception neither party  had  any
         other spouse or civil partner.'

 9. A provision extending that rule to children is at paragraph 296.

10. It was contended to us through the sponsor,  although  rather  vaguely,
    that he disclosed the true nature and history of his relationship  with
    Elham Yazdani to the SSHD when he arrived in this country  and  in  the
    proceedings leading up to this appeal.  We do not  require  to  resolve
    that issue in order to decide this case, but it appears to us unlikely.

11. The appellants' case was  rather  vague  on  whether  the  relationship
    between the sponsor and Elham Yazdani  was,  as  a  matter  of  law,  a
    marriage. If it was, then this case founders because it is contrary  to
    public policy, as expressed in the rules, for a person to obtain status
    as the husband of a refugee and then to use that status to sponsor  the
    entry of another wife, and of a child, in a polygamous arrangement.

12. It the relationship was not a  marriage,  then  the  sponsor  does  not
    appear ever to have been in  a  position  legitimately  to  be  granted
    status as the husband of a refugee; and  however  that  may  have  come
    about, there is now no perceptible basis upon which he can maintain his
    claim to refugee status.

13. The sponsor has never had status as a refugee in his  own  right  which
    would enable him to sponsor the appellants to enter the UK.

14. Mr Winter made a faint attempt to advance the case in terms of  article
    8, particularly regarding the second appellant.  However, she  has  not
    lived with the appellant for  most  of  her  childhood;  there  was  no
    evidence of the quality of their relationship; and there is  no  reason
    for the sponsor not to carry on family life with either or both of  the
    appellants in Iran.

15. No error has been disclosed which might tend towards  the  decision  of
    the FtT being  set  aside.   Everything  that  has  emerged  shows  the
    appellants' case, revolving around the sponsor, to be rather worse, not
    better, than was thought by the FtT.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    [pic]


    8 April 2019
    UT Judge Macleman


