
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00708/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st January 2019                          |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                                 samuel [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies promulgated on 31st August  2018.   At
    the appeal hearing before the Upper Tribunal  the  Appellant  has  been
    represented by Ms Appiah of Counsel and  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State has been represented Ms Everett, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

 2. The decision under appeal from First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Roopnarine-
    Davies was made following a hearing at Taylor House on 21st August 2018
    in  which  the  learned  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   considered   the
    Appellant's human rights appeal outside of the Rules, there having been
    a concession made by Counsel representing the Appellant at  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the provisions of the Immigration Rules on the basis
    of family life were not met.

 3. Within her decision the Judge found that the Appellant was born on 16th
    April 1985, was a national of Nigeria and that he had  applied  on  1st
    March 2017 for leave to remain as a partner of [NS], a British citizen,
    and their daughter [A] who was born on 9th May 2014.   [A]  also  is  a
    British citizen.  The Secretary of State had  refused  the  application
    under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  as  amended,  also  under
    paragraph 276ADE and on the basis  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    Appellant had appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   After  hearing
    evidence both from the Appellant and the Sponsor, the  Judge  found  at
    onwards that it was clear that the Appellant had  a  relationship  with
    the Sponsor and his child and they with them, but stated that the issue
    was the nature and strength of that relationship.  The Judge found,

         "I was satisfied that the Sponsor's intentions are genuine and that
         she intends to live permanently with  the  Appellant,  but  I  have
         doubts as to the Appellant's intentions given the length and nature
         of their relationship.  He presented as  a  confident  and  worldly
         individual and she as a serious and modest adult."

 4. The judge went on to find in paragraph 12,

         "The Appellant made no attempt to make  contact  with  the  Sponsor
         even though he was aware in 2013 that she  was  pregnant  with  his
         child.  He did not do so until allegedly in 2016 by which  time  he
         was an overstayer.  The Sponsor believed that  he  failed  to  make
         contact because he was out of the country, but  this  was  not  the
         case.  He had been in and out of the UK since 2010.  He married  an
         EEA national in 2014 and though he claimed  that  the  relationship
         ended in 2015 and that he and the Sponsor wished to marry.  He  has
         taken no steps to divorce her.  The Sponsor was not aware  that  he
         had been previously married until he was detained in 2017."

 5. The judge went on to find:

         "13.  ...  The  Appellant  has  not  shown  on  balance  that   the
         relationship was established since 2016.  He did not refer  to  the
         relationship in documentary form until January 2017, when  he  knew
         that he was due to be removed.  He was  unaware  of  the  Sponsor's
         earnings.  They do not share a bank  account  or  hold  any  assets
         jointly.  It was not clear how he was able to  contribute  to  food
         and clothing for their daughter, though he claimed that he was  not
         working.  He claimed that his father died in 2015 when the  Sponsor
         believed this to be in 2013.   He  has  not  shown  other  than  by
         assertion that he has no  assets  or  prospects  in  Nigeria.   His
         father had an industrial window cleaning company in which he worked
         prior to coming to the UK.  He has not shown  that  his  father  is
         dead or that his mother has dementia and he is not in contact  with
         her or his siblings in the UK. The frequency with which he  visited
         the UK and that he was in possession of a five year visa undermined
         his claims that he does not have assets.   The  Sponsor's  evidence
         was that she understood him  to  be  from  a  long  line  of  royal
         antecedents.

         14.  In coming to this view I took  of  the  precarious  nature  of
         their relationship, I took into account that the sponsor  is  a  32
         year old professional woman who has had a relationship in the  past
         and is able to form  a  judgment  of  the  Appellant's  intentions.
         Nevertheless, I  must  consider  the  evidence  in  the  round  and
         although I accept that they have a  relationship  I  have  concerns
         whether at this stage of the relationship  his  intentions  are  to
         live  with  her  permanently.   I  am  not   satisfied   that   the
         relationship is yet akin to one of husband and wife and permanent.

         15.  I  also  find  that  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
         daughter is tenuous.  The  evidence  suggested  that  his  lack  of
         status in the UK has taken precedence.  His past behaviour showed a
         complete lack of concern for her in the  first  two  years  of  her
         birth.  The relationship is only approximately  sixteen  months  or
         just over 1 year old and in its inception.  The  child  is  only  4
         years old.  She is at nursery on five days per week from 9am to 6pm
         when her mother returns home.

         16.  I do not doubt the Appellant has some  relationship  with  his
         daughter but it has not been shown  that  it  is  of  the  strength
         claimed.  I must consider her best intentions and this must be done
         without reference to his  immigration  history.   It  goes  without
         saying that it is in the best interests of the  child  to  be  with
         both parents and that if that is not possible then with the mother.
          This is a paramount, but not  the  paramount  consideration.   The
         child had been with her mother since birth.  She is  a  loving  and
         constant and consistent parent unlike the Appellant.  She has taken
         good care of her.  The child is very young.  The appellant has  not
         shown that his intentions at this stage  are  to  live  permanently
         with the Sponsor in the UK.   She  and  the  child  are  not  being
         required to leave the UK.  They are British citizens.  The  child's
         best  interests  are  to  be  with  the  mother  in  the  UK.   Her
         grandparents also live here and are close to  her  and  her  mother
         albeit they live in Preston and the Sponsor in London."

 6. The Judge went on to state that when considering Article 8 the question
    was whether the refusal was proportionate, balancing  the  strength  of
    the public interest in the removal of the Appellant against the  impact
    of removal on his partner and  daughter.   The  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant did not put forward a strong or compelling  sufficient  claim
    to outweigh the public interest in immigration control and  found  that
    the couple's relationship at its highest was only  sixteen  months  old
    and that it did not consider  that  a  temporary  separation  would  be
    disproportionate  in  all  the  circumstances.   The  Judge   therefore
    dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 7. The Appellant now seeks to appeal that decision and in that  regard,  I
    have considered both the original and the renewed  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    What is in effect argued within those Grounds of  Appeal  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in making no reference to the mandatory
    considerations of Section 117 of the Immigration  Act  2002  especially
    Section 117B(6).  This sub-section states that,

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where:

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             qualifying child, and;

         (b)  it will not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

 8. These grounds go on to argue that the  learned  Judge  gave  inadequate
    reasons  when  finding  that  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    daughter was tenuous. This finding was  said  to  be  contrary  to  the
    evidence of the Appellant and  the  mother  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    supportive father.  It is argued that the Appellant drops his  daughter
    at school and picks her up and takes her shopping, etc. and  that  they
    have been living as a family with the Appellant living with the  mother
    and the child since he was granted bail in April 2017.   It  is  argued
    that the Judge's reasons are not supported by the evidence and that the
    Judge failed to give sufficient reasons for that decision.

 9. The grounds go on to argue that the Judge erred in paragraph 20 of  the
    decision regarding temporary separation but Ms Appiah. does not  pursue
    that Ground of Appeal or part of that Ground of Appeal before me today.
     It is also argued in  the  original  grounds  that  the  decision  was
    perverse, but again that argument has not been pursued before me today.

10. In respect of the renewed grounds, it is argued that in  assessing  the
    strength of the Appellant's relationship with his child, the First-tier
    Tribunal applied a higher test than was appropriate. The grounds  point
    out that the Appellant was granted bail to the  partner's  address  and
    they live together.  It is said that the partner was surety in the bail
    application and was well-known by the school as the child's father  and
    he discharged his fatherly role accordingly.  It  is  argued  that  the
    Judge erred in finding that the relationship was tenuous and  that  the
    Appellant was not committed to the relationship with the child.

11. Although permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ford on 6th September 2018,  permission  to  appeal  was
    then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 17th December 2018.   A
    preliminary issue is the fact that First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford found
    that the Appellant sought permission to appeal four days out  of  time,
    against the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  dated  31st  August
    2018.  Judge Ford stated that the only reason given for the  delay  was
    said to be financial constraints, but she was not satisfied that it was
    unfair or unjust not to extend time and therefore did not extend  time.
    When granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  stated
    in paragraph 2,

         "Even if the judge had doubts about the Appellant's motivation  and
         the commitment to his relationship with his partner and  child,  it
         appears  that  she  accepted  (i)  the  Appellant  had  a   genuine
         relationship with his partner and child and (ii) that it was in the
         child's best interests to be brought up by  both  parents.   It  is
         arguable that the judge failed to make clear findings  relating  to
         the Appellant's  relationship  with  his  partner  and  child  with
         reference to the relevant legal framework.   In  particular  it  is
         arguable that she failed to make any clear finding  as  to  whether
         the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with the child and whether it would be unreasonable to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK for the purposes of Section 117B(6)."

12. On that basis she granted permission to appeal.  However as both  legal
    representatives agree when granting permission to appeal, Judge Canavan
    clearly should also  have  gone  on  to  consider  the  question  about
    extending time as specific to Rule  21(7)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   In  circumstances  where  the  Appellant
    makes an application to the Upper Tribunal for  permission  to  appeal,
    and that other Tribunal refused to admit the  Appellant's  application,
    that is something that has to be considered by the Upper Tribunal  when
    granting permission.  Ms Everett on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    does not object in the circumstances of this  case  to  the  permission
    being granted and the case being admitted.  On the basis that there  is
    no objection to the appeal being admitted to the Upper  Tribunal  I  do
    admit it and do extend time.  In my judgment the delay of four days  is
    not that great. I accept also what  is  said  regarding  the  financial
    constraints on the Appellant in  terms  of  actually  paying  for  thee
    grounds to be legally drafted by the solicitors or counsel which caused
    a delay. Further given the fact that Judge Canavan  did  consider  that
    the appeal potentially had arguable merit, it is appropriate  in  those
    circumstances for time to be extended and I therefore do  extend  time.
    That is not objected to by the Secretary of State in this case.

13. I am most grateful for the oral submissions by Ms Appiah of Counsel for
    the Appellant and Ms Everett for the Secretary of State.

14. Ms Appiah referred me in oral  submissions  to  some  of  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge including a letter from Head Start
    Day Nursery contained within the Respondent's bundle at page  C9  which
    is a letter dated 11th January 2017 from the Nursery  Manager  Caroline
    Turner, but signed by Deborah Davies, Director in Ms Turner's  absence.
    In that document it stated that since June 2016 the  Appellant  Mr  [A]
    had accompanied [NS] to collect [A] from nursery in New Barnet  two  to
    three times per week, when  she  is  dropped  off  and  collected  from
    nursery.  It stated that he had attended parents' evening meetings with
    [NS] to discuss [A]'s development and that the Appellant  was  also  an
    emergency contact on her records at the nursery.  It said  the  nursery
    staff had observed that he has a positive interaction with [A]  and  he
    has a pleasant character and positive interaction  with  staff  at  the
    nursery. Ms Turner writes that there might be an impact on [A]'s social
    development if Mr [A] was to leave suddenly.

15. At page 19 of the Appellant's bundle was also an  updated  letter  from
    the nursery dated 9th August 2018 again from  the  Nursery  Manager  Ms
    Turner, but signed again by Deborah  Davies.  In  this  letter  it  was
    stated  that  Mr  [A]  dropped  [A]  at  nursery  every   morning   and
    occasionally picks [A] up from the nursery at the end of the day.  That
    appears as argued by Counsel for the Appellant Ms Appiah to  have  been
    an increase in the number of times where the Appellant is dropping  [A]
    at nursery.  Again  the  letter  stated  that  the  Appellant  attended
    parents' evenings and was an emergency contact and again discussed  his
    positive reactions with [A] and the staff and the impact on [A]  if  he
    was to leave suddenly.

16. Ms Appiah argues that it is unclear in paragraph 15 of the decision why
    the Judge found that the Appellant's relationship with his daughter was
    tenuous. What the Judge should have been looking at she argues, is what
    the relationship was at the date of the hearing and bearing in mind she
    says that [A] at that stage was 4 years old, that that is the key stage
    for her and her memories to be developed.  She argues that  the  reason
    there given is inadequate. She further argues that inadequate reason is
    given in paragraph 16 where it is said  that  the  Judge  accepted  the
    Appellant had some relationship with his daughter but it has  not  been
    shown to be the strength claimed.  Ms Appiah argued that the  Appellant
    in his signed statement gave evidence in paragraphs 8 and  9  regarding
    taking responsibility  for  his  daughter's  morning  routine  included
    washing her and giving her breakfast and taking her to a nursery  every
    morning and that sometimes he would collect her from the nursery in the
    afternoon and activities they did together like going to the  park  and
    their special bond.  She also referred me to the  statement  from  [NS]
    which in paragraph 6 she mentioned how it was that when  the  Appellant
    was detained in January 2017 [A]  was  greatly  impacted  by  that  and
    regressed in different ways; she  stopped  sleeping  in  her  own  bed;
    appeared to have nightmares and she began to ask  [NS]'s  male  friends
    and male strangers if they were her daddy despite them visiting Samuel,
    the Appellant, in detention when possible.

17. Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary of State argues that the decision
    of the First-tier Judge is sustainable and that there  is  no  material
    error.  She submits that it is always a challenging  and  nuanced  task
    faced  by  any  Immigration  Judge  in  deciding  whether  or   not   a
    relationship is genuine and what motivations for any relationship might
    be.  She relied upon the fact that the Judge had  made  findings  about
    matters that the Appellant did not know about his partner's history  as
    set out in paragraph 13 of the decision and matters in which  they  had
    been inconsistent in the evidence that  they  had  given.   Ms  Everett
    argues that although the Judge did not  consider  Section  117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 when making her  findings,
    and that that is an error, it is not a  material  error  and  that  the
    Judge would have made the same findings irrespective.  She argues  that
    when one is considering Section 117B(6) one has to consider whether  or
    not the  person,  in  this  case  the  Appellant,  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child.   She  argues
    that the Judge made clear findings that the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter was tenuous and  was  not  of  the  strength
    claimed.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

18. The provisions of Section 117A-D of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as inserted by the Immigration Act 2014, do need to  be
    considered in any case in which the Tribunal is considering whether  or
    not a decision made under the Immigration Act breaches a person's right
    to respect for private and family life under Article 8 and as a  result
    would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. This is
    made clear by Section 117A(1) of the 2002  Act.   In  this  case  quite
    clearly there is DNA evidence to show that the Appellant and  [A]  were
    father and daughter.  In such circumstances she is clearly a qualifying
    child for the purposes of Section 117D being a person who is under  the
    age of 18 and who is a British citizen.   In  those  circumstances  the
    Judge should clearly have considered the  import  and  consequences  of
    Section 117B and in particular 117B(6) and considered  whether  or  not
    there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and whether or not it would be  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom.  In this case the Appellant  was
    not liable to deportation and under that Section makes  it  clear  that
    public interest does not require a  person's  removal  if  there  is  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child
    and it is not reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

19. In this case although the Judge has made  findings  regarding  what  he
    considers to be a precarious relationship between the Appellant and the
    Sponsor, and made findings at paragraph 14 that she accepted that  they
    have a relationship, but was concerned whether they  intended  to  live
    with each other permanently.  The judge has not specifically gone on to
    consider Section 117B as far as that relationship was concerned.

20. The judge found  as  far  as  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    daughter was concerned was that the Appellant's relationship  with  his
    daughter was tenuous and that the evidence  suggested  the  Appellant's
    lack of status in the UK taking  precedence  and  a  complete  lack  of
    concern for the daughter over the first two years from her  birth.  The
    Judge found their relationship was only  approximately  sixteen  months
    old and still in its inception. [A] was only 4 years old and at nursery
    five days a week from 9am to 6pm.  The Judge went on in paragraph 16 to
    say I do not  doubt  the  Appellant  has  some  relationship  with  his
    daughter, but it is has not been shown to be the strength claimed.

21. I am unclear having read the Judge's reasons as  to  exactly  what  the
    judge means by 'tenuous' and 'not of the strength claimed' when  trying
    to import that  into  whether  it  is  not  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship for the purposes of section 117B(6).  The Judge has looked
    at the longevity of the relationship and the lack of involvement by the
    Appellant during the first two years of [A]'s life.  But  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was seemingly that  the  Appellant
    had lived with the Sponsor and [A] at the Sponsor's home address  since
    he was bailed there in April 2017. Clearly as at the  date  of  hearing
    [A] was just 4 years old and therefore the Appellant  had  been  living
    with her and her mother for sixteen months, a significant proportion of
    [A]'s life. It is unclear from the Judge's findings what the Judge  had
    accepted or rejected from the evidence from the Appellant, sponsor  and
    nursery regarding the quality of the  relationship  the  Appellant  had
    with his daughter as at the date of the hearing, as  opposed  to  their
    lack of relationship over the first two years of her life.

22. I do not find that I can simply say that on the judge's  findings  that
    it would be necessarily the case that the judge would have  found  that
    the relationship between the Appellant and his daughter was not genuine
    and subsisting as at the date of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the purposes of section  117B(6).   Had  the  judge  given
    clearer reasons as to which parts of  the  evidence  was  accepted  and
    which were not that might be a different matter but simply stating that
    she accepts that he has a relationship with his daughter  but  has  not
    been shown which is the strength claimed does not allow me to make that
    finding.  I therefore do find in the circumstances of  this  case  that
    the judge's failure to consider Section 117B and in particular  117B(6)
    is a material error of law.

23.  Although  criticism  is  made  of  the  findings  in  respect  of  the
    relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor, those  findings  at
    paragraphs 12 and 13 are well reasoned and  cogent  and  were  findings
    that the Judge was entitled to make.

24. It has been submitted to me by both legal representatives that  if  any
    material error is found in the circumstances of this case  that  it  be
    appropriate for the entire decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to
    be set aside with no preserved findings of fact and for the  matter  to
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination before
    a different constituted Tribunal.  In the circumstances I do set  aside
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies and I remit
    the case back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  before  a
    differently constituted Tribunal not to be before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Roopnarine-Davies, with no preserved findings of fact.

25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any findings or orders in  respect
    of anonymity being necessary and therefore I do not make any  anonymity
    order in this case.


Signed                                  Date 31st January 2019


R F McGinty

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty


