








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00744/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 12th June 2019                     |On 14th June 2019               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                     MT

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan Counsel instructed by WTB Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Mc Vitie   Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holt promulgated on the 21st February 2019, whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's claims based on Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having  considered  all  the  circumstances  I  consider  it
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Welsh on 15th April 2019. Thus the case appeared  before
    me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law in the
    decision.

 4. The material part of the grant of leave provides:-

         2  It is arguable that the Judge applied the incorrect limb of Ex1.
         This error is potentially material, as notwithstanding  the  doubts
         the judge has regarding the evidence as outlined in[37], at [41(2)]
         the judge appears to accept  that  the  interference  would  engage
         Article 8. It is arguable that the judge  has  failed  to  make  it
         clear findings regarding Stage II of the Razgar test, and  if  that
         was met has not applied the correct test under s117B(6) or Ex1.

 5. At the outset of the hearing before me the respondent's  representative
    conceded that there were material errors of law in the decision as  set
    out in the grounds of appeal.

 6. It was conceded that in paragraph 39 the judge had  applied  the  wrong
    test as to whether the appellant could maintain her  relationship  with
    the children of her ex-partner. The judge in considering whether or not
    the relationship with the children could be maintained had applied  the
    test of whether or not  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    relationship continuing.

 7. The respondent's representative accepted that insurmountable  obstacles
    was not an applicable test in the circumstances. Whether  dealing  with
    appendix FM EX.1. or Section 117B(6) the test to be applied was whether
    or not it was reasonable for the children to leave the United  Kingdom.
    Of course that was predicated upon whether or not there was  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental  relationship  between  the  children  and  the
    appellant.

 8. The respondent's representative also conceded that in  accordance  with
    the case of R (on the application of RK) v SSHD IJR (2016)  UKUT  00031
    (IAC) an assessment had to be made  whether  or  not  the  relationship
    between the appellant  and  the  children  constituted  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship such  as  to  engage  Appendix  FM  or
    Section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 9. The respondent's representative accepted that the errors  of  law  were
    such that the appropriate course was for this  matter  to  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh. On  behalf  of  the
    appellant it was accepted that was the proper course to take.

10. Accordingly in light of the concession I rule that there  are  material
    errors of law in the decision of Judge Holt and I allow the  appeal  to
    the extent that the case is to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh.

     Notice of Decision

11. I allow the appeal to the extent that it is remitted back to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 12th June 2019





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 12th June 2019



