
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00746/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 November 2017                            |On 27 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                             Tagoe Hannah Ayeley
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, instructed via direct access
arrangements
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant, born on 29 May  1955,  is  a  national  of  Ghana.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 7 April 2004 with leave to enter for  six
    months as a visitor.  Thereafter, she remained in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully. On 22 April 2014 the appellant applied for leave to remain,
    such application being refused on 13 June 2014. A subsequent  challenge
    brought by way of judicial review was unsuccessful, and on 29 September
    2015 the SSHD served a decision to remove the appellant.  This prompted
    the making of a further application for leave  to  remain,  reliant  on
    Article 8 ECHR.  It is the SSHD's response to that application that  is
    the subject of the underlying appeal in the instant proceedings.

Appellant's underlying claim

 2. At the core of the appellant's claim to remain the  United  Kingdom  is
    her relationship with a Mr James Shelley.   Mr  Shelley  is  a  British
    citizen who was  86  years  old  as  of  the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  He was widowed  in  June  1978,  has  five  adult
    children living in the United Kingdom, ten grandchildren and six  great
    grandchildren.  Other aspects of the appellant's private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom have also been prayed in aid, such as her connections to
    the church.

Summary of the First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  White  on
    10 January 2017 and was dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  10
    February.  The relevant features of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    can be summarised thus:

      i) Although the appellant  and  Mr  Shelley  are  to  be  regarded  as
         partners for the purposes of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
         she, nevertheless, fails under the Rules because;

          a) the financial requirements of Appendix FM are  not  met  (such
             conclusion not being the subject of challenge before the Upper
             Tribunal); and,

          b)  the  appellant  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach   of
             immigration  laws  and  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
             paragraph EX.1 of the Rules.

     ii) Requiring the appellant to leave the United Kingdom does  not  lead
         to a breach of Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

Grounds of Challenge

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page in a decision dated 7 September 2017,  the  pleaded
    grounds being as follows:

      i) the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing  to  have  regard  to  the
         respondent's published policies/guidance relating to the assessment
         of "insurmountable obstacles" and "exceptional circumstances";

     ii) the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  approach  to  the  evidence
         contained in a letter from the  appellant's  general  practitioner,
         dated 5 November 2015;

    iii) the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to give sufficient  weight
         to Mr Shelley's evidence as to his phobia of flying.

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal  Mr  Turner  raised,  for  the
    first time, the following additional ground:

    (iv)     the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  consideration  of  the
         national service undertaken by Mr Shelley between 1950 and 1952;

Decision and Discussion

 6. For the reasons which follow, I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision does not contain an error of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of the appeal and I do not set it aside.

 7. Taking the grounds in turn, the application to the Upper Tribunal  sets
    out (it appears in  full)  paragraphs  3.2.7c  and  3.2.8  of  what  is
    described therein as "the Secretary of State's own  published  guidance
    as  to  the  issue  of   insurmountable   obstacles   and   exceptional
    circumstances."

 8. Mr Turner accepted that a copy of the guidance had not put  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Furthermore, it is not said that submissions  were
    made to the First-tier Tribunal to the effect that such guidance  ought
    to be considered.  At the hearing I invited Mr Turner to draw attention
    to any decision or legal principle which supported his contention  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was in  such  circumstances  required  to  take
    account of the aforementioned  aspects  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    published guidance. In reply it was asserted that it  was  a  "Robinson
    obvious" point - this being reference to the decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal in R v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  ex  parte
    Robinson [1997] 3 WLR 1162.

 9. The basis of the Robinson doctrine is, as Lord Woolf  MR  described  at
    [1998] QB at P945B-G,  that  as  organs  of  the  state  the  Appellate
    Authorities are bound to exercise their powers to  ensure  the  state's
    compliance with its international obligations.  Robinson is a  judicial
    artefact, the purpose of which is to ensure, within a  narrow  compass,
    that obvious points of Refugee Convention law did not go  unconsidered,
    with the risk that this country might find itself to have breached  its
    international obligations.  The significance  of  Robinson  is  in  its
    demonstration of the role of the courts and the  Tribunal  in  ensuring
    that the United Kingdom does not fall foul of the  Refugee  Convention,
    even where an obvious point of Convention law has been  missed  by  the
    practitioners.  It also applies on the  same  basis  to  the  ECHR,  in
    particular given Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 it is  unlawful
    for a public Authority to act in any way which is incompatible with  an
    ECHR right.

10. However, the decision in Robinson does not, in my  view,  lay  a  legal
    foundation  requiring  the  First-tier  Tribunal   to   give   specific
    consideration to guidance published by the Secretary of State as to how
    she is going to give apply the insurmountable obstacles  threshold  set
    out in paragraph EX.1  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Neither  does  the
    application  of  the  Robinson  doctrine  require  the  FtT   to   give
    consideration  to  the  SSHD's   guidance   to   her   caseworkers   on
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

11. The critical consideration  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  whether
    requiring an appellant to leave the United Kingdom would breach Article
    8 the Rules providing, in general, the Secretary of State's view as  to
    where the public interest lies in any given case.

12. In any event, having considered the passages set out the grounds I  can
    find no aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision which  could  have
    been materially affected by it having given specific application to the
    guidance. In coming to  this  conclusion,  I  have  had,  although  not
    exclusive, regard  to  those  passages  which  are  emboldened  in  the
    grounds.

13. Moving on to the second of the pleaded challenges.  This centres  on  a
    letter authored by the appellant's general practitioner on  5  November
    2015 and submitted to the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  time  of  the
    application which led to the decision under challenge.  The  main  body
    of the letter, the entirety of  which  I  have  considered,  states  as
    follows:

         "I confirm the above is registered with this practice.

         I also confirm that it would not be recommended on  health  grounds
         for a gentleman of his age with the following medical conditions to
         be forced to emigrate to Ghana.

         He would not be able to  cope  with  the  climate,  the  associated
         health risk of malaria.

         There would also be a very harmful effect by leaving  his  extended
         family and support network.

         He is appealing for his partner Hannah Tagoe to be given  leave  to
         stay in this country.

         He suffers from the long-term conditions listed  below  and  is  on
         regular medication and  receives  frequent  health  checks  at  the
         surgery.

         ..."

    The following medical conditions are then listed:

    "essential   hypertension",   "hyperlipidaemia   NOS"   and   "diabetes
    mellitus".

14. In her decision letter of 22 December  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered the aforementioned evidence stating, inter  alia,  that  "Mr
    Shelley's poor reaction to hot weather  ...  is  seen  as  speculative.
    Additionally, Mr Shelley does not currently suffer  from  malaria  and,
    therefore, is assessed on the basis that he does not suffer  from  this
    disease."  The decision also asserts that there are medical  facilities
    available in Ghana to  treat  the  conditions  with  which  Mr  Shelley
    presents.

15. The First-tier Tribunal initially considered this evidence as  part  of
    its assessment of whether there would be insurmountable obstacles to Mr
    Shelley relocating to Ghana, stating as follows at [17]:

         "I have a letter from Mr Shelley's GP ... confirming that it  would
         not be recommended on health grounds for a gentleman of his age  to
         be forced to emigrate to Ghana.  It is said that he  would  not  be
         able to cope with the climate or  the  associated  health  risk  of
         malaria and there would also be very harmful effects by leaving his
         extended family and support network.  It is  said  that  he  is  on
         regular medication and  receives  frequent  health  checks  at  the
         surgery.  As noted by the respondent, there are medical  facilities
         available in Ghana and there is  no  evidence  that  treatment  for
         diabetes or high blood  pressure,  the  conditions  from  which  he
         suffers, would not be available.  The suggestion that he  would  be
         unable to cope with the climate seems to me, with  all  respect  to
         the doctor, to be wholly speculative. Again, I do not doubt that it
         would be a very significant move for him to have to make and  would
         require  a  good  deal  of  adjustment,  but   the   threshold   of
         insurmountable obstacles sets, and it is intended to set,  the  bar
         very high, and that is the law which I have to apply.   It  is  not
         clear to what support network the  doctor  is  referring.   I  have
         already noted the evidence of Mr Shelley's daughter that it is  the
         appellant who looks after his daily needs."

16. Mr Turner asserts that the FtT was wrong to treat  the  conclusions  of
    the GP's letter as speculative and that, given the terms of the  letter
    and that it was authored by  a  medical  professional,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should have concluded that Mr Shelley would be unable to  cope
    with the climate in Ghana and that he would be at risk  of  contracting
    malaria there.

17. In my conclusion, the First-tier Tribunal did not err  in  law  in  its
    consideration of this evidence.  Whilst I accept that use of  the  term
    "speculative" may not have been entirely apt, it was  clearly  intended
    to be no more than shorthand  for  a  finding  that  the  letter  lacks
    evidence based justification for the conclusions  reached  therein  and
    that those conclusions lack precision. For example, the letter does not
    identify with any precision the meaning of the phrase "could  not  cope
    with the climate".  That phrase imports a wide range  of  possibilities
    and it is for the appellant to demonstrate those  circumstances  likely
    to prevail for Mr Shelley if he were to move to Ghana. The same can  be
    said of the GP's identification that there  is  an  "associated  health
    risk of malaria" in Ghana for Mr Shelley.  One  cannot  ascertain  from
    this  the  prospects  of  Mr  Shelley  contracting  malaria   and   the
    consequences for him if he were to do so.  It may be  that  the  letter
    was intending to convey no more than that the prospects of  Mr  Shelley
    contacting malaria are greater in Ghana than in the UK.

18. The First-tier Tribunal particularised some of its concerns  about  the
    contents of the GP's letter. It  noted  the  evidence  therein  to  the
    effect that there would be "very harmful effects [for  Mr  Shelley]  by
    leaving  his  extended  family  and  support  network".  It   correctly
    observed, however, that the other evidence before it was to the  effect
    that Mr Shelley's care needs were undertaken by the appellant and  that
    in the all the circumstances it was not clear "what support network the
    doctor is referring  to".  In  addition,  the  Tribunal  lawfully  took
    account of the absence of any evidence to the effect  that  Mr  Shelley
    could not obtain appropriate medical treatment in Ghana.

19. In summary, I do not accept that it  has  been  demonstrated  that  the
    weight that the First-tier Tribunal attached to the GP's letter  of  15
    November 2015  was  irrational  or  that  it's  consideration  of  such
    evidence was otherwise flawed by material legal error.

20. Turning then to the final ground pleaded in the notice of appeal.  This
    ground has its origins in the evidence  given  orally  by  Mr  Shelley,
    recorded at paragraph 14 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  in  the
    following terms:

         "He [Mr Shelley] said that he has never been back to Ghana, that he
         has a phobia about flying, following a very bad trip from  Thailand
         eleven years ago, that he is not very good sailor either, and  that
         he has no inclination to leave the country."

21. The First-tier Tribunal considered this evidence within the context  of
    its assessment of whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  Mr
    Shelley moving to Ghana, concluding as follows at [18]:

         "In relation to potential difficulties of travel, I can  understand
         that Mr Shelley might, after a long  and  very  uncomfortable  trip
         back to Thailand, feel very reluctant to fly again, but I  have  no
         evidence which would entitle me to find that he  has  a  phobia  of
         such description as to  render  him  psychologically  incapable  of
         flying to Ghana, were he decide  to  go  to  live  there  with  the
         appellant.  Equally I have no evidence that  would  entitle  me  to
         find that he would be incapable of withstanding  the  sea  journey,
         even though he might find it uncomfortable."

22. Mr Turner asserts the Tribunal should have proceeded on the basis  that
    Mr Shelley has a phobia of flying, given that other aspects of his  and
    the appellant's  evidence  were  found  credible,  and  that  it  acted
    irrationally in not doing so.

23. The Tribunal did not, as suggested by Mr Turner,  reject  Mr  Shelley's
    evidence on this  issue.  It  correctly  observed  that  there  was  no
    evidence before it to support  a  conclusion  that  Mr  Shelley  had  a
    condition which rendered him psychologically  incapable  of  flying  to
    Ghana.  Mr  Shelley  himself  did  not  give  evidence  that   he   was
    psychologically incapable of flying and the medical evidence before the
    Tribunal did not touch on this issue.  There was nothing irrational  or
    otherwise unlawful in the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  Mr  Shelley's
    evidence in this regard.

24. In any event, the First-tier Tribunal  observed,  in  the  alternative,
    that there was no evidence before it to  the  effect  that  Mr  Shelley
    would be incapable of undertaking a sea journey to Ghana,  if  he  were
    unable to fly there.  This aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    was not the subject of challenge in the written grounds of  appeal.  It
    was not until the hearing that Mr Turner first made the assertion  that
    such conclusion is irrational. However, I reject this contention  given
    the absence of any evidence supporting a contrary view to that taken by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

25. Moving on to Mr Turner's attempt to pursue a further ground not pleaded
    in the written application for permission to appeal i.e. that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred  in  its  consideration  of  the  national  service
    undertaken by Mr Shelley between 1950 and 1952. No  formal  application
    for permission to amend the grounds was received and no explanation was
    provided for the failure to raise the ground at  an  earlier  juncture,
    this being despite the Tribunal observing during the hearing that  such
    ground had not been pleaded.  Having considered all  the  circumstances
    of the case,  and  given  the  failure  to  plead  the  ground  at  the
    appropriate time, the failure to provide any, let  alone  an  adequate,
    explanation for such failure, the late hour at  which  the  ground  was
    eventually pleaded, the failure to make a formal application  to  amend
    the grounds and the fact that the ground is  not  obviously  strong,  I
    refuse to admit this ground for  consideration.   Had  I  admitted  the
    ground I would nevertheless have rejected it.

26. The ground focuses its challenge on the rationale found at paragraph 24
    of the Tribunal's decision, which reads:

         "I was invited to note that Mr Shelley had  done  national  service
         between 1950 and 1952 and was  described  on  his  discharge  as  a
         capable and hardworking NCO and a smart and efficient soldier  whom
         his commanding officer would be sorry to lose.  That is clearly  to
         his credit, but I am not persuaded that it can carry  the  kind  of
         weight that Mr Turner sought to place on it.   Obligatory  national
         service in peacetime, without in any way playing down  the  demands
         it would have made, seems to me a  rather  different  matter,  when
         weighing in the scales of  proportionality,  than  active  service,
         particularly voluntary active service, in the time of war."

27. Mr Turner asserts that the First-tier Tribunal was wrong to state  that
    Mr Shelley's service  was  undertaken  during  peacetime,  because  the
    Korean War was in full flow between 1950 and 1953 and British  soldiers
    saw active service in that war.

28. I am prepared to take judicial notice of the dates  between  which  the
    Korean war was fought and that  British  soldiers  saw  active  service
    during it. However, such matters add nothing to the  appellant's  case.
    Mr Shelley's own evidence on this  issue,  found  for  example  in  his
    letter of 30 September 2015 to the Home  Office  and  summarised  in  a
    letter of 5 November 2015 covering the application for leave to remain,
    is to the effect that Mr Shelley served national service  in  the  army
    under both King George VI and Queen Elizabeth II between 1950 and 1952.
     There is no reference in this evidence to  Mr  Shelley  seeing  active
    service, whether in Korea or anywhere else, nor is there  reference  to
    any aspects of Mr Shelley's national service said to be  impinged  upon
    by the Korean War.

29. Whilst I, therefore, accept that the First-tier Tribunal was  wrong  to
    treat the period between 1950 and  1952  as  being  in  "peacetime",  I
    conclude that the evidence before the Tribunal was such that this error
    is not one capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

30. Standing back and looking at the First-tier Tribunal's decision in  the
    round, I find that it took account of all  material  matters,  did  not
    take into account any material irrelevancies, properly directed  itself
    in law and came to conclusions which  were  rational  on  the  evidence
    presented.  The Tribunal was entitled to conclude that the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules had not been met, and  was  also  entitled  to
    conclude that requiring  the  appellant  to  move  to  Ghana  would  be
    proportionate to the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration  control
    -  particularly  given  that  she  has  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully since the end of 2004 and engaged in her  relationship  with
    Mr Shelley in full knowledge of this fact.

31. This appeal is, therefore, dismissed.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of  law
capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and is to remain standing.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor


