
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00456/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2016                 |On 30 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SADIA SADAF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  acting  for  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer Abu  Dhabi  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing an appeal on the  papers  brought  by  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, the present respondent, herein after "the  claimant"  against
    the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance as a family visitor.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    having decided that the claimant wanted to visit the United Kingdom for
    a purpose that engaged Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and that refusal was a disproportionate  interference  with  her
    right to a private and family life.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal reminded itself, correctly, of  the  importance
    of following the five step approach identified in  R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27 but if it then followed that direction it certainly  did
    not do it in a way that satisfied the Secretary of State.

 4. The claimant wanted to visit her brother and her  grandmother  and  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  with  aspects  of  the  case
    including  the  evidence  about  the  grandmother's  ill  health.   The
    scepticism on that point now appears regrettable because there is  good
    evidence that, sadly, the grandmother died before the  visit  could  be
    arranged and the  First-tier  Tribunal,  prompted  by  the  grounds  of
    appeal, purported to follow the decision in Abbasi and Another  (Visits
    - bereavement - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 and allowed the appeal.

 5. The  first  ground  raised  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  not
    impressive.  It refers to a  material  misdirection  in  law  of  facts
    appertaining to the date of decision and is based on the  premise  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was prevented from taking note of  events  that
    had happened since the date of decision.  I would like to have had  the
    benefit of more argument on this point but I reject the submission made
    by Mr Whitwell in support of this ground.

 6. Section 85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 says:

         "On an appeal under Section 82(1) against a decision  the  Tribunal
         may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to  the  substance
         of the decision including a matter arising after the  date  of  the
         decision."

 7. A plain reading would suggest that the Tribunal may consider  a  matter
    arising after the date of decision. This approach was restricted by  an
    earlier version of Section 85(5) of the  2002  Act.   It  introduced  a
    caveat that disapplied Section 84(4) to  entry  clearance  appeals  but
    that section has now gone.  The present Section  85(5)  says  "But  the
    Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the Secretary  of  State
    has given the Tribunal consent to do so"  and  the  subsequent  section
    tells us the meaning of  a  "new  matter"  and  one  of  its  essential
    characteristics is that it constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind
    listed in Section 84.  This is clearly not  a  new  matter  within  the
    meaning of the Act.  It is a new fact and one which in my judgement the
    Tribunal had to consider.

 8. However it does not follow from the fact that it was considered that it
    was considered properly.  In my judgement it was  not.   As  I  thought
    this Tribunal had made clear in the decision of Mostafa (Article  8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC), in cases involving applications
    for entry clearance  as  a  visitor,  Article  8  is  only  engaged  in
    particular circumstances and although it is very likely to  be  engaged
    in visits between husband and wife and parent and minor child  it  will
    be unusual for it to be engaged in other cases.

 9. The decision of the President of this  Tribunal in Abassi  and  Another
    is a reminder of the broad scope of Article 8 and is an illustration of
    the  sort of circumstances were, exceptionally, there might be  a  duty
    on the Secretary of State to promote  a  person's  private  and  family
    life. It certainly does not mean that everyone who wants to  visit  the
    grave of close relatives or enter the United Kingdom for the purpose of
    mourning can say the United Kingdom has  an  obligation  under  Article
    8(1) to promote that desire because that is simply not the law.

10. There is nothing in the evidence produced in this case that I have been
    able discern which shows any particular  reason  such  as  cultural  or
    religious expectation that makes it more than ordinarily  desirable  to
    visit the grave of a loved one, or that the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her brother in the United Kingdom was anything more  than
    a healthy respectful relationship between adult siblings.

11. In my judgement in those circumstances there is not enough evidence  to
    say the case comes  within  the  protection  of  Article  8(1).   These
    relationships are not relationships the United Kingdom  is  obliged  to
    promote.  Rather such people are expected to live independent lives and
    although it is pleasing when adult siblings get on, and  understandable
    that they might want to meet to mourn the death of  their  grandmother,
    there is no general obligation to promote these things.

12. In my judgement the Tribunal  was  wrong  not  to  set  out  the  steps
    required by Razgar and if they had been set out they would have  failed
    the first hurdle.  I note that the judge  finds  as  a  fact  that  the
    requirements of the Rules are met and that is  a  significant  but  not
    determinative feature when Article 1 is engaged, but for the reasons  I
    have given that is not the case here.

13. It follows that I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  should  not  have
    made the decision it did and I set aside the decision and I  substitute
    a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.

14. I make it plain  before  hearing  the  appeal  I  considered  carefully
    whether it was right to continue with the hearing in the absence of any
    representation from the claimant. My hesitation  comes  from  the  fact
    that she has barely had time  to  respond  to  the  notice  of  hearing
    because it was sent by airmail to the correct address on 22 August 2016
    notifying her of a hearing on 22 September 2016. Notices are deemed  to
    take 28 days to arrive by airmail. The  claimant  has  just  about  had
    enough time if not to have prepared  her  case  to  have  notified  the
    Tribunal that she was in receipt of the notice and  wanted  more  time.
    Nothing of that kind was done.

15. It follows therefore that I  am  satisfied  she  had  good  service  in
    accordance with the Rules and it was right to continue with the hearing
    in her absence.

Decision

16. Secretary of State's appeal is allowed. The decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside and a decision substituted dismissing the  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 September 2016              |

