
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00605/2020
                                                           HU/00609/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2021                       |On 18 August 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                  RB and JB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Eaton, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellants.
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The  appellants,  who  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh,  appeal  with
         permission against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         Paul) (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who  dismissed  their
         human rights appeals in a decision promulgated on  the  11  January
         2021.

      2. I am mindful that considerations arise in this  matter  as  to  the
         second appellant's mental health concerns. I observe Guidance Note
         2013, No. 1 which is concerned with  anonymity  directions,  and  I
         note that the starting point for consideration of  such  directions
         in this chamber of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  as  in  all  courts  and
         tribunals, is open justice.  Rule 14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules') contains a power  to
         make an order prohibiting the publication of  information  relating
         to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
         public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
         should not be identified.  Rule 14(7) of the 2008 Rules contains  a
         presumption that information about  mental  health  cases  and  the
         names of the people concerned in such will not be disclosed in  the
         absence of good reason. I am satisfied that  in  the  circumstances
         which arise to be considered in this matter, and in particular  the
         issue of suicide ideation, the interests of  justice  require  that
         the appellants are not named  in  these  proceedings.  I  therefore
         issue the anonymity direction detailed at the  conclusion  of  this
         decision.

      3. The hearing took place on 7 July 2021, by means of Microsoft  teams
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face-to-face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable,
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via  video  as  did
         the appellant so that she could listen  and  observe  the  hearing.
         There were no issues regarding sound,  and  no  technical  problems
         were encountered during  the  hearing,  and  I  am  satisfied  both
         advocates were able to make their respective cases  by  the  chosen
         means.

Background:

      4. The history of the appellants is set out in  the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ, the decision letter and the evidence contained in the bundle.



      5. The 1st and 2nd appellants are nationals of Bangladesh. They have a
         child born in the UK in 2016 who is also a national of Bangladesh.

      6. The 1st appellant came to the United Kingdom on 13  September  2009
         with entry clearance as a student and made various applications  to
         extend his leave.

      7. The 2nd appellant arrived in the UK on  28  January  2013  and  was
         granted leave as the 1st appellant as his  dependent.  Their  child
         was born in the UK in June 2016.

      8. In or about 2015 the 1st appellant made an application for leave to
         remain on the basis of his  family  life  and  private  life.  That
         application was refused with a right of appeal which was  exercised
         by the appellant, but his appeal was dismissed  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. There is no copy of that decision, but it is referred  to
         in the decision of Judge Paul at paragraphs 3-5 of his decision.

      9. Immigration  judge  Oliver  heard  the  appellants'  appeal  on  22
         December 2016. In a decision promulgated on 25 January 2017, he set
         out the appellant's immigration history and  the  circumstances  of
         their life  in  the  UK  which  flowed  from  the  1st  appellant's
         education in the UK and his visits back to Bangladesh. It  is  said
         that the 1st appellant's parents, and brother lived  in  Bangladesh
         and supporting documents had been provided that they were concerned
         that they would face problems if they returned  Bangladesh  because
         of attacks on the Hindu majority. There was also  further  evidence
         that the 2nd appellant's wife was 8 weeks  pregnant  and  had  iron
         deficiency and was suffering from anaemia. The  1st  appellant  had
         filed  evidence  relating  to   their   educational   achievements,
         financial evidence and medical evidence  concerning  his  wife  and
         objective evidence of the situation in Bangladesh.

     10. It is recorded that an application was made on 16 December 2016  to
         adjourn the case on the basis of medical problems and in particular
         that  the  2nd  appellant  was  under  medication  in  relation  to
         depression.

     11. Judge Oliver found that the removal of  the  appellants  would  not
         cause any interference their family life as they would  be  removed
         together. He found "they clearly cannot satisfy the requirements of
         paragraph 276ADE of the rules for the reasons given in the  refusal
         letter. The other  circumstances  put  forward  relate  the  wife's
         medical  problems  which  are  not   in   themselves   unusual   or
         exceptional. They have not in any event submit evidence of  private
         life in the UK beyond that  expected  of  those  in  the  UK  on  a
         temporary basis."

     12. Whilst permission was granted to appeal that  decision,  the  Upper
         Tribunal subsequently dismissed the appeal, and it is recorded that
         the High Court refused  permission  to  appeal.  The  1st  and  2nd
         appellants were considered to be "appeal rights  exhausted"  by  30
         October 2018.

     13. On 31 October 2018 the 1st appellant made a further application for
         leave  to  remain  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  he
         subsequently varied to an application of a limited leave to  remain
         under the Tier 2 general migrant category, and which was eventually
         refused on 29 April 2019 with an administrative review. The  review
         was lodged but the refusal decision of the original application was
         maintained on 13 June 2019.

     14. On 25 June 2019 a further application was made for indefinite leave
         to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

     15. The respondent refused the application in a decision  letter  dated
         17 December 2019.

     16. The decision set out the family's immigration history  as  set  out
         above. As to the issues raised by  the  appellant,  the  respondent
         took into account the length of residence of the 1st  appellant  of
         10 years and 3 months but stated that it was  not  considered  that
         the length of residence itself was significantly compelling  for  a
         grant of leave to remain outside of the rules. His lawful residence
         was 9 years and one month from 13  September  2009  to  30  October
         2018. The respondent considered that he had resided  in  Bangladesh
         for 27 years prior to entering the  UK  and  thus  had  significant
         knowledge of the language, culture and customs in Bangladesh  which
         could be used to reintegrate into the community.

     17. The 1st appellant's qualifications and employment were  taken  into
         account and the respondent considered that he would be  in  a  more
         advantageous position than other Bangladeshi nationals.

     18. As to the 1st appellant's private life and social ties in  the  UK,
         his employment, education and involvement in a range  of  voluntary
         organisations, it was considered that he had not evidenced that his
         ties were so exceptional to warrant a grant of leave to  remain  in
         the UK. The respondent considered that he would be able  to  engage
         with   employment,   further   education   or   similar   volunteer
         opportunities in Bangladesh if he wished to do so.

     19. As to family life, his wife entered the UK in January 2013 and  her
         length of residence of 6 years and 11 months not considered  to  be
         exceptional to warrant either her or both of them to be required to
         remain in the UK indefinitely.

     20. The respondent considered  the  evidence  provided  that  his  wife
         during 2019 had severe depression and  anxiety  and  hypothyroidism
         and  anaemia  but  that  evidence  available  to  the  Home  Office
         demonstrated  that  there  were  medical  facilities  available  in
         Bangladesh although the standard of facilities  was  likely  to  be
         different to that in the UK and psychiatric treatment would also be
         available.

     21. Consideration was given to the appellant's minor child aged 3 years
         and 6 months,  but  it  was  not  considered  that  her  length  of
         residence was significant to warrant a grant of  leave  outside  of
         the rules. It was considered that given her age  her  greatest  tie
         was to her parents and not the UK and  thus  it  was  in  her  best
         interests for her to remain with her parents as a family unit. They
         could return as a family unit and continue family life together.

     22. The decision letter made reference to the issue  raised  that  they
         would be unable to return to Bangladesh to threats  that  they  and
         family members had received in Bangladesh of extremist groups.  The
         respondent considered that if they feared persecution,  they  could
         apply for leave on protection grounds (claiming asylum) could lodge
         an asylum claim at a screening unit.

     23. The application was therefore refused under paragraph  322  (1)  of
         the Immigration Rules that the  variation  of  leave  to  enter  or
         remain being sought for a purpose not covered by the rules.

     24. Notwithstanding what was  set  out  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,
         consideration was given to whether the  circumstances  warranted  a
         grant of limited leave to remain on the basis of family life  under
         Appendix  FM  or  under  paragraph  276ADE  (private   life).   The
         appellants  were  not  eligible  to  apply  because  none  of   the
         appellants were British citizens or settled in the UK and thus  the
         claim was only considered under the private life  route.  The  same
         assessment was set out as summarised above in relation to  the  1st
         appellant's private life.

     25. The respondent considered  whether  any  exceptional  circumstances
         which would render refusal a  breach  of  article  8  of  the  ECHR
         because it would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
         1st appellant, another family member or relevant child. Taking into
         account the best interests of the child, respondent considered that
         the appellants had provided no information or evidence to establish
         there are any exceptional circumstances in the case.

     26.    The    respondent    therefore    refused    the    application.



     27. The appellants appealed that decision to the FtT on the 11 December
         2020. In a decision promulgated on 11 January 2021 he dismissed the
         appeals.

     28. The FtTJ heard evidence from the 1st appellant but not from the 2nd
         appellant as a result of the medical report (see paragraph [15]).

     29. The FtTJ set out the immigration  history  of  the  family  and  at
         paragraphs [3] - [5] summarised the decision of Judge  Oliver  made
         in January 2017. At paragraph [6] the FtTJ set  out  the  documents
         submitted on behalf of the  appellants  which  included  an  expert
         psychiatric report in respect of  the  2nd  appellant  and  further
         correspondence including a letter from Dr Rahaman  reflecting  upon
         the availability of treatment and the overall situation  Bangladesh
         versus  psychiatric  conditions  and  reports  of   mental   health
         treatment condition in Bangladesh.

     30. The FtTJ summarised the evidence from the appellants  (  [8]-[12]),
         the psychiatric evidence (at [13]-[16]) and the submissions of  the
         advocates at [17]-[22]. The FtTJ's analysis  and  factual  findings
         are set out at paragraphs [23]- [27]. They  can  be  summarised  as
         follows.

     31. The  FtTJ  noted  that  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
         appellants focused primarily on the "psychiatric evidence and  that
         the daughter of the family although still under 5 years old  to  be
         treated as having been fully integrated into the UK".

     32. The FtTJ found that the only significant feature that distinguished
         the appeal from the  previous  appeal  was  that  the  "psychiatric
         evidence is now available whereas previously there was just medical
         evidence that pointed towards  the  2nd  appellant  been  depressed
         following the birth of the child " (at [23] ).

     33. The  FtTJ  considered  that  there  was  no  evidence  advanced  or
         developed in relation to the 2nd appellant's  family  circumstances
         in Bangladesh and that whilst there was an assertion she  would  be
         treated as a "mad person" that was not evidenced  either  from  the
         2nd appellant's family and he rejected the assertion that she would
         be ostracised as a result of suffering depression. The  judge  also
         considered that on the evidence  of  the  relevant  child  had  not
         suffered as a result of her mother's ill health and that they  were
         a "fully functioning family" and that this could  be  continued  in
         Bangladesh.  In  addition  the  judge  did  not  accept   the   1st
         appellant's evidence in relation to his own  family  on  the  basis
         that he had  significant  support  and  achieved  good  educational
         qualifications.

     34. At [26] he did not accept the medical evidence  showed  that  there
         was an Article 3 risk nor  that  her  medical  condition  was  such
         engage Article 8. At [27] the judge observed that he was not  taken
         to the background evidence as to medical  facilities  available  in
         Bangladesh, but that medical attention could be  obtained  in  that
         country and that as to the "core issue in the appeal"  it  had  not
         been  demonstrated that there were "insurmountable obstacles to the
         family reintegrating in Bangladesh." The judge concluded  that  the
         appellants "could not strengthen their case by reliance on  section
         117B and the private life provisions of 276AE are dealt with in the
         context of my decision about the insurmountable obstacles  relating
         to the appellant's wife." He therefore dismissed the appeal.

     35. Permission to appeal was sought and permission was refused by  FtTJ
         Chohan but on renewal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Grubb  on  19
         March 2021 for the following reasons;

         "In  reaching  adverse  findings  against  both  appellants   under
         paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi), the  judge  arguably  erred  in  law  by
         applying the wrong test, namely whether there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" to their reintegration in  Bangladesh  rather  than  the
         correct test  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  integration.  The
         materiality of any error will need to be established. Permission is
         granted generally."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     36. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of  the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face-
         to-face hearing and that this could take place via Microsoft teams.
         Both parties have indicated that they were content for the  hearing
         to proceed by this  method.  Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed  the
         hearing to enable oral submissions to  be  given  by  each  of  the
         parties. I am grateful for their assistance and  their  clear  oral
         submissions.

     37. Mr Eaton of Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant and  relied
         upon the written grounds of appeal and the written submissions.

     38. In his oral submissions, he relied upon paragraphs 2  -  4  of  the
         written grounds where it  was  argued  that  the  appeal  had  been
         brought on the grounds that the removal  of  the  appellants  would
         breach Article 8 of the ECHR and that a  critical  issue  that  the
         judge was required to determine was whether "there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into  the
         country to which they would have to go required  to  leave  the  UK
         (paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi)). However the FtTJ failed to  determine
         that issue and dismissed the appeal on the basis that  it  had  not
         been demonstrated that there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the
         family reintegrating in Bangladesh  (see  paragraph  [27])  of  the
         decision.

     39. Mr Eaton therefore  submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
         applying the wrong test of "insurmountable obstacles"  which  is  a
         more demanding test than the one he was required  to  and  did  not
         apply the test of "very significant obstacles". He  submitted  that
         given the words used by the judge at paragraph 27 of his  decision,
         it was plainly the position that the judge erred in law and that he
         applied the wrong test.

     40. He  submitted  that  they  were  2  separate  tests  and  that  the
         Immigration Rules used a different test when considering  different
         rules. The test of "insurmountable obstacles" is  that  used  under
         EX1 and EX 2 and sets out a heightened test. By  reference  to  the
         decision  in  Lal  v  SSHD,  he  submitted   that   "insurmountable
         obstacles" had been defined as "very significant  difficulties  and
         those which are literally impossible to overcome.

     41.  Whilst  the  test  of  "very  significant  obstacles"  is  also  a
         heightened  threshold  it  is  a  lower  threshold   to   that   of
         "insurmountable  obstacles".  The   test   of   "very   significant
         obstacles" refers to  obstacles  which  are  very  significant  but
         through a degree  of  hardship  could  be  overcome.  He  therefore
         submitted it was plain that there was a  different  test,  but  the
         judge had not drawn any distinction nor addressed the correct  test
         and thus he had misdirected himself in law.

     42. Whilst the UTJ granting permission had stated that the  materiality
         of any error had to be established, Mr Eaton submitted  that  given
         his misdirection in law this must be a material error and therefore
         the decision should be set aside on this basis.

     43. Paragraph 5 of the written grounds refers to the psychiatric report
         and that the removal of the 2nd appellant would  cause  a  "serious
         deterioration in her mental health" and would increase the risk  of
         committing suicide (15.2).  The  opinion  was  not  dependent  upon
         treatment in Bangladesh being inadequate or unavailable, but it was
         said that this constituted a "very significant  obstacle  to  their
         integration". The judge was obliged to give reasons addressing that
         contention but erred in law by failing to do so.

     44. Mr Eaton submitted that the judge had assumed a  level  of  support
         would be available  in  Bangladesh  but  should  have  applied  the
         decision in Savran v Denmark (2019) ECHR.

     45. Mr Eaton submitted that the FtTJ erred in law  by  looking  at  the
         situation now rather than addressing the psychiatric evidence as to
         the position in  Bangladesh  upon  return.  The  skeleton  argument
         provided by counsel for the hearing at paragraph 13   set  out  the
         "very significant obstacles to their  integration"  which  included
         the real risk of suicide, the real  risk  that  the  2nd  appellant
         mental health with seriously deteriorate if removed and  at   (  c)
         that "discrimination towards people with mental illness is that she
         is likely to suffer from her family, the 1st appellant's family and
         society more widely". Thus the issue had been raised of stigma  and
         evidence had been provided of this (see  report  of  Dr  Rahman  at
         [p.93AB]). In that report the doctor relied upon his own experience
         and had a level of expertise. The key point is that on return there
         would be a marked deterioration in the  2nd  appellant's  condition
         including the risk  of  suicide  therefore  there  would  be  "very
         significant obstacles  to  integration  "to  Bangladesh.  Mr  Eaton
         submitted that the evidence of the  psychiatrist  was  based  on  a
         deterioration in the 2nd appellant's medical condition upon  return
         to Bangladesh and that  the  prognosis  was  made  irrespective  of
         whether there was medical provision, and it will be made available.
         The FtTJ erred in law because he looked at the situation as it  was
         rather than on the basis  of  how  it  would  be  with  the  family
         returning to Bangladesh.

     46. Mr Eaton made reference to paragraph  7  of  the  grounds  and  the
         FtTJ's assessment of the minor child at [24] that she had  "clearly
         not suffered as  a  result  of  her  mother's  ill-health".  It  is
         submitted that there was no evidential basis for that  finding  and
         even if that was a finding reasonably open to the judge, it did not
         answer the material issue which was the effect upon  the  child  of
         the appellants being removed to Bangladesh. Mr Eaton submitted that
         it had been argued before the judge that there would be  an  impact
         upon the child if they were returned to Bangladesh and thus was not
         considered in any section 55 consideration.

     47. At [24] the judge found "this is a  fully  functioning  family,  as
         appears to be at the forefront of their cases staying  in  the  UK,
         and there is no reason to believe that it cannot  be  continued  in
         Bangladesh". In light of the psychiatric evidence about the  impact
         on the 2nd appellant's mental health if removed to  Bangladesh  and
         the implications for that for her capacity to parent a child,  this
         finding was inadequately reasoned or irrational. The judge was duty-
         bound to explain how we arrived at the finding at [24] the light of
         the psychiatric evidence which constituted a reason  for  believing
         they  could  not  continue  as  a  "fully  functioning  family"  in
         Bangladesh.

     48. It was submitted that the appellants 'evidence  was  that  the  1st
         appellant's family would not  accept  his  continuing  relationship
         with his wife on account of her  mental  illness  and  had  exerted
         pressure on him  to  separate  from  her.  The  judge  reject  that
         evidence because at [25] he stated, "the 1st  appellant's  evidence
         in relation to his own family, is, in my view, tainted by the  fact
         that he has clearly had significant support and indeed has achieved
         good education qualifications, and there is no  reason  to  believe
         that his own family would not provide the necessary support." It is
         submitted on behalf of the appellant that that was not a reasonable
         basis for rejecting the evidence about the 1st appellant's family.

     49. Mr Bates, in his oral submissions relied upon the Rule 24  response
         which stated that whilst  the  judge  referred  to  "insurmountable
         obstacles" at paragraph 27, this was likely a typographical cut-and-
         paste error. Even if that were not the case, it is difficult to see
         that this would have been a material error in light of the findings
         of fact. The response submits  that  the  judge  clearly  gave  the
         medical  evidence  very  careful   consideration   and   that   his
         conclusions with respect to reintegration were properly reasoned.

     50. In his oral submissions Mr Bates submitted that  the  reference  to
         "insurmountable obstacles" was in the  context  of  the  family  at
         paragraph 27 and therefore the judge was mindful of the  fact  that
         it was a family unit.

     51. In any event there was no material difference between the  2  tests
         and that it would be generally expected to see the  strongest  case
         to be that relating to family life rather than private life in  the
         context  where  a  family  unit  returning  to  their  country   of
         nationality alongside familiarity with the culture and language and
         family support available.

     52. Mr Bates submitted that  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  with  the
         arguments concerning the ostracism of the family as a result of her
         mental health as set out at paragraph [24] where the judge observed
         that it was a  "really  curious  feature  of  the  case"  that  "no
         evidence has been advanced and developed in  relation  to  the  2nd
         appellant's family circumstances in Bangladesh". The judge also was
         not satisfied that a husband's family would ostracise  her  in  the
         way claimed. The judge formed the view that this  was  "far-fetched
         and fanciful". Whilst the judge accepted the  medical  evidence  of
         the  depression,  there  was  no  evidence  that  their  child  was
         suffering from any behavioural difficulties or  not  developing  at
         school.

     53. Mr Bates submitted that  the  judge  considered  the  argument  put
         forward concerning social stigma that was not satisfied that it was
         made out and that he had no evidence of  the  2nd  appellant's  own
         family had treated this way.

     54. As to the 2 different tests, any mistake made by the judge  was  in
         terminology rather than the way the judge had assessed  or  applied
         the evidence. He submitted that it was unfortunate that  the  judge
         had used the term "insurmountable obstacles" but if  the  judgement
         was read as a whole, the judge did apply the correct test.

     55. As to the 1st appellant's wife's mental health  and  the  issue  of
         section 55 (best interests of the child), the starting  point  with
         the best interests child were to be with both parents and based  on
         the FtTJ's finding that there was extended  family  available  this
         would provide support and would be in the  best  interests  of  the
         relevant child. The appellant's child was not a "qualifying child".

     56. As to the impact on the 2nd appellant's mental  health,  whilst  it
         was argued that it was not a matter of accessing treatment but  the
         issue of a  potential  decline,  the  judge  had  stated  that  the
         appellant had a supportive  husband  and  was  not  satisfied  that
         family support would not be available.

     57. Therefore when looked at holistically, even if the correct test was
         applied, the factual findings made by the judge that she would have
         family support from both sides therefore make  this  a  sustainable
         decision.

     58. Mr Eaton by way of reply submitted that the 2 tests were  different
         tests in law and that the judge had therefore misdirected  himself.
         "Insurmountable obstacles" under EX1 and EX 2 are premised  on  the
         basis of the appellant and child have residence in the UK and where
         1 of the parties has a right to remain. This was not  the  position
         with both of these appellants.

     59. As to family support in Bangladesh,  the  judge  misunderstood  the
         evidence.  The  1st  appellant's  family  had  previously  provided
         support but that was now no longer available because the family had
         relinquished that support due to his wife's mental health.

     60. Mr Eaton submitted that the key point related to  the  impact  upon
         the child in the light of the mother's deterioration in this  would
         have a serious impact upon the child's welfare.

     61. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I
         now give.

Decision on error of law:

     62. I have had the opportunity to consider the  respective  submissions
         of the advocates as summarised above. Having done so I am satisfied
         that the judge made a material misdirection in law by applying  the
         wrong test of "insurmountable obstacles" rather than those relevant
         to  whether  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles"   to   the
         appellants reintegration to Bangladesh.

     63. It is accepted on behalf of  the  respondent  that  the  judge  did
         appear to apply the wrong test as can be  seen  by  the  references
         made at paragraph [27] of the decision. Whilst it is  submitted  on
         behalf of the respondent that this was most likely a  typographical
         error,  the  terminology  used  of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  is
         repeated within  the  short  concluding  paragraph  at  [27]  which
         indicates in my judgement that it was not a typographical error but
         that this was the test that was being applied.

     64. EX 2 defines "insurmountable obstacles" for the purposes of  EX1(b)
         as "the very significant difficulties which would be faced  by  the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

     65. There is no dispute between the parties as to the relevant law that
         was applicable when considering the  issue  of  whether  there  are
         "very significant obstacles".

     66. In the decision of SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813,  Lord Justice
         Sales in considering a foreign criminal's  "integration"  into  the
         country where he is to be deported, stated at [14]  that  the  idea
         "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as
         to whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of
         understanding how life in the society  in  that  other  country  is
         carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
         reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to  operate
         on a day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
         reasonable time a variety of human relationships to give  substance
         to the individual's private or family life.

     67. Whilst I consider Mr Bates is correct in his submission  that  both
         tests require a heightened threshold, for the reasons  set  out  in
         the grounds and the oral submissions, the test to be applied were 2
         different tests contained in 2 different legal rules and  also  had
         to be considered in the context of  the  particular  factual  claim
         advanced on behalf of the appellants.

     68.  In  my  judgement  the  issue  is  one  of  materiality;  a  legal
         misdirection would not render the decision to be in error based  on
         the assessment of the evidence made by the judge if it  provided  a
         sound basis on a proper application of the law.

     69. One of the issues before the FtTJ related the circumstances of  the
         2nd appellant and her mental health and this was said to constitute
         a "very significant obstacle" to her integration.  Not in terms  as
         to whether there would be adequate treatment  available  which  the
         judge referred to at [27] but that the medical evidence relied upon
         (set out in the report of Dr Duhmad) was that the  removal  of  the
         2nd appellant would cause severe deterioration in her mental health
         and increase the risk of  suicide  and  it  was  this  which  would
         constitute a "very significant obstacle".

     70. Whilst the FtTJ stated at [26] that he did not  consider  that  the
         2nd appellant's medical condition was such  to  engage  Article  8,
         that did not dispose of the issue as to whether  it  constituted  a
         very significant obstacle to  reintegration.  In  this  context,  I
         accept Mr Eaton's submission that the FtTJ approached  the  factual
         circumstances,  and  the  situation  is  it  was  now  rather  than
         considering the position as it would be in Bangladesh upon return.

     71. Whilst Mr Bates makes the valid point that the judge made a finding
         that the extended family would provide support for the  appellant's
         wife,  the  argument  made  in  the  grounds  is  that  the   first
         appellant's evidence was that  his  family  would  not  accept  the
         continuing relationship with his wife  on  account  of  her  mental
         illness and had exerted pressure on him to separate from her. I  do
         not follow the reasoning set  out  at  [25]  that  the  appellant's
         evidence was tainted by the fact that he had  "significant  support
         and achieved good educational qualifications". On  the  appellant's
         evidence his account was that the family had  provided  support  in
         the past but that they had ended the support given previously as  a
         result of his wife's mental illness and therefore there appears  to
         have been a misunderstanding of the evidence and the fact that they
         had previously supported him did not provide a basis for  rejecting
         the evidence that they were not presently hostile to him.

     72. As to the issue of stigmatisation of mental  health  conditions  in
         Bangladesh, whilst the FtTJ  dismissed  this  as  "far-fetched  and
         fanciful" at [24], there was evidence set out in a  report  from  a
         physician in Bangladesh which provided some evidential support  for
         this. There is no reference to that in the assessment as to whether
         the  issue  of  such  stigmatisation  applied  to   the   appellant
         circumstances.

     73. Mr Bates submitted that the error was not material because the fact-
         finding made by the judge was to the effect that the 2nd  appellant
         would have family support  from  both  sides.  At  [24]  the  judge
         referred to there being no evidence advanced to show that she would
         be treated as a "mad person" or from the family. The evidence  from
         the appellant's wife was that her fear in this regard was based  on
         the circumstances of her aunt and how she was treated and therefore
         there was  some  factual  basis  for  this  alongside  the  general
         evidence set out in the physicians letter.

     74. For all of these reasons I consider that the grounds are  made  out
         and that the decision reached  discloses  material  errors  of  law
         requiring the judge's decision to be set aside.

     75. I have therefore considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for  a  further  hearing.  In
         reaching that decision I have given careful  consideration  to  the
         Joint Practice Statement  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
         Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

         "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     76. I have considered the further consideration of the  appeal  in  the
         light of the practice statement recited above and by  reference  to
         the  history  of  the  appeal.  Both  advocates  agree   that   the
         appropriate course  is  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a rehearing. It will be necessary for oral evidence to
         be given to deal with the evidential issues, and therefore  further
         fact-finding will be necessary and in the  light  of  the  relevant
         documentary evidence, and in  my  judgement  the  best  course  and
         consistent with the overriding objective is for it to  be  remitted
         for a hearing before the FtT.

     77. It is not necessary to make any  further  directions  as  they  are
         likely to be dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal in the light  of
         the case management powers. However, as the appeal centres upon the
         mental health of the 2nd appellant, it is likely  that  an  updated
         report will be required.



Notice of Decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be  set  aside
and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or their family members.   This  direction  applies
both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated       29/7/ 2021
