
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00677/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 May 2017                             |On 30 May 2017                   |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                       mr Warren Steve Emanuel Mowatt
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Alexander, Counsel, instructed by Windsor Croft
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has permission to challenge the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pacey sent  on  19  April  2016  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision made by the respondent to refuse leave  to  remain
    on human rights grounds.  The appellant is a  citizen  of  Jamaica  who
    came to the UK in December 1999 and has remained unlawfully since.   He
    is the maternal uncle of four children whose mother is KM. The children
    are British citizens.

2.   As advanced by Ms Alexander the grounds have  three  main  prongs.   It
    was argued first of all that the judge  erred  in  her  application  of
    subparagraphs (4) and (5) of  s117B  of  the  NIAA  2002,  as  she  had
    accepted the appellant enjoyed a family life relationship with the four
    children of his aunt, whereas subparagraphs (4), (5) are considerations
    applicable  to  private  life  only.   In  amplifying  this  ground  Ms
    Alexander also submitted that the judge had failed to  understand  that
    the appellant fell within the scope of EX1(a)(i), in that he enjoyed  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his aunt's  children,
    two of whom have resided in the UK for seven years.  The second  ground
    was that the judge had wrongly focused on the impact of removal on  the
    appellant, rather than the  impact  on  all  persons  affected  by  his
    removal, the children in particular.  She should have accepted that  it
    would be unjustifiably harsh for the children to have to go and live in
    Jamaica.  The appellant's third ground was that  the  judge  failed  to
    carry  out  a  proper  best  interests  of  the  child  assessment   or
    alternatively approached it erroneously in treating the fact  that  the
    eldest was nearly 18 as important.  Finally it was submitted  that  the
    judge erred in failing to have regard to the aunt's written evidence.

3.   I am grateful to the submissions I heard from both representatives.

4.   It is convenient if I deal first with the last  mentioned  ground.   It
    is misplaced.  It is clear from paragraph 28 that the judge  took  into
    account the aunt's  written  evidence.   The  judge  was  incorrect  to
    describe it as a witness  statement,  since  it  was  in  the  form  of
    letters, but paragraph 28 makes clear that  the  written  evidence  put
    forward was considered.  Indeed, the main point made by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 28 was, that she could not attach significant weight  to  the
    aunt's written evidence because "the sister  was  not  called  to  give
    evidence as could reasonably have been done, so it was not possible  to
    explore with her what she had said in  her  witness  statement  arising
    around the childcare issues".  This ground  appears  to  have  targeted
    what was said by Judge  Pullig  in  his  decision  refusing  the  first
    application for permission to appeal, but  Judge  Pullig's  (incorrect)
    understanding of the  evidence  before  the  judge  on  this  score  is
    irrelevant to my task of deciding whether the judge materially erred in
    law.

5.   Before addressing the other grounds, it is also convenient  to  address
    the argument raised by Ms Alexander before me that the judge failed  to
    consider that the appellant was in a  parental  relationship  with  the
    children and so came within EX.1(a)(i).  The judge did not err  in  not
    considering  this  matter  because  on  the  evidence  before  her  the
    appellant was plainly not in a parental relationship with his  sister's
    children.  On the basis of the evidence before her the judge reasonably
    concluded that his sister was a single mother  and  that  although  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his nephews he
    did not live with them and he was not their parent or  legal  guardian.
    At paragraph 18 the judge stated that "[h]is relationship, accepted  as
    genuine, with  his  nephews  in  the  UK,  does  not  fall  within  the
    parameters of Appendix FM".

6.   Returning to the first three grounds in order, I am not persuaded  that
    the judge materially erred in  her  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    appeal in relation to s117B.  It is perhaps unfortunate that the  judge
    sought to rely at paragraph 26 on the case of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ  74
    since she did in fact conduct a separate examination of the appellant's
    case outside the Rules, albeit later describing herself as  doing  this
    in the alternative.  That examination, however, sufficiently  addressed
    the issue of whether there were compelling or exceptional circumstances
    warranting a grant of leave outside the Rules.   At  paragraph  33  the
    judge stated:

    33.  I would add that if I had proceeded to consider article 8  outside
         the rules and had dealt with the issue of proportionality  I  would
         have  found  that  the  public  interest  outweighed  that  of  the
         Appellant under s.117B(4) and (5). Moreover, in considering s.55  I
         would note that the Appellant is not in the position of a parent to
         his nephews.  No evidence has been provided of the  involvement  of
         their father in their lives and he does not live with them.

7.   Whilst  this paragraph is somewhat cryptic, it cannot be said  that  it
    discloses that in assessing the appellant's case outside the Rules  the
    judge  only  had  regard  to  s117B(4)  and  (5)  considerations.    In
    paragraphs 25-31 the judge considered, inter alia, the circumstances of
    the children and the appellant's involvement in  their  lives  and  the
    appellant's poor immigration history, demonstrating  thereby  that  the
    considerations weighed in the balance by the judge were not confined to
    s117B(4) and (5).   Ms  Alexander  sought  to  reinforce  her  argument
    regarding this matter by invoking the reasoning of the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the reported case of Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138
    (IAC).  However, whilst that case assists her argument  that  s117B(4),
    (5) concern private life, not family life, she fails to note  that  the
    head  note  to  that  case  makes  two  other  points.   One  is   that
    "precariousness" is a criterion of relevance to family life as well  as
    private  life  cases  and  is  an  established  part   of   Article   8
    jurisprudence.  The body of the decision in Rajendran makes clear  that
    this means that even  cases falling outside  s117B(4),  (5) -  because
    they concern family life rather than private life -are. still  subject
    to established Article 8 jurisprudence on precariousness.  That is very
    significant in the appellant's case because the judge  expressly  found
    at paragraph 30 that the ties he formed in the UK  with  three  of  his
    nephews were plainly formed at a time when his immigration  status  was
    precarious.  Further, the head note in Rajendran makes clear that s117A-
    D  considerations  are  not   exhaustive   of   all   public   interest
    considerations and so, one way or another, the judge cannot be  faulted
    for  clearly  weighing  against  the  appellant  his  poor  immigration
    history.

8.   As regards the appellant's third ground, I discern  no  material  error
    in the judge's assessment of the children's best  interests.   Contrary
    to Ms Alexander's submission, neither the judge nor the  respondent  in
    the refusal decision contemplated that the children  were  expected  to
    leave the UK.  The respondent had expressly acknowledged in her refusal
    letter that it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK.
    The only issue, therefore, was whether it was proportionate  to  remove
    the appellant on the footing that the children would remain in  the  UK
    with their mother.

9.   Whilst the judge can be criticised for not dealing  in  greater  detail
    with the best interests of the  children,  paragraphs  27  and  28,  at
    paragraph 33 of the judge's decision identify a  sufficient  basis  for
    her conclusion that the circumstances of the children would  not  cause
    the decision to remove the appellant  to  be  a  disproportionate  one.
    What was said in paragraph  33  could  not  be  clearer:  "moreover  in
    considering Section 55 I would note that the appellant is  not  in  the
    position of a parent to his nephews.  No evidence has been provided  of
    the involvement of their father in their lives and he  [the  appellant]
    does not live with them".  The clear thrust of  the  judge's  reasoning
    was that the best interests of the children were served by remaining in
    the care of their mother and her other family close by "who  reasonably
    could provide assistance with childcare" and "single mothers are  able,
    allbeit sometimes with some difficulty, to cope with  childcare  issues
    without having to rely on foreign national sibling  with  no  leave  to
    remain" (paragraph 27).  Moreover, it was clearly of central importance
    to the judge that the appellant had failed to discharge the  burden  of
    proving that the children's circumstances were as claimed: that was the
    principal point made at paragraph 28 when noting  the  failure  of  the
    children's mother to attend his appeal hearing.

10.  What has just been said will  suffice  to  deal  with  the  appellant's
    contention that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's removal on the children.  Her basic position, one  properly
    adopted on the evidence, was that the appellant had failed to establish
    that he was a parental figure in the children's lives.

11.  During submissions Ms Alexander made reference to a Family Court  order
    dated 3 May 2017 which is an  application  for  the  appellant  to  be
    granted parental responsibility for two of the children.  That was  not
    before the judge and post-dates  her  decision.   As  such  it  is  not
    relevant to the issue of whether the judge  materially  erred  in  law.
    That court order may be pertinent to further representations  that  the
    appellant might seeks to make to the Secretary of State, but it is  not
    relevant to my decision on this appeal.

12.  For completeness I note that there was previous correspondence  between
    the appellant's representatives  and  the  Tribunal  regarding  whether
    Upper Tribunal Judge Finch meant to grant permission.  It is clear from
    the file that it was decided by Principal Judge Dawson that the  appeal
    should proceed to a hearing and I have  proceeded  on  the  basis  that
    accordingly there was a valid grant of permission, notwithstanding that
    neither Judge Pullig nor UTJ Finch identified any  arguable  errors  in
    the judge's decision.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly her decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 26 May 2017
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




