
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00017/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Friday 19 March 2021                    |On 31 March 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             SUKUMAR GUNASEKARAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  S  Bellara,  Counsel  instructed   by   Legend
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Burnett promulgated on 19 October 2020 ("the Decision").  By the
   Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 5 December 2019 refusing a human rights claim
   based on his private life.


2. The Appellant's claim was made in the context of an application to
   remain in the UK based on his long residence.  He asserts that he has
   spent ten years living lawfully in the UK.  The Appellant came to the UK
   as a student on 24 July 2009 with leave to 28 May 2011.  His leave was
   subsequently extended as the dependent of his partner who had leave first
   as a student and then as a Tier 2 migrant until 24 August 2019.  The
   Respondent contends that the leave of the Appellant's partner and the
   Appellant's own leave was validly curtailed to end on 27 November 2018.
   Thus, she says that, at 24 July 2019 when the ten year period ended, and
   at 22 August 2019 when the Appellant made the application which led to
   the decision under appeal, he did not have leave to remain.  A further
   fact of significance (for reasons I will come to) is that the Appellant
   and his partner separated in 2016.  It appears that the Appellant's
   partner returned to India and the Appellant continued to live in the UK,
   as I understand it, at the address where he previously lived with his
   partner.


3. The Judge observed at [11] of the Decision that "[t]he central issue was
   whether there had been a valid and lawful notice served in September 2018
   to curtail the appellant's leave to remain".  The Judge concluded that
   there had been an effective termination of leave at that point in time
   and went on to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

4. The Appellant challenges the Judge's reasoning in relation to the
   finding that leave had been effectively curtailed.  It is said that the
   reasoning is inconsistent with case-law and guidance, is speculative and
   ignores relevant evidence.  In short, the contention is that the Judge
   was not entitled to reach the conclusion he did.

5. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge
   McClure on 23 November 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  The curtailment was effected by email being sent to the
         partner at the email address given by the partner and appellant to
         the respondent previously.  The judge considered the fact that as
         the appellant had not given notice that he was separated from his
         partner that was valid service of curtailment on the appellant.
         3.   Issue is taken in the grounds with the fact that the judge
         admitted computer evidence at the hearing to show service of
         curtailment.  The judge admitted the evidence of service by email
         as a computer record and gave the appellant and his representative
         an opportunity to apply for an adjournment.  The representative did
         not apply for an adjournment.  In the circumstances if that were
         the only ground I may not have granted permission as the judge was
         entitled to proceed with the hearing and take account of the
         evidence before him.  However I consider that the remaining ground
         of appeal is arguable.
         4.   The judge considered the appropriate case law and the
         requirement of the rules.  The appellant had not been served in
         person.  The appellant had in 2018 provided his own address and
         email address to the respondent.  The issue being whether the
         respondent should have separately served the appellant and if so at
         what address or at what email address.
         5.   I grant permission on all grounds."

6. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains an
   error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.


7. The hearing took place remotely via Skype for Business.  It was also
   attended by the Appellant.  There were no technical issues affecting the
   conduct of the hearing.


8. At the start of the hearing, Mr Bellara and Ms Everett informed me that
   it was agreed that there was an error of law in the Decision.  As I will
   come to and as I indicated at the hearing, I agree that there is an error
   of law in the Decision.

9. Ms Everett also informed me however that, as a matter of fact, it was
   incorrect to say that the Appellant had not been personally informed of
   the curtailment as an email was also sent to the Appellant's own email
   address.  She could not explain why the Presenting Officer before Judge
   Burnett had not drawn attention to that as it was visible on the computer
   record alongside reference to service by email on the Appellant's wife.
   She accepted that this further evidence could not be used to impugn the
   Decision.  Clearly that is correct.  However, as I noted, this is the
   Appellant's challenge to the Decision and, since it is accepted that
   there is an error of law in the Decision, it falls to be set aside.
   Accordingly, the appeal will have to be heard afresh with whatever
   evidence is then available.

10. I also noted that it appeared to be the position of the parties before
   Judge Burnett that the issue of curtailment and length of residence was
   determinative of the question whether the Appellant satisfies paragraph
   276B of the Immigration Rules ("Paragraph 276B").  I questioned whether
   that accurately recorded the Respondent's position as there are of course
   other considerations within Paragraph 276B which might be relevant to the
   Appellant's case, particularly in light of his failure to notify the
   Respondent that he was no longer living with his wife and was therefore
   no longer entitled to remain as her dependent for about two years prior
   to the curtailment and three years prior to his application.


11. Following discussion, it was agreed that, because of the new evidence
   and so that any other issue arising in relation to Paragraph 276B could
   be considered in a manner which was not unfair to the Appellant, the
   appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so that it could be
   heard entirely afresh and so that the parties' evidence and submissions
   could be fully reconsidered.


12. I therefore found there to be an error of law in the Decision.  I set
   the Decision aside in its entirety and remitted the appeal to the First-
   tier Tribunal.  I indicated to the parties that I would give short
   reasons in relation to the error of law and next steps which I now turn
   to do.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

13. The relevant part of the Decision is at [25] to [36].  I do not need to
   set that out in full in light of the concession.   It is however
   appropriate to set out parts of it.  At [25] of the Decision, the Judge
   summarised the issue and the parties' position as follows:


         "The issue in this appeal is a fairly narrow one.  The respondent
         accepts that if the curtailment notice was not validly served the
         appellant qualifies for 10 years long residence and the appeal
         ought to be allowed.  The appellant accepts that if the curtailment
         notice was validly served the appeal ought to be dismissed.  It was
         not argued on behalf of the appellant at the hearing that the
         appeal ought to be allowed on any other basis.  I have thus
         concentrated on the question of whether the curtailment notice was
         validly served on the appellant."


14. I have already drawn attention to a reason why the curtailment notice
   issue may not be determinative of the question whether the Appellant
   meets Paragraph 276B (although it does not appear to have been the stance
   of the Presenting Officer before Judge Burnett that other issues needed
   to be considered by the Respondent even if the Appellant had completed
   ten years' residence).  Equally, the only basis on which the Judge could
   allow or dismiss the appeal is on human rights grounds (as the Judge
   recognised).  The curtailment issue, whilst important if determined in
   the Appellant's favour, did not necessarily mean that the Appellant would
   fail if that issue were determined against him.  Nonetheless, no issue is
   taken with [38] and [39] of the Decision where the Judge, having
   determined the factual issue against the Appellant carried out an Article
   8 balancing assessment and dismissed the appeal.  In other words, it is
   not suggested that the Appellant can succeed on Article 8 grounds if he
   fails on the factual issue.


15. The Judge referred to relevant case-law and statutory provisions.  In
   particular, he had regard to the case of Mahmood (R (on the application
   of Mahmood) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (effective
   service - 2000 Order) IJR [2016] UKUT 00057 (IAC) ("Mahmood") and to
   article 8ZA of the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Amendment
   Order 2013 ("the 2013 Order").  The guidance in Mahmood and the 2013
   Order are concerned with the giving of notice of curtailment.  As is said
   in Mahmood however "[w]here Art 8ZB [of the 2013 Order] applies, both
   delivery and the date of delivery are rebuttably presumed".


16. The Appellant's evidence and the Respondent's position in relation to
   the curtailment notice are set out at [29] to [31] of the Decision.  That
   passage is worth setting out to put the Judge's reasoning in context:


         "29. The appellant told me during the hearing that he had separated
         from his wife in 2016.  The appellant was residing in the UK on the
         basis of being a dependent partner of his wife.  It is clear that
         as the appellant was no longer a dependent partner of his wife from
         2016, he did not have a basis of stay in the UK as a dependent
         partner.  The appellant told me that he had not informed the Home
         Office of this fact.  This sets in context the service of the
         notice upon the appellant's partner.  It also sets in context what
         the appellant accepted at the hearing, that he did not have access
         to his wife's email.  He thus did not ever see the email sent to
         his wife.  He stated, and I have no reason not to accept what he
         says, that he hadn't spoken to his wife and didn't know what she
         was doing since they had separated.  The notice was served by the
         Home Office in 2018 to his wife's email address.  The appellant
         confirmed at the hearing that he had not asked the Home Office to
         only serve him personally in respect of his leave.  The appellant
         did not dispute that the email address which the respondent
         identified was his wife's email address.  The appellant did not
         dispute or suggest that his wife had not given the email address
         for the purposes of correspondence.
         30.  I note from documents served by the appellant (see page 7 of
         the bundle), that the GCID entry states that an ICD letter was
         served on the appellant to his wife's email address in November
         2015.  In my judgment this demonstrates that the email address had
         been provided for the purposes of correspondence.  I should note
         here also that the entries provided also showed that the respondent
         was aware of the appellant's postal address as other notices were
         served on the address.
         31.  Mr Beer did not suggest at the hearing that the respondent did
         not know the appellant's postal address or his email address in
         September 2018.  The GCID record demonstrates that the respondent
         only served the person they considered was the 'lead applicant'
         (the appellant's wife).  It is not stated by the respondent or
         asserted that they ever served the appellant (personally or
         individually) at his postal address or via his own email address."


   As I have already noted, the latter assertions in [31] of the Decision
   appear not to be accurate but that was because the Judge was not informed
   of the evidence which Ms Everett told me exists to show that the
   Appellant was indeed served at his own email address.  That assertion
   cannot undermine the Decision as Ms Everett accepted.  The Judge's
   summary of the evidential positions of both parties at that time
   therefore appears to be accurate.


17. The Judge then set out his reasoning and conclusion on the factual
   issue as follows:


         "33. The skeleton argument provided did not identify the above
         provisions [of the 2013 Order].  The argument identified older
         cases such as SYED.  It was not drawn to my attention any specific
         provision regarding the service upon dependents (of other people
         who have leave to remain).  The 1971 Act and the order refer to the
         service of the notice on a 'person affected' by the decision.  The
         question that may potentially arise is 'was the email address of
         the appellant's wife an email address which was 'provided for
         correspondence by the person or the person's representative'?
         34.  The appellant, by not notifying the respondent of his
         separation from his wife and requesting that all notices should be
         sent to him, lost an opportunity to receive the notice to his
         postal address, or to his own email address.  The appellant cannot
         show that the email was not received in his wife's email address to
         rebut the presumption of service.  By virtue of the Order the email
         is deemed served when it was sent.  This is rebuttable but the
         appellant has failed to rebut this service as he had no access to
         the email address, as he had separated from his wife.  The
         appellant chose to keep quiet and not inform the respondent as to
         the basis of his stay in the UK and that it was no longer
         applicable to him.  I have stated above that the appellant's wife's
         email address had been used for the service of other notices.  I am
         satisfied that it was provided for correspondence by the appellant.
         35.  I turn to a consideration of the IDI provided by Mr Bellara.
         The IDI (Immigration Directorate Instruction) is the IDI for
         December 2019.  It is the latest version of the guidance.  I was
         not provided the guidance that existed in September 2018.  The IDI
         states that the respondent's preference is to serve to a postal
         address if the applicant is in the UK or to an email address if not
         in the UK.  There is nothing before me to show that the person who
         took the decision followed the guide.  However, from the
         information before me the 'lead applicant' was refused entry at
         port and she returned to India.  In such circumstances it is not
         surprising that the curtailment notice was sent via email.  In my
         judgment the IDI does not assist the appellant's case.
         Conclusions paragraph 276B Curtailment notice
         36.  My findings are set out above.  I conclude that the notice was
         served upon the appellant via his wife's email address.  This email
         address had been provided by the appellant for the service of
         correspondence.  The appellant did not see or know of the service
         of the notice.  Following the case of Mahmood, the appellant did
         not need actual notice of the service of the decision.  I find that
         the appellant chose not to notify the respondent to serve only his
         postal address or email address as he had no basis of stay in the
         UK, from the point in time when he separated from his wife (in
         2016).  I conclude that there was a valid and lawful service of the
         notice of curtailment.   I hence dismiss the appeal."


18. Although the grounds are lengthy, the error made by the Judge can be
   explained relatively shortly.  The question which the Judge asks himself
   at [33] of the Decision is only part of the relevant consideration.  The
   fact that an address is given for correspondence is relevant to the issue
   whether service has been effected in accordance with the 2013 Order.
   However, that is not the end of the matter.  The question still arises
   whether the presumption created by service to that address has been
   rebutted.


19. The Court of Appeal has recently grappled with this issue in the cases
   of Alam and Rana v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA
   Civ 1527.  Having reviewed relevant case law, Floyd LJ said this:


         "29. In my judgment, the giving of notice for the purposes of
         section 4(1) of the 1971 Act and the 2000 Order does not require
         that the intended recipient should have read and absorbed the
         contents of the notice in writing, merely that it be received.  If
         it were not so, a failure to open an envelope containing the
         notice, for whatever reason, would mean that notice was not given.
         Similarly, I do not consider that the recipient must be made aware
         of the notice.  Again, a recipient who allows mail to accumulate in
         a mailbox or on a hall table will not be aware of the notice.
         Proof of such facts should not enable the person to whom the mail
         is addressed to establish that the notice was not given, by being
         received.
         30.  Receipt, and thus the giving of notice, can plainly be
         effected by placing the notice in the hands of the person affected.
          So much is recognised by Article 8ZA(2)(a).  In my judgment,
         however, receipt in the case of an individual is not so limited.
         Receipt of an email, for example, will be effected by the arrival
         of the email in the Inbox of the person affected.  Likewise,
         documents arriving by post will normally be received if they
         arrive, addressed to the person affected at the dwelling where he
         or she is living, at least in the absence of positive evidence that
         mail which so arrives is intercepted.  A document received at an
         address provided to the SSHD for correspondence is received by the
         applicant, even if he does not bother to take steps to collect it.
         31.  It follows that the burden of proving the negative, non-
         receipt, in the fact of convincing evidence leading to the
         expectation of receipt, will not be lightly discharged.  In
         particular it will not be discharged by evidence, far less by mere
         assertion, that the notice did not come to the attention of the
         person affected."


20. The Judge accepted that the Appellant had no access to his wife's
   email.  As such, although service complied with the 2013 Order, on the
   Judge's analysis, the Appellant did not receive it and was unaware of it.




21. It may be that the Judge's reasoning is based on the Appellant's wife's
   leave having been effectively curtailed so that the Appellant's leave
   fell away.  That is certainly a possible interpretation of what is said
   at [33] to [36] of the Decision.  I would not wish to express any firm
   opinion on that possible construction without hearing argument.  However,
   the Appellant still had leave in his own right even if that was as a
   dependent.  Speaking for myself, therefore, I am not persuaded without
   more that this is a correct analysis (if indeed that did form part of the
   Judge's reasoning).


22. Of course, if the Appellant had provided no means of communication
   other than via his wife, that might cast a different complexion on
   matters.  It is understandable that the Respondent would give notice via
   the Appellant's wife's address in ignorance of the fact that the parties
   had separated and in the knowledge that she had returned to India.  The
   Respondent might well be entitled to consider that this was the
   appropriate method of service of both notices if the parties were, as she
   thought, still living together.   However, the Judge accepted that the
   Appellant had given another email address for correspondence.  As it now
   appears, the Respondent may also have given notice via that address.  If
   that is the position, it will fall to the Appellant to provide evidence
   that he did not receive it.


23. However, based on the evidence which the Judge had before him as
   recorded in the Decision, his analysis is erroneous.  The fact that the
   Appellant's wife could not have rebutted the presumption of service of
   the notice on her does not mean that the Appellant could not rebut the
   presumption of service of curtailment of his own leave.


24. For those reasons, I conclude that there is an error of law disclosed
   in the Decision.  I therefore set the Decision aside in its entirety.

25. For reasons I have already explained, I remit the appeal to the First-
   tier Tribunal for redetermination.  The First-tier Tribunal may wish to
   give directions for the filing of further evidence given what I say above
   regarding further evidence in the possession of the Respondent to which
   the Appellant will need to respond.  The Respondent obviously should not
   wait to be directed to provide what is clearly relevant evidence and
   should ensure that this is provided to the Appellant as soon as possible
   so that he can consider it and give instructions to respond to it.


   DECISION

   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett promulgated on 19
   October 2020 involves the making of an error on a point of law. I
   therefore set aside the Decision.  I remit the appeals to the First-tier
   Tribunal for re-hearing before a Judge other than Judge Burnett.


   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 23 March 2021

