
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00725/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th January 2017                           |On 25th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                           Shahrad Nasrolahi Fard
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Marcus of Counsel instructed by S Hirsch & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge James who dismissed an appeal against the Secretary
    of State's refusal to grant the appellant indefinite leave to remain in
    the  UK  on  the  basis  of  long  residency  and  human  rights.   The
    application was refused on 3rd June 2015.

 2. On 4th June 2004 the appellant was granted leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as a student with leave valid until 30th September  2004.   His
    leave was subsequently extended until 30th September 2006.

 3. Thereafter the history becomes more  complicated.   On  29th  September
    2006 he made an application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  postgraduate
    student and that application was refused on 6th October 2006.  There is
    now and in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  challenge
    to the legitimacy of that refusal  because  it  is  asserted  that  the
    Secretary of State failed to give  the  appellant  the  opportunity  to
    rectify the defect in the payment, and the onus was on the Secretary of
    State as the funds were in the appellant's bank account.  The appellant
    then made two further applications for leave to remain as a student  on
    26th October 2006, which was rejected as being on the wrong  form,  and
    the second on 16th November 2006.  The appellant disputes that he  ever
    received the refusal letter in respect of  that  last  application  and
    indeed it would appear that no  dated  refusal  letter  has  ever  been
    supplied.  It was asserted by the  respondent  that  the  Secretary  of
    State  refused  the  application  on  15th  December  2006   and   sent
    notification to the appellant on that date.  That is  disputed  by  the
    appellant.  Although the Secretary  of  State  asserts  she  served  an
    IS151A on 10th May 2007.   The  appellant  in  his  grounds  of  appeal
    submitted that the application lodged on 29th September 2006 should  in
    fact not have been refused with the result  that  the  appellant  would
    still have had leave to remain in the UK when he temporarily  left  the
    UK on 14th May 2007.  He also appears to dispute  the  receipt  of  the
    said decision on 15th December 2006.

 4. On 31st January 2008, however, the appellant was granted leave to enter
    the United Kingdom  as  a  student  until  17th  May  2011  subject  to
    conditions and this leave was extended three times until 7th July 2015.

 5. The appellant's latest application for leave to remain was  refused  on
    3rd June 2015 on the basis that he did not meet  the  requirements  for
    ten years' continuous lawful  residence  in  the  UK.   The  respondent
    asserted that the appellant  did  not  have  valid  leave  between  1st
    October 2006 and 16th January 2008. Despite the issue over the break in
    leave the Secretary of  State,  nevertheless  addressed  the  break  in
    residence and calculated that the appellant had combined absences  from
    the UK of 987 days which exceeded the permissible limit of 540 days  in
    accordance with paragraph 276A(a)(v) of the Rules.

 6. The appellant, before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  submitted  that
    there was no evidence that the respondent exercised her  discretion  in
    regard to the reason the appellant remained outside the UK in order  to
    deal with his divorce and treatment for PTSD and the  appellant  relied
    on the respondent's own policy guidance on Long Residence dated 8th May
    2015) in this respect.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge James dismissed  the  appeal  on  10th  March
    2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Perkins, on the basis that the judge had not dealt  properly  with  the
    appellant's contention that the Respondent should  -  not  could-  have
    considered her discretion to excuse some of the delay and arguably  not
    dealt with the point that the decision made by the Secretary  of  State
    when refusing the application as invalid was so muddled (whether  funds
    or wrong wording on the cheque) that it should not have  been  rejected
    at all.

 8. The challenge, as agreed by Mr Nath and Mr Marcus at the hearing before
    me, was in respect of ground (i),  that  there  was  an  error  in  the
    judge's decision in relation to the respondent's discretion.

 9. The judge within his  decision  dealt  with  the  discretion  point  at
    paragraphs 42 and 44 of his decision in the following way:-

         "42.     I have noted a number  of  features  of  this  discretion.
             First, it  is  permissive.   There  is  no  requirement  on  a
             decision  maker  to  exercise  or  consider  the   discretion.
             Second, the circumstances must be compelling or  compassionate
             and prevent the applicant returning to the UK.   The  guidance
             provides a list  of  matters  to  consider  before  exercising
             discretion which I have noted.  In relation to the Appellant's
             first absence from the UK he says that he stayed  in  Iran  to
             resolve his divorce.  While I can appreciate that this  was  a
             period of high emotion for the Appellant I do not accept  that
             he was prevented from returning to the UK during that  divorce
             process.  However difficult the  divorce  process  might  have
             been, I do not accept that  it  would  have  required  him  to
             remain in Iran for the whole of the 261 days.   I  have  noted
             that the Appellant has stated that it was during  this  period
             that he first suffered from PTSD and he has referred me  to  a
             letter from Dr Malakouti dated 26 May 2016.  It is clear  from
             that letter that Dr Malakouti did not treat the Appellant  for
             PTSD during this period.  Accordingly I do not find  that  the
             Appellant was prevented from returning to the  UK  because  of
             any treatment he was receiving.

         ...

         44.      I have noted that the Appellant asked  the  Respondent  to
             exercise discretion in this matter.  As stated above I do  not
             find that the Respondent is obliged to exercise discretion but
             in any event, the Appellant's circumstances do  not  meet  the
             criteria required  for  the  exercise  of  discretion  in  his
             favour."

10. It was asserted that the error the first passage disclosed was that the
    judge wrongly concluded that there was no obligation for the respondent
    even to consider the existence of her discretion.   The  appellant  had
    expressly  asked  in  his  application  that  the  respondent  consider
    exercising her discretion and as the judge noted at paragraph 44.

11. Therefore:-

      a) the fact that under her policy  the  respondent  was  empowered  to
         exercise the discretion was a relevant factor;

      b) the respondent was  accordingly  obliged  to  consider  whether  to
         exercise her discretion; and

      c) the failure to do so was a public error reviewable by the  Tribunal
         on the basis described in Greenwood (No. 2) (para  398  considered)
         [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC) at paragraphs 21 to 23.

12. As set out by Mr Marcus in the grounds of  appeal  that  obligation  is
    very different from an obligation to  exercise  the  discretion  in  an
    appellant's favour and it would appear that the judge conflated the two
    obligations in paragraph 42.  I note that it was not argued  by  either
    party that there was no discretion at all in view of  the  question  of
    leave.  Indeed the refusal of leave, as I have recorded, had also  been
    challenged in the appeal.

13. Mr Nath argued that these were merely semantics and what the judge  was
    really trying to state was that the decision was with the Secretary  of
    State and it was not for the judge to make that  decision.   In  effect
    the judge was stating that he was not in a position to mandate  to  the
    Secretary of State to exercise her discretion. As noted it is difficult
    to understand how the Supreme Court could have reached  its  conclusion
    in Mandalia v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  1
    WLR 4546 if  the  judge's  conclusion,  which  is  that  there  was  no
    obligation even to  consider  a  discretion  that  the  respondent  has
    voluntarily adopted in a published policy - was correct.

14. What persuades  me  is  that  there  was  a  specific  request  in  the
    application to the Secretary of State to consider her discretion and in
    this case there was nothing  in  the  decision  letter  issued  to  the
    appellant to deal with the points as set out in the application by  the
    appellant's representatives.  There was an obligation on the respondent
    to consider the fact of her policy and to make  clear  in  her  refusal
    letter that she had considered and exercised her discretion, even if it
    was not exercised  in  the  appellant's  favour.   The  point  was  not
    addressed at all in the decision letter.

15. The Policy states under the Section 'Time spent outside  the  UK'  even
    refers, when assessing time spent outside, to departing  the  UK  after
    the expiry of leave but applying for fresh entry  clearance  within  28
    days.  Under the same section of the guidance there is also a  specific
    reference to exercising discretion 'over excess absence  in  compelling
    or compassionate circumstances' and 'this must  be  decided  at  senior
    executive officer (SEO) level'.  The policy then set out a  'things  to
    consider' paragraph.

16. The judge assumed that the circumstances in which discretion  could  be
    exercised were limited to those as set out in the policy.   The  policy
    conferred a discretion to be exercised by the respondent  by  reference
    to the indicative criteria; the criteria given are not  exhaustive.   I
    find that is an error of law.  As is clear, it is not for the judge  to
    act as the primary decision maker.

17. In the event that I found an error, both Mr Nath and  Mr  Marcus  agree
    that I should be in a position to remake the decision.  I find an error
    of law in the decision of Judge James and I remake  the  decision,  and
    bearing in mind that this was an application by the appellant, I  refer
    the matter to the Secretary of State for lawful  consideration  further
    to Greenwood cited above.

Notice of Decision



The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and his decision is set  aside.
 I remake the decision and allow the appeal to the extent set out.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date Signed 23rd January 2017

Helen Rimington
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
