




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU005452015
     HU005462015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                                |On 23rd May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                                 MUNIR AHMED
                                 AMTUL RAUF
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State acting on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer,  Abu  Dhabi  but
    nonetheless I will describe the parties as they were  described  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mr Munir Ahmed and Mrs Amtul  Rauf  as
    the appellants and the Entry Clearance Officer as the respondent.

 2. The appellants are husband and wife and citizens of Pakistan born on  1
    January  1952  and  1  January  1955  respectively  and  they  made  an
    application to visit their elderly uncle in  the  United  Kingdom.   It
    would also appear that the appellants also have two  brothers  who  are
    EEA nationals who also live in the United Kingdom.  First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Obhi allowed the appellants' appeals against the refusal  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer to their visit visa  application.    The  Entry
    Clearance Officer made his decision on 21 May 2015.  The  Secretary  of
    State with permission challenges that decision which was  made  on  the
    papers by Judge Obhi on 19 January 2016.

 3. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  did  not  believe  that  the  appellants
    intended to return to Pakistan following their visits, noted  that  the
    appellants had previously made three separate  applications  for  entry
    clearance during an eight month  period,  that  they  had  no  declared
    source of income and declared no income  or  assets  of  their  own  or
    provided any evidence of remaining family in Pakistan.

 4. It should be noted that the appellants appealed under Section 82 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which establishes a  right
    of appeal in respect of most immigration decisions  but  the  right  of
    appeal against the decision to refuse a visit visa  in  all  categories
    was abolished by Section 52 of the Crime and Courts Act 2015 save where
    the decision is contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  or  the
    Race Relations Act.

 5. The challenge by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  behalf  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to Judge Obhi's decision  was  effectively  that  the
    judge had made a material misdirection in law because  Article  8  will
    not normally exist between adult siblings, parents and  adult  children
    and the case of Kugathas v Secretary of State [2003] EWCA Civ  31  made
    the point that there is no presumption of family life and  that  family
    life is not established between an adult and his  surviving  parent  or
    other siblings unless something more exists than normal emotional ties.
     It was submitted that none of the criteria were met in this case.

 6. It was submitted that there should be an indication that the  issue  of
    how one person would be dependent on the relative in relation  to  more
    than normal emotional ties further to Ghising and  Others  [2015]  UKUT
    00567 (IAC).   It was also submitted that  the  judge  had,  in  error,
    drawing an analogy with Abbasi and  another  (visits  -  bereavement  -
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00463 (IAC) in stating that

    "I am therefore satisfied that the refusal of entry clearance to see an
    elderly or infirm relative who is close to  death  is  an  interference
    with the private and family lives of the  appellants  and  their  close
    family members".

 7. It was contended that it still needed to be clear that the elements  of
    family life with the person in the UK were established.  Furthermore it
    was pointed out that the Tribunal  in  Abbasi  did  not  refer  to  the
    jurisprudence in Kugathas.   It  was  also  pointed  out  that  in  the
    decision there appeared to be no proportionality assessment or  why  it
    was disproportionate.

 8. In sum I find in response to Mr Bramble's submissions that there is  an
    error of law in this decision.  The judge records in  paragraph  13  of
    his decision that he has little detailed information about  the  nature
    of the relationship between the appellant's late uncle and  themselves,
    and merely states that the fact that the second appellant's brother, Mr
    Ahmed, was present as his death indicates that  the  relationship  with
    the family was strong.  The judge also adds that  the  fact  that  they
    also wished to visit him knowing he was close to  his  final  days  was
    indicative  of  a  strong  relationship  with  him  but  there  was  no
    indication of, for example, the last time they  saw  each  other.   The
    judge clearly added that he was confused as to the age  of  the  uncle.
    There was no indication as to any money or passing or  dependency  such
    that there  were  more  than  normal  emotional  ties.  Indeed  in  the
    documentation which was supplied by  the  appellants  in  their  appeal
    suggested that in fact they are  financially  independent  and  are  in
    receipt of a pension.

 9. I also turn to paragraph 9 of the judge's determination where  he  says
    there is very limited information about the brothers or their lives  in
    the UK and adds

     "The only additional information which is given in the papers  sent  to
    the ECO is that the couple have a 'maternal uncle'".

10. The judge notes that Wadi Hussain who is the uncle is  in  poor  health
    and that he is

     "officially 90 years old but thought to be  probably  around  10  years
    older than that"

     and that the judge notes from additional papers submitted in support of
    the appeal but not seen by the Entry Clearance Officer that in fact the
    uncle  had  passed  away  in  November  2015  and  there   is   further
    complications as to the date on the death certificate.

11. The  reasoning  was  inadequate  to  demonstrate  the  requirements  as
    indicated by Kugathas and the evidence recorded regarding the extent of
    the relationship fails to support or substantiate a  relationship  that
    falls within the ambit of a protected family life.

12. In sum I am not persuaded that the evidence shows that there is a close
    relationship such as to satisfy the test or guidance set out  in  cases
    such as Kugathas or the line of authorities set out in Mostafa (Article
    8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).  Indeed, the  judge,  at
    paragraph 12, states that the relationship between the  adult  siblings
    is not the type of close relationship which  existed  in  the  case  of
    Mostafa.  There is no evidence in this case  that  there  is  indeed  a
    close relationship or indeed the nature of that relationship is between
    the appellants and the uncle.

13. I find that the first point of the five principles as set out in Razgar
    v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 cannot be satisfied.  I  am  not  persuaded  that
    there is any engagement in either family and/or private  life  in  this
    appeal and therefore the appeal should accordingly be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the decision is set  aside.
 I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal of  Mr  Munir  Ahmed  and  Mrs
Amtul Rauf.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 20th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                                  Date 20th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

