


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00798/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 14 November 2019                     |On: 19 November 2019              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, instructed by Mondair Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  MJ's  appeal
   against the respondent's decision to refuse his human rights claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and MJ as the appellant,  reflecting
   their positions  as  they  were  in  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

Immigration History

3. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 1 February 1992. He  first
   entered the United Kingdom on 15 May 2009 as a  family  visitor  and  was
   refused  leave  to  remain  as  the  dependent  of  his  mother.  He  was
   subsequently granted various periods  of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
   immigration rules between 2 January 2013 and 16 March 2018, but was  then
   refused further leave following an application made on 15 March 2018.

4. The appellant's application of 15 March 2018 was made  on  the  basis  of
   his family life with his children and his private life.  The  application
   was refused on 20 December 2018 on suitability and  eligibility  grounds.
   The respondent considered that the appellant was  a  persistent  offender
   whose offending had caused serious harm and that, whilst the Tribunal had
   previously found that his offending did not outweigh his family life with
   his children, he had subsequently been  convicted  for  further  offences
   since being granted leave to remain on 16 September 2015 which meant that
   his application fell for refusal under S-LTR.1.5  and  S-LTR.1.6  of  the
   immigration rules. The respondent considered further that  the  appellant
   did not meet the eligibility requirements of the immigration rules  as  a
   parent because he did not have sole responsibility for his children,  who
   resided with their mothers, and  had  not  provided  evidence  of  direct
   access to his children. He could not, therefore, meet the requirements of
   Appendix  FM.  The  respondent  considered  that  there  were   no   very
   significant obstacles to integration in  Zimbabwe  for  the  purposes  of
   paragraph  276ADE(1)  and  no  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances
   outside the  immigration  rules.  The  respondent  took  account  of  the
   appellant's  injuries  and  mental  health  issues  following  a  serious
   accident in November  2017  in  which  he  lost  part  of  his  leg.  The
   respondent also considered that the  appellant  was  the  father  of  two
   British children who resided in the UK, but noted the lack of documentary
   evidence to show that he played an active role in their lives  and  their
   upbringing. The respondent considered that the decision  did  not  breach
   the appellant's Article 3 or 8 human rights.

5. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  in
   the First-tier Tribunal on 5 June 2019 by Judge  Young-Harry.  The  judge
   noted that the appellant did not dispute the number of convictions over a
   number of  years  and  found  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
   suitability requirements in Appendix FM. The judge also  noted  that  the
   appellant did not dispute that he had failed to show  that  he  had  sole
   responsibility for his children, that his children resided  with  him  or
   that he had a contact order in  place  and  accordingly  found  that  the
   appellant failed to meet the eligibility requirements in Appendix FM. The
   judge considered that the appellant had failed to show  that  there  were
   very significant obstacles to his integration in Zimbabwe and that he was
   not able to meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  However  the
   judge found that the appellant's criminality did not outweigh the  weight
   attached to his family life with his daughter  M,  as  it  would  not  be
   reasonable to expect M to leave the UK as  per  section  117B(6)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The judge accepted that the
   appellant had resumed contact with M a  few  months  previously  and  had
   weekend visits with her and accepted that he had a genuine and subsisting
   parental relationship with her, although he had no contact with his other
   daughter.  The   judge   concluded   that   the   respondent's   decision
   disproportionately interfered with the appellant's Article  8  rights  on
   that basis and she accordingly allowed the appeal.

6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had failed to give clear  reasons  why  the
   appellant's relationship with one of his daughters outweighed the  public
   interest, given the inconsistent evidence of the claimed contact  between
   them. The grounds asserted that the judge had erred by  failing  to  give
   preference to a social worker's report which confirmed that the appellant
   had not seen his daughter for over  a  year  and  accepting  instead  the
   evidence of the appellant's sister  about  contact  commencing  in  April
   2019.

7. Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 3  October
   2019. The matter then came before me for a hearing.

8. At the hearing, and following my enquiry, Mr Muquit confirmed that  there
   had not been a social worker's  report  as  such  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, but what the judge was referring to at [21] was a  document  at
   page 112 to 118 of the appellant's appeal bundle which was  a  Child  and
   Family Progress Plan. That document, which must have been prepared before
   May 2019, given the dates  provided  for  further  reviews,  referred  to
   contact between the appellant and M. The judge  had  photographs  of  the
   appellant together with M and provided reasons for concluding that  there
   was contact between the appellant and his daughter and that there  was  a
   genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

9. Ms Jones acknowledged  that  the  respondent's  grounds  relying  on  the
   social worker's report therefore fell away and had nothing to add.

Discussion

10. In light of Ms Jones'  position,  and  given  the  evidence  of  contact
   between the appellant and his daughter which was before the Tribunal, the
   judge was fully and properly  entitled  to  conclude  that  there  was  a
   genuine and subsisting parental relationship between father and daughter.
   There is no merit in the respondent's  grounds  challenging  the  judge's
   findings and  conclusions  in  that  regard.  Likewise  the  respondent's
   further challenge in the grounds at [7] has no merit and Ms  Jones  quite
   properly did not pursue it.  There was no requirement for  the  judge  to
   balance the  appellant's  family  life  with  his  daughter  against  his
   criminality and the public interest. Having found that the appellant  had
   a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and that it
   was unreasonable for that child to leave the UK, section 117B(6)  of  the
   2002 Act removed any public interest capable of  justifying  interference
   with the appellant's Article 8 rights. Accordingly the  judge's  decision
   to allow the appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  was  fully  and
   properly open to her on the evidence before her.

11. Accordingly, I do not consider there to be any material error of law  in
   the judge's decision and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law requiring the decision to be  set  aside.  The
   decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
   therefore stands.



    Anonymity Direction


    The appellant has requested an anonymity direction given that his  case
    involves  a  child.  The  following   direction   is   made,   in   the
    circumstances.


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.














Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 14 November
2019
