
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00940/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19 December 2017                   |                                      |
|                                      |On 24 January 2018                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                             Kul Bahadur Gurung
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jaisri, instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Kul Bahadur Gurung, was born on 19 October 1974 and is a
    male citizen of Nepal.  He applied for entry clearance as  the  partner
    of Rita Pun (the sponsor) who has indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant and sponsor were married on 10  November
    2013.  The appellant's application was refused by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) by a decision dated  10  June  2015.   The  ECO  was  not
    satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with the sponsor or that they intended  to  live  together
    permanently in the United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hosie) which, in a decision promulgated on 7 March
    2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The history of the relationship between the appellant and  the  sponsor
    is unusual.  The couple met in 1996  and  they  lived  together  as  an
    unmarried couple between January 1997 and November 2003.   During  that
    period, they had two children together.  The families of both appellant
    and sponsor were opposed to the relationship and the  couple  separated
    in 2003.  The sponsor married another man and travelled to  the  United
    Kingdom to settle with him.  That relationship then broke down and  the
    sponsor returned to a relationship with the appellant.  The sponsor and
    the appellant married in Nepal in 2013 following the sponsor's divorce.



 3. I find that the First-tier Tribunal's decision should be set aside.   I
    have reached that decision for the following reasons.   First,  I  find
    that the judge has misunderstood the  evidence.   At  [23],  the  judge
    wrote:

         The document at A35 does not match  with  Miss  Pun's  explanation.
         She claims that the birth certificate was lost and that she  sought
         a replacement in 2015,  that  an  unauthenticated  certificate  was
         produced and that she had to seek  validation  of  the  certificate
         from the SMO.   She  stated  that  the  validated  certificate  was
         produced in 2016.  She was unable to explain  when  asked  why  the
         birth certificate at A35 is dated 6 November 2006  or  why  it  was
         lost  as  claimed.   Nor  was  this  information  provided  by  the
         appellant.  She stated that there should have been a new one issued
         in 2016 and that it was her husband who had  attained  it  and  not
         her.  The appellant has provided no explanation for this anomaly.

 4. Mr Jaisri told me that  it  had  been  made  clear  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing  (he  had  been  the  Counsel  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal also) that the document at A35 is a translation of a photocopy
    of the  original  certificate  which  is  dated  2006.   The  appellant
    subsequently lost the original certificate but the  photocopy  survived
    and had been  translated.   The  appellant  had  sought  a  replacement
    certificate  (A34)  from  the  Nepalese   authorities.    The   judge's
    observations at [23] are not at all clear as it does appear that he has
    overlooked the fact that the document at A35 was a photocopy of a  lost
    original certificate and was not a replacement original from 2016.  The
    judge had already recorded the evidence of the sponsor at [19] that the
    children's birth had been registered after the relationship between the
    appellant and sponsor had broken down in 2003.  That  would  appear  to
    explain the 2006 date on the birth certificate.  Whilst I  accept  that
    neither the reasoning of  the  decision  nor  the  evidence  itself  is
    entirely  straightforward,  I  am  satisfied   that   the   judge   has
    misunderstood the explanation provided  by  the  sponsor.   As  to  the
    reason why the original certificate was lost,  it  is  clear  from  the
    evidence given to the Tribunal [19] that the children were living  with
    the appellant after the relationship  had  broken  down  and  that,  in
    consequence, the sponsor was unaware of the circumstances in which  the
    certificate had been lost.  It was not clear why  the  judge  has  held
    that explanation against the sponsor.

 5. Secondly, the judge has failed to deal with all the evidence.   As  the
    judge  indicates  at  [27],  he  had  before  him  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's "claimed mother-in-law" which indicates inter alia that the
    mother-in-law now gave her consent to the relationship.  The judge  has
    not made any findings as to that evidence but has instead gone on  [27]
    to criticise the sponsor for failing  to  obtain  written  evidence  in
    support of the appeal from her own parents.  I find that the judge  has
    fallen into error.  He should have made a clear finding as  to  whether
    or not he accepted the evidence from the mother-in-law and what  weight
    he attached to that evidence.  Likewise, it was harsh of the  judge  to
    find that the appellant's credibility was diminished by  the  sponsor's
    failure to obtain evidence from her own parents.  I accept that it  was
    possible for this evidence to be obtained but the judge would have been
    better advised to analyse and  make  clear  findings  on  the  evidence
    before him rather than to attach significance  to  evidence  which  was
    not.

 6. Finally, as regards the marriage of the appellant and sponsor,  I  find
    that the judge's findings are not clear.  It seems that the  judge  did
    accept that there is a difference between a marriage and  a  subsisting
    relationship; he refers to GA Ghana [2006] UKAIT 00046 at [30]) but  he
    states at [31], "even if I  were  to  accept  that  there  is  a  valid
    marriage, I do not accept that it  is  genuine  or  subsisting".   That
    statement is odd given that the validity of the marriage itself was not
    disputed by the ECO.  If the judge had wished to reject the validity of
    the marriage, then he should have given clear  reasons  for  doing  so.
    His statement at [31] appears to suggest that he had not accepted  that
    the marriage was valid notwithstanding the  ECO's  concession  that  it
    was.

 7. I find that the  judge  has,  as  indicated  above,  misunderstood  the
    evidence whilst the remainder of his decision is insufficiently  cogent
    to stand.  I set it aside.  I set aside the findings  of  fact.   There
    will need to be a new fact-finding exercise before a fresh panel of the
    First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is now returned.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 7 March 2017  is
    set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.   The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Hosie) for that Tribunal
    to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
