
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00961/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2018                                 |On 8 March 2018            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                    The Entry Clearance Officer Istanbul
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Sarab Al Hasan
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr A Moran
For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson promulgated  30.5.17,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer,
    dated 4.12.15, to refuse her application  made  pursuant  to  paragraph
    352D of the Immigration Rules for entry clearance (EC) as a child  then
    under the age of 18 to join her Syrian mother granted refugee status in
    the UK.  It is relevant to note that the claimant's father is a British
    citizen resident in the UK with her mother and  other  members  of  the
    family.

 2. The application was refused in the decision dated 4.12.15, pursuant  to
    the mandatory grounds under paragraphs 320(3) and 320(7A), on the basis
    that the claimant submitted a non-genuine passport.  It  followed  that
    the Entry Clearance Officer could not be satisfied  that  the  claimant
    was related as claimed.

 3. Paragraph 320(7A)  is  a  mandatory  ground  of  refusal  "where  false
    documents  have  been  submitted  "whether  or  not  material  to   the
    application and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge."

 4. Judge Davidson found at [22] on the balance of probabilities  that  the
    passport was false and thus that refusal  under  320(7A)  was  correct.
    However, the judge went on to consider the  appeal  outside  the  Rules
    pursuant to article 8 ECHR family life, noting  that  apart  from  "the
    technicality of the suspect document" all the other  elements  required
    to satisfy 352D were met. The judge then stated, "I therefore  consider
    that the (claimant) falls within the  scope  of  what  the  Immigration
    Rules determine to be within her right to a family. Life," and  allowed
    the appeal.

 5. The grounds first submit that  having  found  320(7A)  met,  the  judge
    should have dismissed the appeal. Second, the grounds submit  that  the
    judge failed to consider the public interest in the deception  used  by
    the claimant. Third, it is submitted that the judge materially erred in
    law by failing at [24], or  elsewhere  within  the  decision,  to  give
    adequate reasons why the appeal was to be  allowed  outside  the  Rules
    pursuant to family life rights under article 8 ECHR. It is pointed  out
    that there was no proportionality assessment.

 6. On 21.12.17, Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted permission  to  appeal
    on all grounds, noting in particular that "the decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds is wholly unreasoned and no  account  taken
    of the submission of a false passport with the application."

 7. Thus, the matter came before me on 7.3.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 8. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

 9. In the light of the DNA evidence proving the relationship  between  the
    claimant and her parents in the UK,  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Secretary of State did not rely further on paragraph 320(3) as a ground
    of refusal.

10. It is clear that the application fell to be rejected on the application
    of paragraph 320(7A), a mandatory ground  of  refusal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge agreed, and so found. However, as the only viable appeal
    was on human rights grounds, the judge was obliged to  go  on  consider
    article 8 family life rights outside the Rules. To that  extent,  there
    is no merit in the first ground of appeal, as Mr McVeety accepted.

11. The first part of the second ground of appeal is  also  flawed  in  the
    sense that 320(7A) does not require deception to have been used by  the
    claimant, or that it was used in the application with her knowledge and
    consent. However, it was incumbent on the judge to consider and make  a
    finding on the claim that the family members were entirely  unaware  of
    the deception, as that would be relevant to any article 8 assessment. I
    reject Mr Moran's argument that by referring to the passport issue as a
    "technicality" the judge implicitly accepted that no blame fell on  the
    family. Whilst that might have been the judge's view, it was  not  made
    clear within the decision.

12. At [24] the judge purported to go  on  to  consider  the  appeal  under
    article 8 family life rights. Surprisingly, the entire  basis  for  the
    decision to allow the appeal under article 8  appears  to  be  enclosed
    within a single sentence  at  [24],  "I  therefore  consider  that  the
    appellant  falls  within  the  scope  of  what  the  Immigration  Rules
    determine to be within her rights to a family life."

13. I find that Judge Davidson failed to  conduct  an  adequate  article  8
    Razgar assessment, and in particular failed  entirely  to  conduct  the
    crucial proportionality balancing exercise. In such an assessment, that
    the application fell to  be  refused  under  the  mandatory  Rules  for
    refusal  is  a  weighty  consideration  in  the   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of  the  decision.  Neither  did  the  judge  make  any
    assessment of the public interest in immigration control (s117B of  the
    2002 Act), or in refusing entry where fraudulent  documents  have  been
    used to circumvent the Rules. In that  regard  the  judge  should  have
    considered and made a finding as to whether deception was  employed  by
    the claimant or the extent, if any of her culpability in the submission
    of a false document. Even  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  went  on  to
    consider article 8 and to make a proportionality assessment; the First-
    tier Tribunal did not.

14. I reject Mr Moran's argument that the admittedly inadequate  article  8
    assessment was immaterial to the outcome  on  the  basis  that  on  the
    findings of the Tribunal the decision to refuse  EC  cannot  have  been
    proportional to the accepted genuine and  subsisting  family  life.  He
    relied in support on the indications from the  Rules  as  to  how  such
    matters are treated with and without  deception  on  the  part  of  the
    applicant, such as in 320(7B). It  was  pointed  out  that  even  where
    deception had been used, where a person was under the age of  18,  that
    was not a bar to future applications. However, such an argument, whilst
    badged as one of 'materiality,' are in essence an  attempt  to  reargue
    the appeal, rather than directly addressing the issue of  an  error  of
    law. I do not accept that on its own facts  and  the  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal the appeal was bound to be allowed under article  8
    family life considerations. Whether a judge reached such  a  conclusion
    remains to be seen and depends on an assessment of proportionality that
    was not undertaken in this case. The decision has to  be  fair  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and needs to provide clear and  cogent  reasons
    for the conclusions reached. That was not done.

15. In the circumstances, for the  reasons  stated,  the  decision  was  in
    material error of law and cannot stand and must be set aside.



Remittal

16. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the findings and  conclusions
    on a crucial issue at the heart of an appeal are unclear, as  they  are
    in this case, effectively there has not been a valid  determination  of
    those issues. The errors of the First-tier Tribunal vitiate  all  other
    findings of fact and the conclusions from those facts so that there has
    not been a valid determination of the issues in the appeal.

17. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  nature  or
    extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision
    in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly  and  justly,
    including with the avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  determine  the  appeal
    afresh.

18. I declined to preserve any findings of fact, as that would unfairly tie
    the hands of the judge considering the remitted appeal.

Conclusion & Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.


                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be seen.


                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated

