
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00664/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 26 November 2020                |On 03 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Arjan Muja
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the  respondent  and  Mr  Muja  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a national of Albania  born  on  15  December  1977.  He
   arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 October 1998 and claimed asylum in  a
   false name and nationality. On 6 January  1999  he  made  another  asylum
   claim in his own name, but also in a false nationality,  claiming  to  be
   from Kosovo and to be at risk on  return  to  Kosovo.  Both  claims  were
   refused but the appellant successfully appealed the second  decision  and
   was granted refugee status and indefinite leave  to  remain  on  14  June
   2001. On 6 April 2006 the appellant was naturalised as a British citizen,
   also under his correct name but false nationality. On 19  June  2019  the
   appellant was served with a Deprivation Order when his true identity  was
   discovered by the respondent.

4. The respondent then considered whether it was appropriate  to  grant  the
   appellant leave to remain in the UK  on  the  basis  of  his  family  and
   private life, but decided that it was not and refused  his  human  rights
   claim in a decision dated 16 December 2019.

5. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First- tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese on 9 September 2020.  Judge  Abrebese
   allowed the appeal on Article  8  human  rights  grounds  in  a  decision
   promulgated on 18 September 2020.

6. The respondent sought, and was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
   Upper Tribunal on 22 October 2020. In a Rule 24  response  filed  by  the
   appellant's solicitors, on 19 October 2020, it was  conceded  that  Judge
   Abebrese had made material errors of law in his decision for the  reasons
   set out in the grounds and, further, on the basis that he had  failed  to
   engage with the discretionary nature of  the  suitability  provisions  in
   Appendix FM. The Tribunal was requested to set  aside  his  decision  and
   remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

7. The following notice  and  directions  were  then  sent  to  the  parties
   (erroneously referring to the appeal having been dismissed in the  First-
   tier Tribunal):

    "1.  This case has come before me for a hearing on  26  November  2020,
    following the grant of permission to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  22
    October 2020, with respect to a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese dismissing  [allowing]  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal of his human rights claim.

    2.   I note that a Rule 24 response has been filed  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, following the grant of permission, in which it  is  accepted
    that Judge Abrebese made material errors of law in his decision and  in
    which a request is made for this Tribunal to set aside Judge Abrebese's
    decision and to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

    3.   In the circumstances, having had regard to  the  judge's  decision
    and the grounds of challenge from the Secretary  of  State,  and  given
    that both parties agree that the judge's decision should be set  aside,
    it seems to me that there is no need for a hearing on 26 November  2020
    and that the matter can simply be disposed of, on the  papers,  in  the
    manner proposed in the Rule 24 response.

    4.   Both parties are to respond to the proposal at [3]  above,  before
    5pm on Monday 23 November 2020.  In the absence of any response to  the
    above, this case will remain listed for hearing on 26 November 2020."

8. The directions  were  unfortunately  sent  out  late  and  neither  party
   responded  in  time  for  the  hearing,  but  only  Mr  Clarke,  for  the
   respondent, appeared before me. He agreed to the matter being remitted to
   the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

9. In light of the fact that the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal  are
   not challenged by the appellant,  and  for  the  reasons  given  by  both
   parties, I find there to  be  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
   decision and I set it aside in its entirety. The appropriate  course,  as
   both parties agree, is for the case to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to be heard de novo before a different judge.



DECISION

10. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law and the decision is set  aside.  The
   appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be heard afresh before any judge aside from
   Judge Abebrese.

    Anonymity

    Judge Abrebese made an anonymity order, but I see no reason for such an
    order and I therefore discharge it.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Date: 26 November 2020
