
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: HU/00899/2015
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    HU/00900/2015
     HU/00902/2015
     HU/00903/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17th November 2016                    |On 05th December 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               OSKK and others
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Ikwuazom, instructed by Ernst Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This  order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. This is the appeal of a husband and wife and their two minor  children,
    all Nigerian citizens,  who  have  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge (Hatton Cross hearing centre)
    dismissing their appeals against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    them leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  their
    private and family life in the United Kingdom.

 2. The principal appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2004  on  a
    multiple-entry visit visa, valid until 13 August 2006.  He  overstayed.
    The principal appellant was arrested in November 2005, on suspicion  of
    handling stolen goods, but gave an alias.   He  was  notified  in  that
    identity of his liability to detention and granted temporary admission,
    and in February 2006, he absconded.   In  September  2006,  having  not
    embarked,  he  was  again  encountered  working  illegally  and   given
    temporary admission again, in the alias identity.   He  absconded,  and
    returned to Nigeria.  An application for a further  5-year  multi-entry
    visit visa in August 2006 was refused.

 3. The principal appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  February  2008,
    with the second appellant, who must have been pregnant,  because  on  2
    July 2008, the third appellant was born in the United Kingdom.   It  is
    their case that they have not left the United  Kingdom  since  February
    2008.  The visit visa on which they  entered  expired  on  11  December
    2009.  On 9 February 2010, the fourth appellant was born.

 4. Human rights applications for leave to remain were made in October 2010
    (refused with right of appeal) and July  2011  (refused,  no  right  of
    appeal). In May 2012, the appellants sought a  reconsideration  of  the
    latter decision.

 5. On 22 August 2013, the principal appellant was arrested  in  possession
    of a false employee identity document for the London Underground, which
    would have enabled him to work on the underground.   It  is  his  case,
    which the respondent has never disputed, that although he possessed the
    document he had not used it.  The principal appellant gave his own name
    on arrest, but a fingerprint match linked him to the  alias  previously
    used for his stolen goods and illegal working arrests.   The  appellant
    was convicted of possessing or controlling articles for use  in  fraud,
    and received a community sentence (60 hours unpaid work).   He did  not
    receive a custodial sentence.

 6. The appellant chased the outstanding  reconsideration  request  in  May
    2014, June 2014 and April 2015.   On  28  April  2015,  the  respondent
    served him with form RED.0001 notifying him of his  immigration  status
    (or lack thereof) and liability to detention and removal.   The  status
    of the second, third and fourth appellants is that of dependents in the
    principal appellant's application, and they also now have no  leave  to
    remain and are liable to detention and removal to Nigeria.

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which  dismissed  his
    appeal.  The Judge considered the provisions of section 117B(6) and set
    out his views thereon at [22] - [25]  in  his  decision.   However,  at
    [27], he said this:

         "27. Having concluded that it would not be unreasonable to  require
         the children to leave the United Kingdom, I go on to  consider  the
         position of the parents.  For the reasons stated above, I find that
         they are unable to benefit from the provisions of  section  117B(6)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended).
         I recognise for the purposes of section 117B(2) that the mother and
         the father speak English.   However, I find  that  section  117B(3)
         weighs against them as they are not financially self-sufficient and
         I consider that due to their relative lack  of  education  and  the
         father's criminal record,  they  are  likely  to  be  dependent  on
         benefits if granted leave to remain in this country.

         28.  However, I find that it is section 117B(1)  that  weighs  most
         heavily against them.  This provision highlights the fact that  the
         maintenance of effective  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
         interest.  In this case, the mother has never had any lawful  basis
         for being in this country.  The father  has  been  in  the  country
         without leave for a number of years, has previously  overstayed  an
         earlier visit  visa,  and  has  failed  to  comply  with  reporting
         restrictions imposed on him in the past. ..."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal.  The appellants  appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal. Leave to appeal was granted only in relation  to
    ground 3 of the grounds, in which the appellants argued that the First-
    tier Tribunal had failed to consider section  117B(6)  in  relation  to
    these appellants.   The assertion that the principal appellant and  his
    dependents cannot benefit from section 117B(6) is  unexplained  and  is
    plainly wrong: the principal appellant's is not a foreign  criminal  as
    defined by section 117D(2)  of  the  2002  Act,  because  his  criminal
    conviction did not entail a period  of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12
    months, or cause serious harm,  nor  is  it  contended  that  he  is  a
    persistent offender.  He is not subject to automatic deportation  as  a
    foreign criminal, pursuant to Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

 9. The provisions of section  117B(6)  are  applicable  to  the  principal
    appellant's circumstances.  Section 117B, so far  as  relevant,  is  as
    follows:

         "117B (1)     The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
         in the public interest. ...
         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

10. Qualifying child is defined at section 117D(1) as:

         "117D(1) In this Part - ...
             "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18
             and who-
             (a)  is a British citizen, or
             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more; ..."

    The date when the period of 7 years falls to be assessed is the date of
    hearing: see MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the  application  of)  v  Upper
    Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at
    [13].

11. It is not in dispute that  the  principal  appellant  (and  indeed  the
    second appellant) has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with both his children, the third and fourth appellants.  Both children
    are Nigerian, not  British  citizens,  and  were  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The elder child is now 8  years  old.   She  is  therefore  a
    qualifying child under section 117D(1)(b).

12. This application turns on the question whether  it  is  reasonable  for
    that child to leave the United Kingdom, applying section 117D.  As seen
    above, the First-tier Tribunal Judge did consider that  and  reach  the
    conclusion that it would  be  reasonable  for  both  children,  and  in
    particular the qualifying child, to accompany their parents to Nigeria.



13. I have been directed by Mr Ikwuazom to  the  consideration  of  section
    117B by the Upper Tribunal in Treebhawon and others  (section  117B(6))
    [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC), Rajendran (s117B - family  life)  [2016]  UKUT
    00138 (IAC) and PD and  Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC).  The appellant  also  relies  on  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874, which predates the introduction of section 117.

14. All of the existing jurisprudence was considered by Lord Justice Elias,
    with whom Lady Justice King and Sir Stephen Richards concurred,  in  MA
    (Pakistan) and his conclusions on the proper approach are to  be  found
    at [45]-[47]:

         "46. ... the fact that a child has been here for seven  years  must
             be  given   significant   weight   when   carrying   out   the
             proportionality exercise.   Indeed,  the  Secretary  of  State
             published guidance in August 2015 in the form  of  Immigration
             Directorate Instructions entitled 'Family Life (as  a  partner
             or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes' in  which  it  is
             expressly  stated  that  once  the  seven   years'   residence
             requirement is satisfied, there need to  be  'strong  reasons'
             for refusing leave (paragraph  11.2.4).   ...   After  such  a
             period of  time  the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
             developed social, cultural and educational  links  in  the  UK
             such that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is
             required to leave the UK.   That  may  be  less  so  when  the
             children are very young because the focus of their lives  will
             be on their families, but the disruption becomes more  serious
             as they get older.  Moreover, in these cases there must  be  a
             very strong expectation that the child's best  interests  will
             be to remain in the United Kingdom with his parents as part of
             a family unit, and that must rank as a  primary  consideration
             in the proportionality assessment.

         47.  Even if we were applying the narrow reasonableness test, where
             the focus is on the child alone,  it  would  not  in  my  view
             follow that leave must be granted whenever  the  child's  best
             interests are in favour of  remaining.   I  reject  Mr  Gill's
             submission [on behalf of the second appellant] that  the  best
             interests assessment automatically resolves the reasonableness
             question.  If Parliament had wanted the child's best interests
             to dictate the outcome of the leave application, it would have
             said so.  The concept of 'best interests' is after all a well-
             established one.  Even where the child's best interests are to
             stay, it may still not be unreasonable to require the child to
             leave.  That will depend on a careful analysis of  the  nature
             and extent of the links in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in  the
             country where it is proposed he should return.  What could not
             be considered, however, would be the conduct  and  immigration
             history of the parents."

    On similar facts to those in the present case, the Court of  Appeal  in
    MA (Pakistan) upheld the decision of the court below in the case of  MA
    and dismissed the appeal.

15. The 7-year rule is not, however, a trump card where  the  children  are
    not British citizens.  Lord Hodge, giving the decision of the Court  in
    the Supreme Court decision in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 74, said this at [24]:

             "24.  There is no irrationality in the conclusion that it  was
             in the children's best interests to go with their  parents  to
             the Republic of Congo. No doubt it would have been possible to
             have stated that, other things being equal, it was in the best
             interests of the children that they and their  parents  stayed
             in the United Kingdom so that they could obtain such  benefits
             as  health  care  and  education  which   the   decision-maker
             recognised might  be  of  a  higher  standard  than  would  be
             available in the Congo. But other things were not equal.  They
             were not  British  citizens.  They  had  no  right  to  future
             education and health care in this country. They were part of a
             close-knit family with highly educated parents and were of  an
             age when their emotional needs could only be fully met  within
             the immediate family unit. Such integration  as  had  occurred
             into United Kingdom society would have been  predominantly  in
             the context of  that  family  unit.  Most  significantly,  the
             decision-maker concluded that they could  be  removed  to  the
             Republic of Congo in the care of their parents without serious
             detriment to their well-being. ...

             25.  Finally, we see no substance in the  criticism  that  the
             assessment of the children's best interests was flawed because
             it assumed that their parents would be removed to the Republic
             of Congo. ...It was legitimate for the decision-maker  to  ask
             herself first whether it  would  have  been  proportionate  to
             remove the parents if  they  had  no  children  and  then,  in
             considering  the  best  interests  of  the  children  in   the
             proportionality exercise, ask whether their well-being altered
             that provisional balance. When one has regard to  the  age  of
             the children, the nature and extent of their integration  into
             United Kingdom society, the close family unit  in  which  they
             lived and their Congolese citizenship, the matters on which Mr
             Lindsay relied did not create  such  a  strong  case  for  the
             children that  their  interest  in  remaining  in  the  United
             Kingdom could have outweighed the considerations on which  the
             decision-maker  relied  in  striking  the   balance   in   the
             proportionality  exercise  (paras  17  and  18   above).   The
             assessment of the children's best interests must  be  read  in
             the context of the decision letter as a whole."

    Discussion

16. I am satisfied that there is an error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I  have  therefore  considered  whether  it  is
    material to the outcome of the appeal, such that I should set it  aside
    and remake the decision.  There is  no  challenge  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the findings of fact in the First-tier Tribunal, at [23]-[27]
    of the decision.

17. The Judge had regard to all of  the  evidence  which  was  before  him,
    including letters of support written by friends of the family  and  the
    daughter's class mates and a letter written  by  the  qualifying  child
    herself in which she  expressed  a  desire  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The  Judge  noted  that  apart  from  wearing  glasses,   the
    qualifying child had no medical problems, and  that  she  was  used  to
    interacting with Nigerian nationals in the United Kingdom and still had
    relatives there in Nigeria including her grandfather, three  aunts  and
    two uncles.  He  accepted  that  the  qualifying  child  enjoyed  close
    friendships with the children of her parents' friends, whom she saw out
    of school but noted that the accommodation  conditions  of  the  family
    were far from ideal.  They were sharing a room in  a  one-bedroom  flat
    with another single  male  family  friend,  and  were  indigent.   They
    depended for survival on financial gifts from others and  donations  of
    food from the children's school.

18. The Judge concluded that the family would be able to renew contact with
    the extended family on their  return  to  Nigeria  and  that,  although
    neither of the children has ever been to Nigeria, it would be in  their
    best interests to return there with their parents, who have, for a long
    time now, remained in the United Kingdom without leave.

19. Those are the matters which the Judge would have taken into account  in
    determining the reasonableness of removing the  qualifying  child  with
    her parents and younger sibling, had he directed himself correctly that
    section 117B(6) was indeed  applicable.   The  error  of  law  was  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

20. I decline to set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  which  will
    stand, and I dismiss the appeal.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:         2 December 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

