
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00950/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2017                   |On 24 January 2017                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                       mr Kouakou Yoann Hippolyte Doni
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant whose date of  birth  is  12  August
    1997 and who is a national of the Ivory Coast.

2.   This matter comes before me as an error of law hearing.  The  appellant
    applied for permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Clarke) ("FTT"), who dismissed  his  appeal  against  a
    refusal  of  entry  clearance  for  settlement  with  his  mother   and
    stepfather, under paragraphs 297 and 301 of the  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395, (as amended).

First-tier Tribunal Decision

3.   The FTT dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  2  August
    2016.  The FTT found that the appellant failed to show evidence of  the
    death of his father [6] and therefore could not meet  the  requirements
    under paragraph 297(i)(e). The FTT then considered paragraph  297(i)(f)
    and found that despite gaining legal status in 2010  the  sponsor  (the
    appellant's mother) failed to visit him in the Ivory Coast,  failed  to
    arrange for him  to visit to her in the UK and/or failed to  apply  for
    settlement in the UK at an earlier occasion [8].  The  FTT  found  that
    the appellant could be adequately housed and that  this  was  the  case
    since 2009.  [10].  There was no evidence to show that  there  was  not
    adequate finance so that an earlier application could have  been  made.
    The FTT found that the appellant failed to show there were serious  and
    compelling family reasons which made his exclusion undesirable.  He was
    living with a family member, in contact with his mother three  to  four
    times a week, he had  been  educated  and  the  sponsors  pay  for  his
    expenses [12].  As  to  paragraph  301  the  FTT  reiterated  that  the
    appellant had not shown that his mother had sole responsibility for him
    because he failed to show that his father was dead and/or that she  had
    sole responsibility for him and/or that she has been  the  only  person
    ever exercising sole responsibility.

Grounds for Permission

4.   In grounds for permission it was argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred by failing to consider paragraph 301  where  paragraph  297(i)(d)
    and (e) were not met.   It  was  further  argued  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal placed too much weight on the  lack  of  visits  made  by  his
    mother to see the appellant without considering  all  of  the  relevant
    evidence.  It was accepted that the appellant's application  would  not
    have succeeded under paragraph 297(i)(d) or (e) as the appellant  could
    not show that his biological father was dead and  his  mother  did  not
    have settled status.  It was argued that paragraph  301(1)(b)  did  not
    require the other parent to be dead and that  the  FTT  ought  to  have
    considered   "sole   responsibility"    (TD(paragraph    297(i)(e);sole
    responsibility) Yemen[2006] UKAIT 00049 ). The FTT erred at [14] by not
    finding that the appellant's mother had only ever been exercising  sole
    responsibility.  It was further argued that the  FTT  placed  too  much
    weight on the fact that the appellant's mother had not visited him  and
    the surrounding circumstances to the possibility  of  her  issuing   an
    invitation to the appellant to visit the UK.  Alternatively, the appeal
    ought to have succeeded under Article 8.

Permission to Appeal

5.   Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Macdonald on 2 December 2016 in the following terms:

         "The grounds state that the mother and stepfather  both  gave  oral
         evidence in court as well as in their witness statements to confirm
         that they alone have had sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant.
         With reference to TD it is said that the judge erred in  law.   The
         judge did not take account of the reasons given by the  mother  for
         not visiting the appellant.  There were compelling and other family
         considerations that made exclusion of the appellant undesirable.

         The judge attached importance to the lack of  a  death  certificate
         and for that main reason concluded that the appellant had not shown
         that his mother was the sole parent or had sole responsibility  for
         him.  The judge went on to give other reasons why the appellant did
         not satisfy the terms  of  paragraph  297.   There  is  a  detained
         statement from the appellant's sponsor at page 21 of the bundle and
         in  that  statement  she  explains  that  none  of  them  know  the
         whereabouts of the appellant's  father.   She  gives  a  number  of
         reasons why she was not able to visit the appellant.  The judge  is
         silent on whether he accepts or rejects that evidence and if it can
         be inferred that he rejects it then there is an  arguable  lack  of
         reasoning on why that evidence was rejected.  Whilst the  judge  is
         clear on why the appellant does not succeed  under  paragraph  297,
         permission to appeal is granted, for the sake of  clarity,  on  all
         grounds. "

Error of Law Hearing

6.   At the error of law hearing there was no appearance made on  behalf  of
    the  appellant  by  his  representatives  from   Mountain   Partnership
    Solicitors nor by the sponsors.  I was satisfied  that  the  notice  of
    hearing had been served on the appellant at his sponsors'  address  and
    at his solicitor's address.  Further there was no  application  for  an
    adjournment and no reasons given for the  absence  of  the  appellant's
    representative and the sponsors.  I proceeded to determine  the  appeal
    in accordance with the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

7.   Mr Whitwell for the respondent relied  on  the  Rule  24  response  and
    opposed the appeal.   Mr  Whitwell  argued  that  it  was  unclear  why
    permission had been granted as the  FTT  had  made  findings  that  the
    appellant had not demonstrated that his mother had sole  responsibility
    for him at paragraphs 7, 5 and 12.  There was a dearth of  evidence  on
    the specific issue of sole responsibility. It  was  arguable  that  the
    FTT's reasoning at paragraphs 6 and 7 was adequate given that  the  FTT
    found no reliable evidence that the appellant's father was  dead  which
    was the main basis for the appeal.

Discussion and decision

8.   As  stated  above  neither  the  appellant's  representatives  nor  the
    sponsors attended to for the error of law hearing.  I heard submissions
    made by Mr Whitwell which I have taken into account.

9.   I am satisfied that the FTT properly considered the requirements  under
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules  in  concluding  that  paragraph
    297(i)(e) could not be met because there was no evidence to  show  that
    the appellant's father was dead and therefore it could not  been  shown
    that his mother had sole responsibility for his  upbringing.   The  FTT
    further considered paragraph 297(i)(f) and concluded that there were no
    serious and compelling or other circumstances which made it undesirable
    for the child to be excluded and suitable arrangements  had  been  made
    for the child's care.  As the appellant's father had not been shown  to
    be dead his stepfather could not be classed as a "parent".  His  mother
    had discretionary leave and  was  not  therefore  considered  as  being
    settled.

10.  The FTT considered paragraph 301 at [14] and  maintained  the  position
    that  the  appellant  failed  to  show  that  his   mother   had   sole
    responsibility for him because he failed to show his father  was  dead,
    failed to show that she had sole responsibility for him and  failed  to
    show that she was the only person exercising sole responsibility.   The
    FTT considered the appellant's circumstances having regard to the  fact
    that he had lived with his grandmother for a significant period of time
    until her death and thereafter lived with his uncle from 2005 to  2010,
    which the FTT found was not a temporary  arrangement.   The  FTT  found
    that the appellant had been educated and that his mother and stepfather
    paid for his expenses.  In the absence of further  evidence  concerning
    the issue of sole responsibility together with  the  finding  that  the
    appellant had failed to show his father was dead, I am  satisfied  that
    the FTT's findings as to sole responsibility were reasonably  made  and
    open to it to make on the evidence before the FTT.   Having  regard  to
    the decision and reasons as a whole I am satisfied that the FTT reached
    findings and conclusions open to it and that the reasons for dismissing
    the appeal are clear.



Notice of Decision

11.  I find no material error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date    22.1.2017

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 22.1.2017

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
