
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00402/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 19 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE SWEENEY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FDS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss M Chowdhury, Counsel, instructed by Harding
                    Mitchell Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. In accordance with the order of Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  dated  26
    September 2017, and for the sake of continuity, we shall refer  to  the
    now appellant as the SSHD, and we shall refer to the now respondent, Mr
    Dos Santos, as the appellant.  He was granted anonymity in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and that order is maintained.

 2. By permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan, granted on  21  June
    2017, the SSHD appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Keane, promulgated on  12  May  2017,  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal brought under the provisions of Section 82 of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended ("the 2002 Act") against the
    decision of the SSHD, made on 10 May 2015, to  refuse  the  appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR human rights claim, treated as having been made  by  the
    appellant in February 2015, upon the basis that the SSHD's decision  to
    give directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999
    ("the 1999 Act") was not in accordance with the law, and that in  those
    circumstances it was not necessary to consider Article  8  or  to  make
    findings of fact in relation to it.

 3. Ultimately, four grounds of appeal have been relied upon, namely that:

 1) In view of the amendment of Section 86, and other aspects, of the  2002
    Act by the Immigration Act 2014 ("the 2014  Act"),  operative  from  20
    October 2014, the judge had  no  jurisdiction  to  decide  whether  the
    decision to give directions under  Section  10  of  the  1999  Act  was
    unlawful.

 2) In any event, the SSHD had  neither  decided  to,  nor  ever  given,  a
    direction under Section 10 of the 1999 Act.

 3) As the appeal was against the refusal of a human rights claim,  and  by
    the combined effect of Sections 82(1)(b) and 84(2) of the 2002  Act  as
    then in force, the ultimate issue that the  judge  had  to  decide  was
    whether the refusal was unlawful under Section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 ("the 1998 Act"), but he never engaged with that issue.

 4) In any event, a number of the judge's findings of fact in  relation  to
    the Operation Nexus material that was put before  him  were  Wednesbury
    unreasonable or irrational.

 4. It is, in our view, self-evident that this appeal must  be  allowed  on
    grounds 1 to 3, and that the case must be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the appellant's appeal to be heard afresh by  a  different
    judge.   The  parties  agree.  We  shall,  nevertheless,  set  out  the
    background and then summarise our reasons.

Background

 5. The appellant, a citizen of Angola, is now  aged  26.   On  30  October
    2005, aged 14, he entered this country on a family reunion visa and was
    granted indefinite leave to enter.

 6. In the period between July 2009 and February  2015  the  appellant  was
    suspected by the Metropolitan  Police  of  being  involved  in  various
    serious  crimes.   The  underlying  materials  in  relation  to   those
    suspicions were gathered together as part of  the  Metropolitan  Police
    Operation called Nexus.  One incident, in January  2015,  involved  the
    appellant allegedly throwing a bottle at a female and knocking her  out
    and then kicking another female (who had gone to help the first female)
    three times in the head. That led, in June 2012, to  a  conviction  for
    using threatening behaviour with intent to use fear or  provocation  of
    violence, and subsequently to the imposition of a community order  with
    various requirements.

 7. On 9 February 2015 the SSHD wrote to the appellant, pursuant to Section
    5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 ("the 1971 Act"), informing  him  that
    in the light of his conviction, and looking at his life in  the  round,
    consideration was being given (pursuant to section  3(5)  of  the  1971
    Act) as to whether his continued presence  in  the  UK  was  no  longer
    conducive to the public good.

 8. The appellant replied by letter on 16 February 2015, asserting that  he
    had lived in the UK since 30 October 2005; that he had  an  established
    family with his girlfriend Shannon Douglas and  their  young  daughter;
    that he had established personal friendship with  Ms  Shenequa  Hibbert
    and Mr Luke Francis; that he attended Church  of  Jesus  on  a  regular
    basis; and that he had deep roots within his community.

 9. The appellant's representations were treated as being  a  human  rights
    claim, and on 19 May 2015 the SSHD wrote to him  refusing  that  claim.
    In the attached Notice of Decision, the  SSHD  set  out  the  potential
    reasons for  deportation;  the  appellant's  immigration  and  criminal
    history; the evidence from  police  systems;  the  other  evidence  and
    representations; and, at some length, the reasons for her decision.

10. The appellant appealed.  There were four hearings before Judge Keane in
    the First-tier Tribunal - on 9 March 2016, 6 July  2016,  29  September
    2016 and 3  April  2017.   There  was  an  appeal  bundle  of  relevant
    materials, including voluminous  documentation  from  Operation  Nexus,
    which ran to more than 1,000 pages.   The  appellant  called  a  Police
    Constable Dady and the respondent also gave evidence.

11. In setting out the background in his subsequent judgment the judge said
    this:

         "... On 10 May 2015 the respondent made a decision  to  refuse  the
         appellant's application on the grounds that his  removal  from  the
         United Kingdom would not place the United Kingdom in breach of  its
         obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998 and the respondent gave
         directions for the removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom
         pursuant to Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  ...
          It is convenient here to record  concisely  the  issue  which  the
         appeal raised.  The respondent was to establish to the  balance  of
         probabilities the factual basis for the power  to  give  directions
         under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  ..."

12. The judge then set out the then rival contentions of  the  parties  and
    summarised what had happened during each of the four  hearings.   Under
    the heading "Conclusion" the judge began by saying that:

         "The issue which went to the heart  of  the  appeal  concerned  the
         respondent's contention that  the  appellant  had  manifested  that
         conduct, and had been party to those associations, to which PC Dady
         referred in his witness  statement,  and  having  recourse  to  his
         succinct  summaries  and  supplemented   by   the   'Nexus   style'
         documentary evidence.  It was common ground between the parties  to
         the appeal that it was for the respondent to discharge  the  burden
         of  proving  to  the  balance  of  probabilities   the   evidential
         foundation for the exercise of the power to make directions for the
         removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom.  I was to  arrive
         at findings of fact."

13. The judge then went on to make findings of  fact,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, in relation to each of the incidents relied upon by  the
    SSHD, and ultimately said this at paragraph 28 of his judgment:

         "Save in limited respects the respondent did not establish  to  the
         balance of probabilities the evidential foundation or factual basis
         for her exercise of the power in making the decision under  appeal.
         Indeed, the respondent  very  largely  did  not  establish  to  the
         balance of probabilities that conduct which she alleged against the
         appellant.  I most certainly do not condone those  aspects  of  the
         appellant's conduct as to  which  I  have  found  the  respondent's
         contentions   well-founded   contentions.    Nevertheless,   as   a
         generality  the  appellant  has  been  responsible  for  very   few
         incidences  of  misconduct,  upon  a  careful  application  of  the
         requisite standard of proof.  The  respondent's  decision  to  give
         directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999
         for the removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom was not in
         accordance with the law.  In these circumstances I do not  consider
         Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention or make findings  of  fact
         in respect of the appellant's claims to have established family and
         private life in the United Kingdom.  The appeal is allowed  on  the
         ground that the respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with
         the law."

Our Reasons

14. Prior to its amendment by the 2014 Act  Section  86  of  the  2002  Act
    provided that:

         "(1) This Section applies on an appeal under Section 82(1)

         ...

         (3)  The Tribunal must allow the appeal insofar as it thinks that -

             (a)  a decision against which the  appeal  is  brought  or  is
                  treated as being brought was not in  accordance  with  the
                  law (including Immigration Rules), or

         ..."

15. After amendment by the 2014 Act, and in relation to human rights claims
    (defined in Section 113(1) of the  2002  Act  as  those  involving  the
    making of a claim by a person that to remove him or  her  from,  or  to
    require him or her to leave, the United Kingdom would be unlawful under
    Section 6 of the 1998 Act) Section 82 provides:

         "(1) A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where -

             ...

             (b)  the Secretary of State has  decided  to  refuse  a  human
                  rights claim made by P."

16. Insofar as relevant, Section 84 now provides:

         "(2) An appeal under Section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be brought on the  ground  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."

17. Section 86 now provides that:

         "(1) This Section applies to an appeal under Section 82(1).

         (2)  The Tribunal must determine -

             (a)  any matter raised as a ground of appeal and

             (b)  any matter which Section 85 requires it to consider."

18. Insofar as relevant, Section 85 now provides that:

         "(1) An appeal under Section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
             treated by [the Tribunal] as including an appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under Section 82(1).

         ...

         (4)  On an appeal under Section 82(1) ... against a  decision,  the
             Tribunal may consider  evidence  about  any  matter  which  it
             thinks relevant to the substance of  the  decision,  including
             evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date of the
             decision."

19. The Sections as amended by the 2014 Act, as set out immediately  above,
    were all in force at the time that this case was before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It follows that the pre-amendment  version  of  Section  86,
    under which the Tribunal was required to allow an appeal insofar as  it
    thought that a decision against which the appeal was  brought,  or  was
    treated as being brought, was not in accordance with the law (including
    Immigration Rules), no longer existed.  It had been  removed  from  the
    legislation by the 2014 amendments.

20. This case plainly involved the refusal of  a  human  rights  claim  (as
    defined), and therefore, as we have indicated, the  ultimate  issue  in
    accordance with the legislation as  then  in  force  should  have  been
    whether that refusal was unlawful under Section 6 of the 1998 Act.

21. Whilst we have some sympathy  with  the  judge,  who  was  clearly  not
    assisted by the parties to the extent that he should have been,  it  is
    therefore, self-evident that:

 1) He decided the appeal on foot of a provision in the 2002 Act  that  had
    been repealed.

 2) In so doing, as is clear from the background that we have set  out,  he
    proceeded upon the erroneous basis that the SSHD had  decided  to,  and
    had given directions for, the removal of the  appellant  when  she  had
    not.  Indeed, s.10 of the 1999 Act was of no application in  this  case
    at all, as it is  concerned  with  persons  who  are  in  this  country
    unlawfully which the appellant was not - he had indefinite leave.

 3) In any event, the judge never engaged with the real ultimate  issue  in
    the appeal as delineated in the combined effect of the amended  Section
    82(1)(b) and 84(2), namely whether the Article 8 refusal  was  unlawful
    under Section 6 of the 1998 Act.

22. That is why, as we have said, this appeal must be allowed on grounds  1
    to 3 (above) and the case must be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for the appeal to be heard afresh by a different judge.

23. It follows, and again the parties agree, that it is  not  necessary  to
    reach any conclusions in relation to ground 4  -  although  we  observe
    that there is obvious force in the some of the criticisms made.

24. The extent, if any,  of  consideration  and  evaluation  of  the  Nexus
    material in the new appeal hearing will be a matter for the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Hence, we must not be taken to be expressing  any  concluded
    view on that issue.

25. That said, we venture to suggest that the approach to that  issue  will
    necessarily be against the background that:

 1) In Ahsan v The Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 2009 the Court of Appeal recognised that a human rights appeal  can
    provide a suitable forum for  the  adjudication  of  a  factual  matter
    which, if decided in favour of  the  appellant,  will  necessitate  the
    finding that the appellant's Article 8  rights  would  be  violated  by
    hypothetical removal.

 2) Although Section 85 of the 2002 Act makes provision for certain matters
    to be considered on an appeal  under  Section  82(1)(b),  it  does  not
    expand the scope of a human rights  appeal.   Rather,  the  wording  of
    Section 85(1) makes it clear that  the  appeal  can  include  only  "an
    appeal against any decision in respect of which  the  appellant  has  a
    right of appeal under Section 82(1)" - i.e. in this case a human rights
    claim.

 3) Section 85(4) permits the Tribunal to  consider  any  matter  which  it
    thinks is relevant to the substance of the decision.  Therefore,  in  a
    human rights appeal, a matter will be relevant if, and only if, it goes
    to the question of whether the decision was unlawful under Section 6 of
    the 1998 Act.

 4) As this is an Article 8 case, it will require consideration of the five
    questions posed by Lord Bingham at paragraph 17 of the  opinions  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD No 2 [2004] 2 AC 368, and it will only be if the fourth
    and/or fifth questions are reached that it may be necessary to consider
    and evaluate the Nexus material.

Conclusion

26. For the reasons that we have given, the appeal is  allowed.   The  case
    will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the appellant's  appeal
    to be heard afresh by a different judge.

27. In addition, and to avoid any repeat of the mishaps  that  resulted  in
    four hearings first time  around,  we  order  that  a  case  management
    hearing be listed before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal within four
    weeks of today.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.

 2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Directions

(1)  There shall be a case management hearing listed before a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal within four weeks of  the  date  this  decision  is
    sent.


Signed                                  Date 16 March 2018

Mr Justice Sweeney

