
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/00809/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 1 July 2019                     |           On 4 July 2019               |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

                                   Between

                              LEON KWESI ESIMI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Nadeem, Counsel, of City Law Immigration Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Birk (the judge), promulgated on 2  May  2019,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  dated  7
        December 2018 refusing his human rights claim.

   Background


     2. The appellant, a national of Ghana, was born in  1994.  It  is  not
        altogether clear when the appellant entered the  UK.  He  maintains
        that he entered in 2004, and the respondent  accepts  that  he  was
        issued with a visa endorsed "settlement  to  join  parents"  on  23
        February 2005. According to the skeleton argument relied on by  the
        appellant's representative in the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  the
        appellant was around 10 years old when he entered the  UK  to  join
        his mother. He has been settled in the UK since 2005.  His  parents
        and younger siblings reside in the UK, as  do  a  number  of  other
        aunts and uncles. The appellant has not  returned  to  Ghana  since
        first entering this country.


     3. The appellant has several criminal convictions, which the judge set
        out in her decision. Of particular relevance is an offence relating
        to the supply of cannabis for which the appellant  received  an  18
        months sentence of imprisonment on 13 April 2018.

     4. The respondent decided to make  a  deportation  order  against  the
        appellant on 1 May 2018  in  accordance  with  s.32(5)  of  the  UK
        Borders Act 2007. The appellant made a human rights claim on 28 May
        2018 but this  was  refused  on  7  December  2018.  The  appellant
        appealed the  respondent's  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        pursuant to s.82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002 (the 2002 Act).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. At the hearing the  appellant  relied  on  a  bundle  of  documents
        running to  69  pages  that  included,  inter  alia,  a  manuscript
        statement written by the appellant, undated and unsigned statements
        from his parents and his aunt (Linda Darkwah), a witness  statement
        from Whitney Eubanks dated 28 May 2018 (together with a copy of her
        Jamaican passport and a grant of ILR dated  9  March  2004),  birth
        certificates relating to Ms Eubank's three  children  from  another
        relationship (born in 2009, 2012 and  2014)  and  some  educational
        certificates. The judge also  considered  a  skeleton  argument.  A
        respondent's bundle of documents had not previously been served  on
        the appellant and no additional copy was served on the day  of  the
        hearing, although a copy of a presentence report was provided.


     6. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant,  his  father  and
        his aunt. Ms Eubanks did not attend the hearing as it  was  claimed
        she was unable to arrange for a babysitter.

     7. In her decision the judge  summarised  the  decision  refusing  the
        appellant's  human  rights  claim,  the  oral  evidence   and   the
        submissions made on behalf of both parties. The judge then set  out
        the correct legal framework for assessing refusals of human  rights
        claims in the context of deportation decisions (paragraphs 398, 299
        and 399A of the immigration rules,  and  s.117B  &  s.117C  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). The judge  correctly
        directed herself as to the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  "very
        compelling circumstances" under paragraph 398  of  the  immigration
        rules.

     8. Under the heading "My Findings"  the  judge  first  considered  the
        submissions  relating  to  the  private  life  established  by  the
        appellant in the UK, with reference to paragraph 399A and s.117C(4)
        (which provide for  an  exception  to  the  public  interest  in  a
        person's deportation, in the  context  of  a  person  sentenced  to
        between 12 months and 4  years  imprisonment,  if  they  have  been
        lawfully resident in the UK for most of their  life,  are  socially
        and culturally integrated in the  UK,  and  there  would  be  "very
        significant obstacles" to their integration into their  country  of
        proposed deportation). The respondent accepted that  the  appellant
        met the first 2 requirements, but was not satisfied there would  be
        "very significant obstacles"  to  the  appellant's  integration  in
        Ghana. From [25] to [28] the judge noted that the appellant  was  9
        or 10 years age when he arrived in the UK, that he attended  school
        and college here, and that he would not have any family members  or
        friends  to  assist  him  in  Ghana.  The  judge  found  that   the
        appellant's ability to speak English would be an advantage in Ghana
        and that it was not imperative  that  he  must  speak  other  local
        languages. Although the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
        likely to have little memory  of  life  in  Ghana  it  was  not  an
        entirely alien culture to  him  as  he  had  grown  up  within  his
        Ghanaian family in the UK. The judge observed the  absence  of  any
        restrictions on the appellant's family visiting  him  in  Ghana  or
        providing him with support. The appellant had not produced evidence
        from a reliable independent source that he was suffering  from  any
        form of mental or physical difficulties.  The  appellant  had  also
        demonstrated the ability to complete educational courses  (in  2013
        he received some BTEC qualifications in the performing  arts).  The
        judge found that  the  appellant  would  have  an  opportunity  and
        ability to seek work and accommodation and that he would be able to
        look after and care for himself. At [29] the  judge  accepted  that
        the appellant would find Ghana,  at  least  initially,  a  new  and
        different environment but was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant
        would  have  real  difficulties   in   establishing   himself   and
        integrating himself into life in Ghana.


     9. The judge then considered the evidence supporting  the  appellant's
        claimed relationship with Ms Eubanks and her children. Although the
        appellant claimed to have been in a relationship  with  Ms  Eubanks
        for 2 years she did not attend the hearing and her statement was  a
        year old. The judge acknowledged the assertions made in Ms Eubanks'
        statement (that she, the appellant and her children  form  a  close
        family unit and that her children regarded the appellant  as  their
        stepfather), but placed little weight on the  statement  given  its
        vintage and Ms Eubanks absence from the hearing. The judge rejected
        the explanation for Ms Eubanks absence. The judge was not satisfied
        there was any relationship in existence between the  appellant  and
        the Eubank family and supported her conclusion by reference to  the
        absence of detailed evidence of the appellant's involvement with Ms
        Eubanks and the  children,  the  fact  that  they  did  not  reside
        together as a family unit  prior  to  his  incarceration,  and  the
        absence of details of his relationship contained in the presentence
        report. Given these findings the judge did  not  need  to  consider
        whether the appellant's deportation  would  have  an  unduly  harsh
        impact on any qualifying family members.


    10. From [37] to [43] the judge finally considered whether  there  were
        'very compelling circumstances' over and above  the  exceptions  in
        paragraph 399 and 399A and the immigration rules and s.117C(4)  and
        (5)  of  the  2002  Act  rendering  the  decision  to  refuse   the
        appellant's human rights claim disproportionate  under  Article  8.
        The judge noted that the appellant failed to establish Exceptions 1
        and 2 by a large margin, but that he was considered at low risk  of
        serious reoffending within a two-year period and was at low risk of
        serious harm to others  (by  reference  to  a  Offender  Assessment
        report completed in January 2018). The judge however  observed  the
        absence of any independent reliable evidence that the appellant had
        completed work addressing his drug misuse  to  a  satisfactory  and
        sustainable level and that he  had  not  established  that  he  was
        rehabilitated. The issue of drug misuse was still a current factor.
        The judge acknowledged the arguments advanced  by  the  appellant's
        family that he fell in with the wrong crowd as a child,  but  there
        was little evidence that the appellant  had  successfully  overcome
        those influences that led him into crime. The judge also took  into
        account that the appellant's most recent  offences  were  committed
        when he was in his 20's. There was also little independent reliable
        evidence supporting the appellant's claimed mental  health  issues.
        The judge took into account that the appellant's family resided  in
        the UK and that he had been residing with his aunt. The  judge  was
        not however satisfied that the appellant's  relationship  with  his
        aunt or his parents went beyond  the  normal  emotional  ties  that
        exist between  such  adults.  Having  holistically  considered  the
        evidence upon which the appellant relied the judge found there were
        insufficient compelling circumstances to outweigh the  high  public
        interest in deportation. The appeal was dismissed

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

    11. The grounds of appeal, as amplified by Mr Nadeem at the  'error  of
        law' hearing, contend that the judge failed to have  regard  to  or
        make findings in respect of the factors listed in s.117B(2) and (3)
        of the 2002 Act, that the hearing was procedurally  unfair  because
        the appellant was  not  served  with  the  respondent's  bundle  of
        documents, that the judge failed to direct  herself  in  accordance
        with the "very significant obstacles" test in SSHD v Kamara  [2016]
        EWCA Civ 813, and that the judge failed to apply her  mind  to  the
        guidance  given  in  Maslov  v   Austria   [2008]   ECHR   1638/03,
        particularly in respect of the deportation of a youth who had spent
        the majority of his childhood in a host country.

    12. Having heard Mr Nadeem's submissions it was not necessary  to  call
        upon Mr Avery. We indicated that we would dismiss  the  appeal  and
        would give our decisions in writing.

Discussion

    13. The grounds do not challenge the judge's approach  to  the  claimed
        relationship between the appellant and the Eubanks family,  and  Mr
        Nadeem did not suggest that the judge  fell  into  legal  error  in
        concluding that the appellant did  not  have  a  relationship  with
        either a qualifying partner or a qualifying child, as understood by
        s.117D(1) of the 2002 Act.


    14. Mr Nadeem did not advance the "procedural unfairness" point in  his
        oral submissions. We consider this ground to be without merit. When
        granting permission to appeal Designated Judge Shaerf observed that
        there was no reference in the judge's decision  or  her  record  of
        proceedings to any adjournment application made by the appellant or
        his representatives because they  had  not  been  served  with  the
        respondent's bundle. Designated  Judge  Shaerf  observed  that  the
        appellant may  well  need  to  obtain  the  record  of  proceedings
        prepared by his representative at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
        with a view to establishing what was said about the late service or
        failure to serve the respondent's  bundle.  The  Tribunal  has  not
        received any  such  record  of  proceedings  from  the  appellant's
        representative. The grounds do not identify how the  appellant  has
        been prejudiced by the failure to serve  the  respondent's  bundle.
        The  bundle  mostly  replicates  the  documents  contained  in  the
        appellant's  own  bundle  and  includes  the  decision  to  make  a
        deportation order, the deportation order itself and the refusal  of
        the appellant's human rights claim. The only other documents of any
        relevance consist of the Sentencing Remarks and the Police National
        Computer record of the appellant's convictions. The  appellant  has
        not taken issue with the content of these other documents, and,  as
        pointed out by the judge at [4], the  appellant's  criminal  record
        was not in dispute. Whilst the respondent's bundle should have been
        served on the appellant a reasonable time prior to the hearing,  we
        are not satisfied that the respondent's failure to do  so  rendered
        the hearing unfair.


    15. Designated Judge Shaerf  properly  observed  that  the  factors  in
        s.117B(2)  and  (3),  relating  respectively  to  the   appellant's
        proficiency  in  English  and  his  ability   to   be   financially
        independent, were neutral factors and that although the failure  to
        meet those requirements could be held against the  appellant,  they
        were not points upon which he could positively rely  (see  Rhuppiah
        [2018] UKSC 58). It is apparent from reading the decision  'in  the
        round'  that  the  judge  was  acutely  aware  of  the  appellant's
        proficiency in English (see, for example, [26]). Although the judge
        did not specifically refer to s.117B(2) or  (3)  he  did  not  hold
        against  the  appellant  his  proficiency   in   English   or   any
        difficulties  the  appellant  faced  in  being  financially   self-
        sufficient because his passport  had  been  retained  by  the  Home
        Office. The absence of any reference to the appellant's ability  to
        be financially independent indicates that the judge regarded  these
        factors as neutral. There is therefore no error.

    16. In granting permission to appeal Designated Judge Shaerf  was  most
        concerned with the adequacy of the judge's  findings,  at  [26]  to
        [29], that there  were  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
        appellant's deportation to Ghana. The grounds rely on the Court  of
        Decision in Kamara. Both Kamara and AS v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  1284
        considered the concept of "integration" in s.117C(4)(c) of the 2002
        Act and paragraph 399A of the immigration rules.  In  Kamara  Sales
        LJ, with whom Moore-Bick LJ agreed, stated, at [14],


             In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  "integration"
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,
             as set out in section 117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph  399A,  is  a
             broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to  find  a
             job or to sustain life while living in the other  country.  It
             is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as  subject
             to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
             evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life.


    17. In AS Lord Justice Moylan  rejected  a  submission  that  so-called
        "generic" factors, such as intelligence, health, employability  and
        general robustness of character, were irrelevant when  assessing  a
        person's ability to integrate, and held that such  factors  can  be
        relevant  to  whether  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
        integration as they form part of the  "broad  evaluative  judgment"
        (at [58] and [59]). The Court of Appeal rejected a submission  that
        whether someone is "enough of an insider" is to  be  determined  by
        reference to their ties to the country of proposed removal.


    18. Although the judge does not refer to either Kamara  or  AS  we  are
        satisfied that she did  apply  a  broad  evaluative  judgment  when
        determining the existence of "very significant obstacles". We  have
        summarised the matters considered  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  8
        above. She accepted that the appellant  did  not  have  any  family
        members or friends within Ghana, and that he  was  likely  to  have
        little memory of life in that  country,  but  found  that  Ghanaian
        culture was not entirely alien to  him  as  he  grew  up  with  his
        Ghanaian family in the UK. This was clearly a finding open  to  the
        judge. She also noted the ability  of  the  appellant's  family  to
        support him from the UK and through visits, and that  he  had  been
        able to complete educational courses, indicating that he would have
        the opportunity and ability to seek work. There was no  independent
        reliable evidence of any physical or  mental  health  difficulties,
        and English was spoken in Ghana. The judge was not  satisfied  that
        the appellant would have real difficulties in establishing  himself
        and integrating into life in Ghana,  and  gave  cogent  reasons  in
        support. In our judgement it is irresistibly clear from the factors
        that she took into account that the judge found the appellant would
        be able to operate on  a  day-to-day  basis  and  would,  within  a
        reasonable period of time,  be  able  to  establish  a  variety  of
        relationships giving substance to his Article  8  rights.  We  find
        there  is  no  error  of  law  respect  to  the  "very  significant
        obstacles" test.

    19. In reliance on Uner v Netherlands [2006] 3 FCR 229 and  Maslov,  Mr
        Nadeem submitted that the judge failed to adequately  consider  the
        appellant's length of lawful residence in the UK as a  child  since
        the age of 10, and that she failed to consider that  the  appellant
        had never returned to Ghana. It is however apparent  from  [3]  and
        [25] that the judge was aware that the appellant had lived  in  the
        UK since the age of 9 or 10. In Akpinar, R (on the application  of)
        v The Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  [2014]  EWCA
        Civ 937 the Court of Appeal concluded that Maslov did not establish
        a new rule of law to the effect that, unless  the  state  can  show
        that there are "very  serious  reasons"  for  deporting  a  settled
        migrant who has lawfully  spent  all  or  the  major  part  of  his
        childhood and youth in the UK,  that  his  Article  8  rights  will
        prevail. In so concluding the Court of  Appeal  considered  a  wide
        range of decisions from the European Court of  Human  Rights  which
        highlighted the danger of treating "very  serious  reasons"  as  if
        they were a  legislative  requirement,  as  well  as  a  number  of
        domestic authorities. Although the judge did not make reference  to
        the case of Maslov of  by  name  she  did  take  into  account  the
        criteria identified in that case, including the appellant's  length
        of residence in the UK, his age  when  he  committed  his  criminal
        offences, and  the  solidity  of  ties  he  has  with  the  UK.  In
        determining that there  were  no  "very  compelling  circumstances"
        under paragraph 398 and s.117C(6) (as understood in NA (Pakistan) v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662,
        which confirmed that Parliament intended medium offenders  to  have
        the same fall back protection  as  serious  offenders),  the  judge
        adopted a wide-ranging and holistic approach and took into  account
        all relevant circumstances, including the appellant's  relationship
        with his family in the UK, the pre-sentence report, the appellant's
        state of health and the evidence suggesting that the appellant  was
        very much an independent person. The decision discloses no error in
        the assessment of "very compelling circumstances".

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.
The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed[pic]                               1  July 2019

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
