
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00170/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 November 2016                    |On 13 December 2016            |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                             RAMSHA SOHAIL AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Sohail Ahmad Sponsor
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on 27 October 2016 which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  refuse  her
   application for entry clearance as the partner of a PBS Migrant.

Background

4. The Appellant was  born  on  6  September  1992  and  is  a  national  of
   Pakistan.

5. On 23 January 2015 the Appellant and her sponsor Sohail Ahmad married  in
   Faisalabad. At the time the Sponsor was working in the UK  as  a  Tier  2
   Migrant and had been since 2010. On 13 April 2015 the Appellant made  the
   application the subject of this appeal in order to join  her  husband  in
   the UK.

6.  On  7  May  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the   Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave only one  reason  that  it  was  not
   accepted that the marriage was genuine and subsisting because  there  was
   no evidence that  the  Sponsor  had  returned  to  Pakistan  since  their
   marriage and she had never visited  him  in  the  UK  and  there  was  no
   evidence that they were in regular contact and therefore  engaged  in  an
   ongoing relationship and had 'chosen to live in different countries.'

The Judge's Decision

7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davies ("the Judge") allowed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found on the basis of the  documentary  evidence  and
   the oral evidence of the Sponsor that he could be satisfied  that  theirs
   was a genuine and subsisting marriage.

8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that there was no  recital  of  the
   credible evidence given by the sponsor or reasons why the Judge found him
   to be credible  and  on  1  August  2016  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  gave
   permission to appeal.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Harrison  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that he relied on the grounds of appeal that were  very  short
   but in essence were that the reasons given for allowing the  appeal  were
   inadequate.

10. Mr Ahmad stated that he gave evidence for about 20  minutes  before  the
   Judge. He asked the Sponsor about the various ways that  he  communicated
   with his wife and when was the last time they spoke  to  each  other.  He
   asked me why, given the time and expense of such an  application  ,  they
   would make such an application if their marriage were not genuine.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. The decision in this case is a very short one but I  am  satisfied  that
   the issue was a narrow one: was the marriage genuine and subsisting.  The
   evidence in the Respondents bundle before the Judge was  clear  that  the
   Respondent acknowledged that the parties were, in law, married  as  their
   application had been accompanied by a copy of their marriage certificate,
   photographs of the wedding and a copy of the  Sponsors  passport  showing
   that he was in Pakistan at the time of the marriage.

14. The application for entry clearance, it might be argued, was  made  very
   promptly after their marriage in April 2015 so it would have been open to
   the Judge to remark that the refusal letter was  unjustified  in  arguing
   that there had been no visits in either direction after the marriage.

15. The Judge  had  before  him  further  documentary  evidence  that  again
   confirmed that the Sponsor had been  to  Pakistan  at  the  time  of  the
   marriage in the form of flights  confirmation.  He  had  before  him  the
   Grounds of Appeal in which the Appellant argued that she had provided the
   evidence required in the UKBA website for such  an  application  and  not
   provided anything else as it was not asked for but stating that they  had
   maintained contact after marriage by Skype,  Whats  App  and  Viber.  The
   Judge also heard  evidence  from  the  Sponsor  at  the  hearing  and  he
   summarised it very briefly at paragraph 7 focusing on the  issues  raised
   in the refusal letter that might arguably have any merit:  the  level  of
   communication which he asserted was daily as the Appellant had stated  in
   the grounds, how long they had known each other (10years)  and  how  they
   knew each other(they were members of a small Ahmadhi community). It  does
   not appear from the Judges notes that the Home Office Presenting  Officer
   challenged the sponsor by way of cross examination.

16. I am satisfied that  having  heard  that  evidence  the  Judge  was  not
   required to recite it again in his findings. He  found  at  paragraph  10
   that the evidence of the  Sponsor  was  credible  and  was  supported  by
   documentary  evidence  which  given  that  it  was  unchallenged  by  the
   Respondent in court and consistent with that provided  by  his  wife  the
   Appellant was a finding that was open to him.

17. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

18. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.



CONCLUSION

19. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

20. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                                                  Date
11.12.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
