
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00083/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th October 2016                          |On 24th January 2017          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  Sajid [I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  20th
    October 1973.  He appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent, taken on 22nd  April  2015  to  deport  the
    Appellant to Pakistan following his conviction in 2002 on two counts of
    possession with intent to supply (heroin) and of dangerous driving.  In
    the refusal letter, the Respondent stated as follows:

         "You are 41 years old and after deducting your time in  prison,  it
         is found that you have been in the UK with  legal  leave  for  half
         your life.  However, it  is  considered  that  you  have  lived  in
         Pakistan  throughout  your  youth  and  formative  years  and   are
         considered to have maintained your cultural connection to  Pakistan
         through  your  family  members  with  whom  you  share  a  cultural
         background while in the UK.  Although you have been in UK since you
         were 16 years old it is considered that your serious criminality is
         evidence of your failure to assimilate into the society of the  UK.
         There is no evidence of you being  able  to  independently  support
         yourself in the UK without recourse to public funds.  It  is  found
         for the reasons  given  above  that  there  are  no  insurmountable
         obstacles raised to your integration into the country to which  you
         are a national and to which you  are  to  be  returned,  Pakistan."
         (Paragraph 43).

 2. The Appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford  at
    Birmingham on 2nd October 2015.  In the  determination  promulgated  on
    16th October 2015, Judge Ford concluded that:

         "I accept that the Appellant has been in the UK for a  considerable
         length of time.  But when considering the public  interest  I  must
         take into account the Appellant's  deportation  is  in  the  public
         interest.  The Appellant can speak  English.   This  is  a  neutral
         factor in the balancing exercise.  The  Appellant  has  established
         her private life in the  UK  and  does  have  a  relationship  with
         qualifying children.  But there is no requirement that his children
         leave the UK.  I do not accept that the Appellant has been lawfully
         resident in the UK for most of his  life  as  I  cannot  take  into
         account the period post conviction and the period of time he  spent
         in the UK prior to conviction did not exceed the period of time  he
         had spent living in Pakistan before that." (Paragraph 35).

 3. Judge Ford also went on to state that, "I have no doubt  but  that  the
    Appellant's family will keep a close eye on him if he  is  returned  to
    Pakistan and will endeavour to provide him with such  support  networks
    as they can organise from the UK" (paragraph 138).

 4. The judge did not overlook the fact that whilst,

         "Life will be hard for the Appellant in Pakistan and he will suffer
         from the separation from his family and his settled way of life  in
         the UK, I am satisfied that this decision is  a  proportionate  one
         and involves  a  proper  balancing  between  the  competing  public
         interest and the Appellant's  private  life  interests"  (paragraph
         141).

 5. The judge also had due regard to the impact of the Appellant's  removal
    upon his children and concluded that "the decision is not unduly  harsh
    for the children" (143) and not least because, "the Appellant  has  not
    established that his deportation is  unduly  harsh  for  the  children"
    (paragraph 143).

 6. In fact, the judge ended the determination with the observation that,

         "The Appellant would be able to continue his relationship with  his
         children and they with him and the only difference will be that  he
         would not see them face to face as often as they would wish.   They
         would have the easy facility they have now of ringing  him  up  and
         asking to see him, stay with him or for him to give  them  a  lift.
         Of course it  would  be  ideal  if  this  easy  relationship  could
         continue.  But I am satisfied that the  decision  is  proportionate
         and involves a proper balancing of the competing public interest in
         the Appellant's deportation ...."  (Paragraph 144).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

 8. On 14th April 2016, a permission to appeal was granted broadly  on  two
    grounds.  First, that having regard to the Appellant's sentence of five
    years' imprisonment with a further  two  years'  imprisonment,  with  a
    total of seven years' imprisonment, there was an arguable error of  law
    in the judge's  assessment  concerning  Article  8,  having  regard  to
    paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules, rather than paragraphs A398 and
    398 of the Rules.  Second, there is an absence  of  regard  to  Section
    117A to D of the NIAA 2002, and more especially an absence of regard to
    Section 117C, and arguably an inadequacy of  reasoning  concerning  the
    "very compelling circumstances" test.

 9. A Rule 24 response dated 20th April 2016 provided a robust rebuttal  to
    this in the following  terms.   First,  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    sentenced to a total of seven  years'  imprisonment  for  very  serious
    crimes and he was  in  the  most  serious  offender  category  for  the
    purposes of the Immigration Rules.   Second,  the  judge  gave  a  very
    detailed and comprehensive determination  and  considered  all  of  the
    evidence arrived at with  the  conclusions  which  were  open  to  her.
    Third, the grant of permission by the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis
    that the judge erred by considering paragraph 399 rather than A398  and
    398 of the Rules was misconceived because paragraph 398 states that  it
    will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public  interest  in
    deportation would be outweighed when paragraphs 399  and  399A  do  not
    apply.  The judge considered as the starting point whether 399 and 399A
    applied and after careful analysis concluded, as was open to her,  that
    even the terms of the lower test cannot  be  satisfied.   It  necessary
    followed, therefore, that if 399 and  399A  cannot  be  satisfied,  the
    higher threshold of 398 will also not be reached.  Finally, as  far  as
    permission had been granted because Section  117C  had  apparently  not
    been considered, this issue had not  been  raised  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal, and the practise of granting permission on grounds  which  have
    not been advanced, was disapproved by the presidential  panel  recently
    in Barry (conduct of hearing) [2015] UKUT 541.  In any event, there was
    nothing in Section 117C,  which  was  not  in  the  Rules,  and  it  is
    submitted that the judge had fully considered the terms of Section 117C
    in the determination.

10. At the hearing  before  me  on  13th  October  2016,  Miss  Rutherford,
    appearing on behalf of the Appellant, repeated the Grounds  of  Appeal.
    She submitted that there had been a failure to consider  paragraph  399
    and it was irrelevant that the  Appellant  had  spent  seven  years  in
    prison.  Miss Rutherford also wisely submitted that she would  have  to
    accept that the Appellant  had  exaggerated  the  relationship  between
    himself and the children, but that was not to  say  that  they  had  no
    contact whatsoever, and at paragraph 89 the judge  had  accepted  there
    were  strong  links  with  the  children.   However,  Miss   Rutherford
    submitted that  her  best  point  was  the  medical  evidence  and  the
    Appellant's medical condition.

11. This had been expressly recognised by the judge when she observed that,
    "the Appellant's health  difficulties  are  significant  but  not  very
    compelling" (paragraph 132), and this was:

         "To do with his having psychotic episodes and  the  risks  that  it
         posed to his own safety and to the safety of others, given that  he
         was sectioned in the spring of 2014  and  had  to  be  tranquilised
         because he was threatening to throw boiling  water  over  a  nurse"
         (paragraph 130).

    The judge had also noted that the Appellant had  "been  diagnosed  with
    paranoid schizophrenia and has suffered from severe psychotic  episodes
    in 2006 and again in 2014" (paragraph 105).  The judge  had  failed  to
    show how the Appellant would be able to look after himself and  support
    himself in Pakistan.

12. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that this appeal amounted  to  nothing
    more than a disagreement with the decision.  What we  had  before  this
    Tribunal was an exceptionally detailed determination,  and  indeed  the
    judge had gone over the medical evidence,  not  once,  but  twice.   It
    cannot be said that she had ignored anything at all.  She was aware  of
    the medical evidence but had dealt with this at paragraph  138 with the
    observation that, "I have no doubt that  the  Appellant's  family  will
    keep a close eye on  him  if  he  is  returned  to  Pakistan  and  will
    endeavour to provide  him  with  such  support  networks  as  they  can
    organise from the UK".  The judge had even  said  that,  "provided  the
    Appellant remains medication compliant, he will,  I  am  satisfied  not
    suffer from the serious prejudice that those with  uncontrolled  mental
    health problems face in Pakistan" (paragraph 138).   This  was  a  very
    careful and considered analysis of the situation.  The test,  submitted
    Mr Mills, was that of "very compelling circumstances" and this was over
    and above what was set out at paragraphs 398 and 399A, so that even  if
    there was a serious condition here, the Appellant could only succeed if
    he could point to "very compelling circumstances"  and  the  judge  had
    rightly decided that there were no such circumstances.

13. Indeed, Mr Mills went on to say that the judge had had  regard  to  the
    established case law referring to MAB [2015]  UKUT  00435  and  to  the
    "conflicting decision" in KMO (Nigeria) [2015] UKUT  00543.   Mr  Mills
    submitted that the judge had observed that, "given the  actual  reading
    of the Rules which speak of the decision being  unduly  harsh  for  the
    child I agree with the conclusion that the focus is primarily upon  the
    effects upon the children of remaining in the UK without the Appellant"
    and that, "I agree that the 'unduly harsh' test is not based  upon  the
    balancing exercise" but that, "rather it is focused upon  the  severity
    of the impact on the children" (paragraph 123).  Mr Mills  pointed  out
    that the judge had actually in so saying preferred to follow  the  case
    of MAB, but the Court of Appeal had since ruled that  the  proper  test
    was in KMO, which  the  judge  had  referred  to  as  the  "conflicting
    decision", and the reality was that the judge had actually applied  the
    more generous test, than the test that had been set  out  in  KMO,  and
    approved by the Court of Appeal, so that  it  was  plain  that  if  the
    proper test had been applied, the Appellant could not have succeeded at
    all.

14. Finally, as far as Section 117C was concerned, this had not been raised
    in the Grounds of Appeal, and  in  any  event  the  test  here  was  no
    different  to  what  appeared  in  the  Immigration  Rules  under   the
    paragraphs that had specifically been considered by the judge.

15. In reply, Miss  Rutherford  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  the
    following observation: "he will face financially difficulty without the
    access to disability benefits and income support that he has had in the
    UK.  But I am satisfied that his brother and nephew  will  continue  to
    provide him with such financial support as they can afford".

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

17. First,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  judge  has,  in  a  clear  and
    comprehensive  determination,   left   no   stone   unturned   in   the
    consideration of the salient facts of this case, and this  is  accepted
    even by Miss Rutherford who appeared before me today.

18. Second, the issue, therefore, is the way in which the  public  interest
    balance has been struck as against the Appellant's  Article  8  rights,
    and the application of the Immigration Rules  at  paragraphs  398A  and
    398.  The application, however, is misconceived.  The question here was
    whether the Appellant, as  a  proposed  deportee,  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and the effect
    of the deportation on the child would be "unduly harsh", and the  judge
    held, "quite independent of the seriousness of his offence",  that,  "I
    found the decision is not unduly harsh  for  the  children"  (paragraph
    143), which related back to the finding (at paragraph 128)  that,  "the
    Appellant relies on exceptional circumstances.  I do  not  accept  that
    the delay is an exceptional circumstance".

19. It is important to recognise that the judge had clearly ruled  that  it
    was unnecessary for  the  Appellant's  children  to  accompany  him  to
    Pakistan, and that the relationship would  not  be  adversely  affected
    between father and children, with  the  Appellant  not  being  able  to
    remain in the UK himself, but having to relocate to Pakistan.  This  is
    clear from the observation  that,  "the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
    continue his relationship with his children and they with him  and  the
    only difference would be that he would not see them  face  to  face  as
    often as they would wish.  They would not have the easy  facility  they
    are now offering him up and ask him to see him, stay with  him  or  for
    him to give them a lift" (144).

20. Miss Rutherford, in fact,  openly  accepted  in  her  wise  submissions
    before this Tribunal that the relationship between  the  Appellant  and
    his children had been overstated, although that was not to say that  it
    was nonexistent.  Paragraph  398  requires  there  to  be  "exceptional
    circumstances"  and  the  Appellant  was  unable  to  point   to   such
    exceptional circumstances.  The judge did take  as  her  stating  point
    whether paragraph 399 and 399A applied and concluded that even  on  the
    terms of the lower test the Appellant could not succeed.

21. If paragraphs 399 and 399A could  not  be  satisfied  then  the  higher
    threshold at paragraph 398, referring to  the  requirement  of  "unduly
    harsh" could also not be satisfied.  The judge  had  already  concluded
    that if all that  the  Appellant  could  point  to  was  effectively  a
    situation whereby his  removal  to  Pakistan  would  place  him  in  an
    uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable, unwelcome, or mere difficulty
    which was challenging in his consequences for him, was not enough.

22. As for the application of Section 117C, this had not been raised in the
    grounds, but in any event the case of KMO  [2015]  UKUT  543  makes  it
    clear that inevitably, in the consideration of  paragraph  399,  regard
    will be had to the consequences  of  the  provisions  of  Section  117C
    (notwithstanding the fact as already indicated that  Section  117C  had
    not been raised by the Appellant).  The judge did consider the terms of
    Section 117C.

Notice of Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd January 2017

