

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/00844/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 November 2017                      |On 24 November 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          MR JUSTICE JULIAN KNOWLES
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                  RAZA MIAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr R. Khosla, Counsel instructed by D J Webb &
Co. Solicitors
For the respondent:          Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim in the context of an application for entry clearance as  a
    spouse under Appendix FM of the immigration rules.

2.    A First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 25 May 2017. The Upper Tribunal concluded that the First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of errors  of  law  and  set
    aside the decision on 08 September 2017 for the following reasons:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider that  it  was  in  the
          public interest to encourage those who are unlawfully in  the  UK
          to  make  voluntary  departures  in  order  to  regularise  their
          immigration status by way of an application for entry clearance.
      ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to give sufficient weight  to  the
          fact that the appellant's child is a British citizen.
     iii) In assessing the financial requirements, the First-tier  Tribunal
          failed to consider the appellant's potential  earnings  following
          the Supreme Court  decision  in  R  (on  the  application  of  MM
          (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10.

3.    The case was listed for a resumed hearing to remake the  decision.  We
    have considered the oral and  written  arguments  and  the  documentary
    evidence.

Decision and reasons

Scope of the appeal

4.    A human rights application made on or after the 06  April  2015  gives
    rise  to  a  'new  style'  appeal  following  amendments  made  to  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002")  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 ("IA 2014"). Other applications might  be  subject
    to transitional and saved provisions, which are not applicable to  this
    appeal. Section 113 of the NIAA 2002, which  defines  a  'human  rights
    claim', was amended by Part 4 of Schedule 9 of the  IA  2014  and  came
    into force on 20  October  2014  (subject  to  transitional  and  saved
    provisions). Section 113 makes clear that a refusal of entry  clearance
    can amount to a human rights claim.

           'human rights claim' means a claim  made  by  a  person  to  the
           Secretary of State at a place designated  by  the  Secretary  of
           State that to remove the person from or require him to leave the
           United Kingdom [or to refuse him entry into the United  Kingdom]
           would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998
           (public authority not to act contrary to Convention).

5.    Paragraph GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM states that the requirements  of  the
    immigration rules reflect how, under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, the balance will be struck between the right to respect for
    private and family life  and  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  an
    effective  system  of  immigration  control.  The  respondent's  policy
    "Rights of Appeal" Guidance (Version 6.0 - 09 October  2017)  sets  out
    the circumstances in which she will treat an  application  as  a  human
    rights claim. The respondent's position  outlined  in  the  immigration
    rules and policies does not preclude  a  claim  amounting  to  a  human
    rights claim on the facts: see R (on the  application  of  AT)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWHC 2589 (Admin).

6.    The entry clearance application was  made  on  30  October  2015.  The
    respondent refused the application in  a  decision  dated  08  December
    2015. An application for entry  clearance  as  a  family  member  under
    Appendix FM is a 'human rights claim'. The appellant has a 'new  style'
    right of appeal under section 82(1)(b) of the  NIAA  2002  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse a human rights claim.

7.          The long standing position under section 85A(2)  NIAA  2002  was
    that the Tribunal could only consider "the  circumstances  appertaining
    at the time of the decision" in an appeal against a decision to  refuse
    entry clearance. Part 4 of Schedule 9 of the IA 2014  repealed  section
    85A on 20 October 2014 (subject to transitional and saved  provisions).
    Section 85(4) NIAA 2002 is the only remaining provision relating to the
    assessment of evidence in 'new style' appeals, which states:

            (4) On an appeal under section  82(1)  against  a  decision  the
           Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks relevant to the
           substance of the decision, including a matter arising after  the
           date of the decision.

8.    The consequence of these changes is that the  Tribunal  is  no  longer
    required to consider the circumstances appertaining at the time of  the
    decision in a 'new style' appeal involving an entry clearance decision.
    There is a right of appeal against a decision to refuse a human  rights
    claim. Whether an appeal relates to the refusal of a human rights claim
    in the context of refusal of leave to enter  or  leave  to  remain  the
    Tribunal may consider any  matter  which  it  thinks  relevant  to  the
    substance of the decision, including a matter arising after the date of
    the decision.

9.    Section 85(4) no longer restricts the consideration of evidence in  an
    appeal against an entry clearance decision, but other provisions  might
    still impose limitations in practice. If applicable, section  85(5)-(6)
    NIAA 2002 might restrict the scope of the Tribunal to consider evidence
    relating to 'new matters'. Another example might be if the Tribunal  is
    considering the evidential requirements of  the  immigration  rules  as
    part of an overall human rights assessment. The rules might specify the
    nature  of  the  evidence  required.   For   example,   the   financial
    requirements of the immigration rules require evidence  of  income  for
    specified periods of time prior to the date of application.

10.   The repeal of section 85A of the NIAA 2002  harmonises  the  treatment
    of evidence in 'new style' statutory  appeals.  The  Tribunal  can  now
    consider all 'new style' appeals on the evidence as it  stands  at  the
    date of the hearing subject to any limitations that might be imposed by
    other provisions.

Factual background

11.   The factual background is not disputed. The appellant entered  the  UK
    in 2005 with entry clearance as a work permit holder. He overstayed and
    continued to work in the UK without permission. He was  caught  working
    illegally on 28 May 2009. When interviewed by the authorities he gave a
    false name. He was released  and  required  to  comply  with  reporting
    conditions. He failed to report and was treated as  an  absconder.  The
    appellant made a human rights application on 03  November  2009,  which
    was refused on 06 May 2010. The appellant remained in  the  UK  in  the
    knowledge that he had no leave to remain. He made a voluntary departure
    on 04 December 2013.

12.   The appellant met his wife in Bangladesh on  09  December  2013.  They
    married on 10 January 2014. Given that it was an arranged  marriage  it
    is reasonable to infer that the appellant left the UK  because  of  the
    impending marriage. However,  there  is  no  suggestion  that  this  is
    anything other than a genuine and subsisting marriage. The  appellant's
    wife is a citizen of Bangladesh who is settled in the  UK.  The  couple
    lived together in Bangladesh until 03 May 2014 when she returned to the
    UK. She has visited the appellant in Bangladesh. Their son was born  on
    08 September 2014. He is a British citizen.

13.   The Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  refused  the  application  under
    paragraph 320(11) of the general grounds of refusal because it was said
    that he had previously contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the
    intentions of the immigration rules. The ECO was not satisfied that the
    appellant had produce the specified evidence required to show  that  he
    met  the  financial  requirements  of  the   immigration   rules.   The
    appellant's family life was only considered as an  alternative  to  the
    rules.   The  ECO   concluded   that   there   were   no   'exceptional
    circumstances' that  justified  granting  entry  clearance.  The  ECO's
    consideration of the best interests of the child were confined  to  the
    following statement:

            "I have also considered the  best  interests  of  the  child  in
           accordance with Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
           Immigration Act 2009, but I am still satisfied that the decision
           to refuse your application is an appropriate one."

Human rights assessment

14.         The appellant is in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
    a person who is settled in the UK and therefore meets the 'Eligibility'
    requirements of the immigration rules. The couple  have  three-year-old
    son who is a British citizen. He lives with his mother in the  UK.  The
    effect of the decision is to prolong the separation  of  the  appellant
    from his wife and  son.  For  these  reasons,  we  concluded  that  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance shows a  lack  of  respect  for  the
    appellant's family life  that  is  sufficiently  grave  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8 (points (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five  stage
    approach in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

15.   The state can lawfully interfere with a person's family life if it  is
    pursuing a legitimate aim and it is necessary and proportionate in  all
    the circumstances of the case. In cases involving human  rights  issues
    under Article 8, the heart of the assessment is  whether  the  decision
    strikes a fair balance between the due weight to be given to the public
    interest in maintaining an effective system of immigration control  and
    the impact of the decision on the individual's private or family  life.
    In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair  balance  a  court  or
    tribunal  should  give  appropriate  weight  to  Parliament's  and  the
    Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of the  general  public
    interest as expressed in the relevant rules and  statutes:  see  Hesham
    Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

16.   In so far as the requirements of the immigration rules might form  one
    part of a private and family life assessment undertaken by the Tribunal
    under Article 8, any  requirements  for  evidence  covering  a  certain
    period of time prior to the application might need to be considered. If
    an appellant meets the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  it  is
    likely to provide a strong indication of where the  balance  should  be
    struck. However, the Tribunal may consider any matter which  it  thinks
    relevant to the substance of the decision, including any matter arising
    after the decision, as part of  a  holistic  assessment  of  the  human
    rights claim. Whether the appellant meets the  strict  requirements  of
    the immigration rules might form one part of that overall assessment.

17.   The respondent's assessment of the  public  interest  is  outlined  in
    several places in the immigration rules and in statute. The  fact  that
    an appellant previously overstayed or used deception leads to mandatory
    refusal under paragraph 320(7B). However, paragraph  A320  makes  clear
    that paragraph  320(7B)  does  not  apply  to  applications  for  entry
    clearance as a family  member  under  Appendix  FM.  Even  if  it  did,
    paragraph 320(7B)(iii) states  that  320(7B)  does  not  apply  if  the
    appellant left the UK voluntarily, not  at  the  expense  (directly  or
    indirectly) of the Secretary of State, more than 12 months  before  the
    application.

18.   The scheme of paragraph A320 and 320(7B)  appears  to  have  two  main
    objectives (i) to recognise the importance of family life  issues;  and
    (ii) to reflect the public  interest  in  encouraging  those  who  have
    breached the immigration laws to make a voluntary  departure  at  their
    own expense. The appellant was not liable to mandatory refusal  because
    (i) he made an application for entry clearance under Appendix  FM;  and
    (ii) he left the UK voluntarily at his own expense at least  12  months
    before making the entry clearance application.

19.   It was open to the respondent  to  consider  whether  the  appellant's
    immigration history was so poor that it still justified  refusal  under
    paragraph 320(11). Given the recognition of the  importance  of  family
    life issues in paragraph A320 of the rules,  paragraph  320(11)  should
    only be used in cases where an appellant's  immigration  history  shows
    that he has "previously contrived in a significant way to frustrate the
    intentions  of  the  rules".  The  fact  of  overstaying,  breaching  a
    condition or using deception is  not  enough.  The  threshold  is  only
    reached when there are aggravating circumstances  such  as  absconding,
    breaching temporary admission/reporting conditions, failure  to  comply
    with bail conditions or using an assumed identity. The rule provides  a
    non-exhaustive list of examples.

20.   Mr Khosla argued that the appellant did  not  'contrive',  within  the
    dictionary definition, to frustrate the intentions of  the  rules,  but
    the argument is semantic and unpersuasive when  the  appellant  readily
    admitted that he knew he was overstaying and that he gave a false  name
    to the authorities out of fear and panic. He would have  been  informed
    of the reporting requirements but knowingly failed to comply. When  his
    human rights claim was refused in May 2010 he remained in  the  UK  for
    another  three  years  before  making  a  voluntary  departure.  It  is
    reasonable to infer  that  he  left  to  contract  a  marriage  with  a
    Bangladeshi citizen who is settled in the UK. Nevertheless, there is no
    dispute that it is a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage.  Rather  than
    attempting to marry in the UK and then seek to regularise  his  status,
    the appellant did what the policy outlined in the rules is intended  to
    encourage, which is to make a voluntary departure to  apply  for  entry
    clearance through the proper channels.

21.    We  find  that  the   appellant's   immigration   history   discloses
    aggravating factors identified in paragraph 320(11) of the  immigration
    rules. In addition to overstaying and using deception by giving a false
    name, the appellant breached the requirements  of  temporary  admission
    and reporting conditions as  well  as  working  illegally  in  the  UK.
    However, even if the higher threshold under paragraph 320(11)  is  met,
    the respondent  must  still  consider  whether  it  is  appropriate  to
    exercise discretion in all the circumstances of the case.  The  current
    policy on the application of paragraph 320(11)  ("General  Grounds  for
    Refusal" Modernised Guidance - 10 April 2017) states:


        "This is not a complete list of offences.  You  must  consider  all
        cases on their merits and take into account family life in  the  UK
        and, if the applicant is a child, the level of  responsibility  for
        any breach. Before you decide to refuse under this  paragraph,  you
        must refer your decision to an entry clearance manager (ECM) to  be
        authorised."

22.   Elsewhere, the respondent's policies recognise that it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect a British child to leave the European Union with a
    parent or primary carer, or to expect the child to be separated from  a
    parent, unless there are strong public policy  considerations  such  as
    criminality or a  "very  poor  immigration  history":  see  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions: "Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life  (as  a
    partner or parent) and Private Life:  10  Year  Routes"  (August  2015)
    referred to in MA (Pakistan) & Ors v UT (IAC) & SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705.

23.   The respondent's consideration of  the  appellant's  family  life  was
    confined to  the  question  of  whether  there  were  any  'exceptional
    circumstances' that might justify a grant of  entry  clearance  outside
    the rules, when it should have been considered as part of  the  overall
    assessment of whether it was  appropriate  to  refuse  the  application
    under paragraph 320(11). The  bare  statement  that  her  duties  under
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  ("BCIA
    2009") had been considered was wholly inadequate when the case involved
    the long-term interests and welfare of a British child.

24.   In assessing the best interests of the child, we have  considered  the
    decisions in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, Zoumbas v SSHD  [2013]
    UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The
    best interests of the child are a primary  consideration,  but  may  be
    outweighed by the cumulative effect of other matters that weigh in  the
    public interest.

25.   The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are "in the United Kingdom". We take into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55. In the guidance, the respondent acknowledges
    the importance of international human rights instruments including  the
    UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on
    to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." The UNCRC sets  out
    rights including a child's right to survival and development, the right
    to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

26.   The fact that the child is a British citizen is a matter of  intrinsic
    importance. The child is entitled to the benefits  of  citizenship  and
    the wider benefits of European citizenship. The fact that he  may  also
    be a citizen of Bangladesh does not diminish those rights. His  parents
    clearly consider that it is in his best interests to live  in  the  UK,
    even though this means that he has now been separated from  his  father
    for some time. It is in the best interests of a child to be brought  up
    by  both  parents.  The  younger  the  child  the  more  important  the
    involvement of a parent is likely to be:  see  Berrehab  v  Netherlands
    (1988) 11 EHRR 322.

27.   On behalf of the respondent it was argued that it would be  reasonable
    for the child to live with his parents in Bangladesh. This would appear
    to be contrary to the respondent's policy outlined above [21] where  it
    is recognised that it would be unreasonable to expect a  British  child
    to leave the EU with a parent or primary carer. Having  considered  all
    the circumstances, we conclude that it is in the child's best interests
    to live in the UK with both parents where he can  continue  to  benefit
    from the rights derived from his citizenship.

28.   Section 117B of the NIAA 2002 sets out a  number  of  public  interest
    considerations that a court or  tribunal  must  take  into  account  in
    assessing whether an interference with a person's right to respect  for
    private and family life is justified and proportionate. In AM  (Section
    117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 the Upper Tribunal found that the duty  to
    consider section  117B  only  extended  to  the  provisions  that  were
    relevant to the facts of the case.

29.   Section 117B(1) states that the maintenance of an effective system  of
    immigration control is in  the  public  interest.  The  fact  that  the
    appellant previously contrived in a significant way  to  frustrate  the
    intentions of the immigration rules is a  matter  that  must  be  given
    significant weight. However, the immigration rules also recognise  that
    the fact of overstaying or use  of  deception  are  not  sufficient  to
    justify mandatory refusal in an application for entry  clearance  as  a
    family member under Appendix FM and seek to encourage  those  who  have
    overstayed to make a voluntary departure at their own expense. We  also
    note that the 'Suitability'  requirements  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    family  member  under  Appendix  FM  do  not  specifically  exclude  an
    applicant for previous breaches of immigration law.

30.    The  public  policy  considerations  relating  to  English   language
    (section 117B(2)) and financial independence (section 117B(3)) apply to
    those who seek to "enter and remain" in the UK i.e. the public interest
    considerations apply to applications for entry clearance as well as in-
    country applications for leave to remain.

31.   The requirements for entry clearance under Appendix  FM  address  both
    public policy considerations. The respondent took  no  issue  with  the
    'English language' requirement contained in E-ECP.4.1-4.2  of  Appendix
    FM. The appellant lived in the  UK  for  several  years.  There  is  no
    evidence to suggest that he would be a burden on taxpayers or  that  he
    is less able to integrate because of a lack of English language skills.



32.   The respondent refused the application because  the  appellant  failed
    to produce evidence of the sponsor's income in  the  specified  format.
    The fact that the sponsor earned a gross  income  of  �18,800  was  not
    disputed. The sponsor produced payslips for the six-month period before
    the date of the application, but the official bank statement  available
    at the date of the application did not cover the period containing  the
    last salary payment on 16 October 2015. To evidence  this  payment  the
    sponsor  produced  an  electronic  copy  of  her  bank  statement.  The
    respondent was not satisfied that it met the evidential requirements of
    Appendix FM-SE because it was not accompanied by a letter from the bank
    or official stamps and did not include her name. At the hearing  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  sponsor  produced  the  official   bank
    statement covering the period from September to October 2015. The  bank
    statement shows her name, address, account number and the official bank
    logo. The statement confirms the missing salary payment on  16  October
    2015. Given that this was the only reason for refusal under Appendix FM
    we conclude that the appellant has produced sufficient evidence to show
    that he met the requirements of the immigration rules.

33.   The immigration rules are said to reflect where a fair balance  should
    be struck under Article 8. We find that no public policy considerations
    arise under section 117B(3) because the  appellant  met  the  financial
    requirements of the immigration rules. He  will  not  be  a  burden  on
    taxpayers and is better able to  integrate  into  society  because  the
    family is financially independent. For the sake  of  completeness,  the
    fact that the appellant worked in the UK in the past (albeit illegally)
    indicates that he would be able to contribute  to  the  family  income.
    This is a matter that can also  be  considered  following  the  Supreme
    Court decision in MM (Lebanon) and is reflected in  recent  changes  to
    the immigration rules (HC 290). For these reasons, we conclude that the
    public policy considerations underpinning the financial requirements of
    the immigration rules are satisfied.

34.   Not all of the public interest factors outlined in  section  117B  are
    relevant to an application for entry clearance. Section 117B(4)  states
    that little weight should be given to a private life or a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner that is established at a time when the
    person is  "in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully".  In  this  case  the
    appellant established a relationship with the sponsor after he left the
    UK. It is not disputed that it is a genuine and subsisting relationship
    and  that  the  appellant  met  the  'Eligibility'  and  'Relationship'
    requirements of the Appendix FM.

35.   Similarly, section 117B(6) states that the public  interest  does  not
    require the "removal" of a person from the  UK  when  a  person  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a "qualifying  child"
    and it would be unreasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK.  The
    reference to "removal" shows that the strict wording is not  applicable
    to applications for entry clearance. However,  the  general  principles
    relating to the respect that should be accorded to the right to  family
    life must form part of an overall human rights assessment in  an  entry
    clearance case. The best interests of a child in  the  UK  is  still  a
    primary consideration: see paragraph GEN.3.3 Appendix FM.

36.    The  multiplicity  of  rules,  policies  and  tautological  statutory
    provisions complicate what should be a  careful,  but  straightforward,
    evaluative assessment of where a fair balance should be struck  between
    the right to family life of an individual and  the  due  weight  to  be
    given to the public interest in  maintaining  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control.

37.   The evidence shows that the appellant me the requirements of  Appendix
    FM for entry clearance  as  a  spouse.  The  fact  that  the  appellant
    overstayed and used deception would  normally  not  lead  to  mandatory
    refusal because this is a family life application  under  Appendix  FM.
    However, the respondent considered that there were aggravating  factors
    that justified refusal under paragraph  320(11).  We  have  found  that
    those factors were sufficiently serious to meet the threshold contained
    in paragraph 320(11), but in deciding whether it was still  appropriate
    to exercise discretion  the  respondent  failed  to  consider  relevant
    family life issues including the best interests of the  child.   Having
    concluded that the best interests of the child are to be brought up  by
    both parents in the UK the crux  of  this  assessment  is  whether  the
    appellant's past immigration history is so poor that it  outweighs  the
    best interests of the child.

38.   The effect of refusal is severe because it is likely to  lead  to  the
    long-term separation of the appellant from his child with  no  prospect
    of being able to make a successful application for entry  clearance  in
    the future. The appellant's past immigration history is very  poor.  He
    expresses regret. He attempted to regularise his  status  by  making  a
    voluntary departure and then made an application  for  entry  clearance
    through the proper channels. The overall scheme of the rules recognises
    the importance of family life, and in  certain  circumstances  forgives
    past breaches of immigration law, whilst encouraging those who overstay
    to leave and make an application through the proper channels. We do not
    seek to diminish the appellant's past actions, but we conclude that the
    cumulative effect  of  the  public  interest  considerations  does  not
    outweigh the family issues involved in this case. For these reasons, we
    conclude that the decision shows a lack of respect for the  appellant's
    right to family life that  does  not  strike  a  fair  balance  in  the
    circumstances of this case (points (iv) & (v) of  Lord  Bingham's  five
    stage approach in Razgar).

39.   We conclude that the decision  to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  is
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

40.   The appellant has been separated from his child  during  an  important
    period when he needed to establish a parental bond. Given the length of
    time since the entry clearance application was made  we  encourage  the
    respondent to give effect to this decision as soon as possible.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
    of law

The decision is remade and the appeal ALLOWED on human rights grounds

Signed   [pic]   Date   23 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








