
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/00215/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 19 January 2018                        |    On 29 January 2018           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                           ms qarshi mohamud jama
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Milis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K. Cronin, Counsel instructed by Wesley Gryk
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Specialist Appeals Team brings an appeal  on  behalf  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer from the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Thorne sitting at Taylor House on 21 April 2017) allowing on Article  8
    grounds the claimant's appeal against the decision to refuse her  entry
    clearance for the purposes of visiting her wheel-chair bound  daughter,
    who had suffered a severe spinal cord injury due to TB  meningitis  and
    in respect of whom a Consultant Neurologist had opined on 4 April  2017
    that it would be very difficult for her to travel to Africa to see  her
    mother. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  anonymity  direction,
    and I do not  consider  that  the  claimant  requires  to  be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. In the grounds of appeal, the Specialist Appeals Team pleaded that  the
    Judge was wrong to find that the appellant and the sponsor  had  family
    life with each other, as there was no evidence nor was there a  finding
    that there were further elements  of  dependency  involving  more  than
    normal  emotional  ties.  Also,  the  proportionality  assessment   was
    inadequate.

 3. It was established case law that family  life  within  the  meaning  of
    Article 8 would not normally exist between adult siblings, parents  and
    adult children.  Where family life did not exist, generally  Article  8
    would not be engaged. Kugathas v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  said  at
    paragraph [25] that because there is no  presumption  of  family  life,
    family life is not established  between  an  adult  and  his  surviving
    parent or other siblings "unless  something  more  exists  than  normal
    emotional ties".  Reference was also also made  to  paragraph  [20]  of
    Kugathas where the following was said:

         Most of us have close relations of whom we are extremely  fond  and
         whom we visit, or who visit us, from time to time; but none  of  us
         would say on these grounds alone that we share a family  life  with
         them in any sense capable of coming within the meaning and  purpose
         of Article 8.

 4. On 16 November 2017 Judge Boyes granted permission  to  appeal  as  the
    grounds were arguable.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Milis conceded that there was no  merit  in  either  ground  of
    appeal. With reference to the first ground, he accepted that there were
    more than normal emotional ties between the claimant and her daughter.

Discussion

 6. A concession of fact must always be accepted by the Tribunal. The  same
    does not apply to a  concession  of  law.  Judge  Thorne  left  himself
    vulnerable to an error of law challenge because  he  did  not  directly
    address the question of whether there were more than  normal  emotional
    ties. There  was  clearly  not  practical  dependency,  as  mother  and
    daughter lived on separate continents.

 7. Until recently, there was some ambiguity about whether it was necessary
    to show a disproportionate interference with established family life in
    a  visit  visa  appeal,  or  whether  it   was   enough   to   show   a
    disproportionate interference with  the  private  life  rights  of  the
    applicant and/or the UK sponsor. However, three recent decisions of the
    Court of Appeal have given a clear answer to this question.  These  are
    the decisions of the Court of Appeal in Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1511,
    Abis [2017] EWCA Civ 1393 and Onuorah [2017] EWCA Civ 1757.

 8. In Onuorah, the Court of Appeal held that Kugathas  remains  good  law,
    and that it applies to visit visa cases just as much as it  applies  in
    settlement cases.  Giving the leading judgment of the Court,  Singh  LJ
    at  paragraph  [35]  said  that  there  were  two   reasons   for   not
    distinguishing the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Kugathas in
    a visit visa case:

         First, as a matter of principle,  the  question  whether  there  is
         "family life" for the purpose of Article 8  is  a  logically  prior
         question and cannot depend on the purpose for which an  application
         for entry clearance  is  made.   Secondly,  the  shortness  of  the
         proposed visit is, if anything, an indication  that  a  refusal  of
         leave to enter  did  not  involve  any  want  of  respect  for  the
         Respondent's family life for the purpose of Article 8: see Kopoi at
         para. 30 (Sales LJ) which I have quoted above.

 9. In Kopoi, Sales LJ said at paragraph [30] as follows:

         A three week visit would not involve a significant contribution  to
         family life in the sense in which that term is used in  Article  8.
         Of course, it would often be nice for family members to meet up and
         visit in this way.  But a  short  visit  of  this  kind  would  not
         establish a relationship between any of the  individuals  concerned
         of support going beyond normal emotional ties, even if there were a
         positive obligation under Article 8 (which there is not) to allow a
         person to enter the UK to try to develop a "family life" which does
         not currently exist.

10. At paragraph [32] of his decision, Judge Thorne held that there  was  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship of mother and daughter between  the
    claimant and the sponsor. But this did not mean that they  already  had
    family life together in the Kugathas  sense,  which  is  the  necessary
    precondition for Article 8(1) being engaged.

11. However, the significance of Mr Milis' factual concession is  that  the
    Judge was right to find that Article 8(1) was  engaged  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer can no longer  assert  that  any  deficiency  in  the
    reasoning of the Judge was material to the outcome.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and so the decision stands. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.




Signed                              Date 26 January 2018


Judge Monson

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

