
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu002822016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |On 31 July 2017               |
|On 18 July 2017                               |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                   yen [p]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Chambers of Celia Record
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Vietnam who  came  to  this
    country in 2004 in the back of a lorry.  She claimed asylum which claim
    was refused but she remained as an overstayer.  In October 2011 she met
    [A] and they subsequently married in  May  2014.   It  is  accepted  on
    behalf of the respondent that this is a genuine  relationship  and  she
    also assists [A] in providing substantial help to her father-in-law who
    has been suffering from schizophrenia and anxiety  and  depression  for
    many years.  It is the appellant's case that she has been assisting  in
    the care of her father-in-law since before her mother-in-law died.  The
    appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of her  family  life
    in this country but this application was refused on 11  December  2015.
    The respondent accepted that the  appellant  met  the  suitability  and
    eligibility requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  the  relationship  was
    genuine and subsisting.  However, she found that paragraph EX.1 did not
    apply because there were "no insurmountable obstacles" to  family  life
    continuing in Vietnam.   She  also  found  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances justifying the grant of leave outside the Rules.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal  was  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Broe  sitting  at  Birmingham  on  28
    September 2016.  In a very short Decision and Reasons promulgated on 13
    October 2016 Judge  Broe  dismissed  her  appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal permission having been granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kamara on 26 May  2017.   The  reasons  given  by  Judge
    Kamara for granting permission are set out as follows:

         "...2.   The facts are not in dispute.   Briefly,  the  appellant's
             father in law suffers from schizophrenia  and  depression  and
             required regular help from the appellant's husband as well  as
             from the appellant.  It is argued that  these  are  compelling
             circumstances and that the removal of the appellant  in  these
             circumstances would be unjustifiably harsh.

         3.   It is arguable that  the  judge's  Article  8  findings,  both
             within and outside the Rules were inadequate."

 3. On behalf of the appellant in her commendably succinct but  nonetheless
    persuasive submissions Ms Record referred the Tribunal to the fact that
    the findings, which begin at paragraph 16,  fail  to  engage  with  the
    evidence which had been before the  judge  as  to  the  effect  of  the
    removal of the appellant on  the  family  life  of  this  family  which
    includes the father-in-law.  At paragraph 17  the  judge  had  accepted
    that family life was established and stated that "I  accept  that  they
    will find a period of separation  upsetting  and  that  the  burden  of
    caring for her father-in-law will fall more heavily on  [A]  until  she
    returns" but nonetheless found or considered that "the  appellant  will
    be in the same position as any other applicant seeking  leave  to  join
    the spouse in this country".  What the judge did not seem to take  into
    account (in Ms Record's submission) was the effect on the father-in-law
    and he did not even take note of the fact that she had  cared  for  him
    for a long time even while his wife was  alive.   Also,  there  was  no
    reference to the report from the independent social  services  on  this
    family and the evidence that if the son-in-law was not able to maintain
    the care he was providing, which he did  with  the  assistance  of  his
    wife, there was a very real risk  that  the  appellant's  father-in-law
    would lose his home and be required to go into long-term care.

 4. On behalf of the respondent Mr Armstrong very fairly  accepted  (as  is
    apparent) that the judge did not go  into  any  detail  concerning  the
    facts in this case and that it would  appear  that  he  had  not  given
    anxious scrutiny to the reports which had been made.

My Findings

 5. In my judgment, on the facts of this case  Judge  Broe's  consideration
    was wholly inadequate.  While it may be that a judge  could  find  that
    removal is proportionate given the long period in which this  appellant
    had been in the country unlawfully and that she  had  made  some  three
    previous applications which had all been unsuccessful,  nonetheless  it
    cannot be said that it was not at least arguable that the circumstances
    in this case are compelling.  On the facts of this case it is at  least
    arguable in my judgment that there are "insurmountable obstacles" (that
    is that there would be very  significant  obstacles)  to  Mr  Armstrong
    relocating to Vietnam and it is also arguable that  it  would  be  very
    harsh indeed on the father-in-law if  the  appellant  was  required  to
    return to Vietnam in order to make an application from that country  to
    be allowed to re-join her husband.  It is not appropriate on the  facts
    of this case for this argument just to be dismissed on the  basis  that
    there is "no need for consideration of the appellant's Article 8 rights
    outside the Rules".  As I have said, such an application may or may not
    succeed,  but  it  is  sufficiently  arguable  that  it  needed  to  be
    considered.

 6. In these circumstances it follows that the judge's  failure  either  to
    consider whether there would be "insurmountable  obstacles"  preventing
    Mr Armstrong relocating to Vietnam with his wife or to give any or  any
    adequate reasons within his decision as to why the appellant's case did
    not fall to be considered outside the Rules is a material error of  law
    and that the decision will now have to be remade.

 7. It was agreed on behalf of both parties that the appropriate course  in
    these circumstances is for this appeal be remitted back  to  Birmingham
    (where the appellant and her husband and father-in-law live) so that it
    can be considered afresh in the First-tier Tribunal by any judge  other
    than Judge Broe and I will so order.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe as  containing  a
material error of law and remit this appeal back to the First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Birmingham for the  decision  to  be  remade  by  any  First-tier
Tribunal Judge other than Judge Broe.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 25 July 2017
