
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/00595/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th December 2018                         |On 7th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Asif [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel, instructed by Clyde Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The is the remaking of a  decision  in  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant
    against the Respondent's decision of 23  December  2016,  refusing  his
    human rights claim which had been made a year previously.

 2. By a decision promulgated on 21 August 2018 I found that the First-tier
    Tribunal had materially erred in law and I set its decision  aside  (my
    error of law decision is annexed, below).  In essence, I concluded that
    the judge had erred in his assessment of relevant medical evidence.   I
    then adjourned the appeal in order for the  Appellant  to  be  able  to
    provide updated medical evidence about his mental health  problems.   I
    confirmed that the core issue in the case related to  Article  8,  both
    within and without the context of the Immigration Rules.   I  preserved
    two findings of fact from the First-tier Tribunal's decision: that  the
    Appellant had cleared his NHS debt, and that he had been aware  of  the
    refusal of his asylum claim in 2003 and the subsequent dismissal of his
    appeal.



The evidence now before me

 3. I have considered the Respondent's  bundle  and  the  bundle  from  the
    Appellant (AB), paginated 1-92 (which is in fact exactly  the  same  as
    that contained  in  the  Respondent's  bundle).  In  addition,  and  in
    compliance with my previous direction,  there  is  a  letter  from  the
    Principal Clinical Psychologist, Dr S El-Leithy, dated 15 August  2018.
    I have admitted this pursuant to Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules.

 4. There has been no further oral evidence.



Submissions

For the Appellant

 5. Mr Symes relied on  his  skeleton  argument.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's claim was a mixed Article 8 scenario based in part  on  the
    ties established in the United Kingdom, but  also  in  respect  of  his
    mental health problems.  It was submitted that the Appellant would  not
    in fact have any support network on return to  Pakistan.   His  parents
    had passed away, as had a brother.  His sister was married  and  living
    with her husband, another brother was estranged from the  rest  of  his
    family and another  was  residing  in  South  Africa.   In  respect  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, and, recognising in  response  to
    my intervention concerning the actual wording of  the  provision,  that
    the relevant date is that of the Appellant's  human  rights  claim,  Mr
    Symes relied on paragraph 14  of  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813.   The
    Appellant's significant mental health problems together with  the  lack
    of support and his time away from his home country all combined to show
    that there would  have  been  very  significant  obstacles  as  at  the
    relevant date.

 6. Outside the context of the Rules and as of  the  date  of  the  resumed
    hearing, it was submitted that any treatment in Pakistan would  not  be
    accessible, that there  was  a  significant  differential  between  the
    Appellant's circumstances in this country and that  he  would  face  in
    Pakistan.  It was accepted that the Appellant will  have  treatment  on
    the NHS if he remains in this country and this would be at  a  cost  to
    the public purse.  It was also accepted that the Appellant's  residence
    in the United Kingdom had always been unlawful.  In respect of suicide,
    Mr Symes relied on the same factual matrix applicable to the Article  8
    issues.





For the Respondent

 7. Mr Lindsay relied on the reasons for refusal letter.  He emphasised the
    significance of the Appellant's unlawful residence in this country.  He
    submitted that as of 2015 there were  no  very  significant  obstacles.
    Treatment would have been available to the Appellant and he could  have
    had support from his sister at least.  There  was  no  reason  why  the
    Appellant could not engage with relevant treatment.  One of the factors
    adverse to the Appellant's current mental  health  was  his  unresolved
    immigration status.  This issue would be removed once the Appellant had
    been removed.  It was submitted that his mental health would be  likely
    to improve after return.

 8. I was referred to paragraph 14 of MA  (Prove  Destitution)  Jamaica  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 00013 and paragraphs 8, 9 and 19 of  Parveen  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 932, both in terms of the situation as at 2015 and now. Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that the Appellant had failed to  make  any  enquiries  about
    possible support on return.  It was suggested that a  mosque  might  be
    able to help in addition to or alternatively to his sister.

 9. With reference to the position  as  of  now,  reliance  was  placed  on
    section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.  The Appellant would need to show that
    there was a very strong or an exceptional case for him to succeed.  The
    ties in the United  Kingdom  were  accepted  but  these  had  all  been
    established during unlawful residence.  The Appellant's  mental  health
    was acknowledged but this was not sufficient for him to succeed in  his
    appeal.  The cost to the public purse as a result of treatment  on  the
    NHS was a significant matter.

In reply

10. In reply Mr Symes suggested that the Appellant's sister would not be in
    a position to assist given that she was now treated as  being  part  of
    her husband's family.  It would be unlikely that help would come from a
    mosque given that the Appellant had converted from Sunni Islam to  Shia
    Islam.

11. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.




Findings of fact

12. I have considered the evidence as  a  whole.   The  burden  of  proving
    relevant facts rests with the Appellant and the standard is that  of  a
    balance of probabilities.

13. I find that the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since 2003.  I
    find that his residence in this country had at all times been unlawful.



The Appellant's circumstances as at the time of his human rights claim

14. I accept that he had by June 2015 established a good friendship with Mr
    Butt and his children.  This has not been challenged by the  Respondent
    and is borne out by the evidence before me (and that before the  First-
    tier as well).

15. In the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), it is important that I first
    deal  specifically  with  the  medical  evidence  as  it  reflects  the
    Appellant's circumstances in June 2015, when his human rights claim was
    made. The following evidence is of particular relevance here:

          i. the reports of Mr C Yeung, CBT Practitioner, dated  27  August
             2015 and 20 April 2015 (60 and 76 AB);

         ii. the report of Dr P Brain, Consultant  Psychiatrist,  dated  24
             March 2015 (73 AB);

        iii.  the  report  of  Dr  P   Stallworthy,   Consultant   Clinical
             Psychologist, dated 11 February 2015 (81 AB).

16. This evidence has not been expressly challenged  before  me,  certainly
    not in respect of the  suitability  of  the  various  sources  and  the
    contents of the reports.

17. It is quite clear to me that the body of medical evidence  as  a  whole
    represents a solid and  reliable  picture  of  the  Appellant's  mental
    health circumstances in the period running up to, at the time  of,  and
    relatively soon after, the making of the human  rights  claim  in  June
    2015. I place significant weight on this evidence.

18. On the basis of what I have said in the preceding paragraph, I make the
    following findings.

19. The Appellant was in fact suffering from PTSD and  a  Major  Depressive
    Episode. Dr Smallworthy dedicates a section of her report  of  February
    2015 to  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  was  feigning  his
    symptoms: her very clear conclusion was that he  was  not  (87  AB).  I
    agree.

20. I find that the PTSD was at a "moderate" level, whilst  the  depression
    was "severe" (see, for example, 73, 77,  88  AB).  In  respect  of  the
    latter, I have taken account of what is said by the CBT Practitioner in
    his report  of  August  2015,  where  he  records  that  the  level  of
    depression had reduced from "severe" to "moderate" following  a  course
    of therapy (61 AB). However, it is  more  likely  than  not  that  this
    reduction only occurred on completion of a course of sessions  and  had
    not occurred at the time the human rights claim was made  a  couple  of
    months earlier. In addition, I find that the reduction was not durable,
    as proved by subsequent evidence (see paragraph 38, below).

21. I find that although the Appellant  had  by  that  time  received  some
    limited treatment, this had not had a materially positive impact on his
    overall mental health and in  fact  the  depression  was  so  bad  that
    measures to alleviate the PTSD could not be pursued (73, 78, 88 AB).

22. I find that the various symptoms affecting the Appellant's  daily  life
    included poor sleeping and eating patterns, lack of any motivation, and
    poor memory and concentration (74).

23. In respect of the PTSD, I find that  there  was  an  objectively  based
    foundation  for  this  condition.  Although  certain  elements  of  his
    original  protection  claim  had  been  rejected  years   before,   the
    Respondent had always accepted that the Appellant had been the  subject
    of an acid attack in Pakistan (documentary evidence about this incident
    had been produced and see also the final paragraph of the  Respondent's
    letter at 27 AB). I note too that even the reasons letter refusing  the
    asylum claim in 2003 did not dispute the assertion that  the  Appellant
    was a follower of the Shia faith  and  had  experienced  problems  from
    Sunni groups (34-36 AB). Further, on the basis of what I can glean from
    the Respondent's  rejection  of  fresh  representations  in  2013,  the
    Adjudicator who dismissed the Appellant's appeal in 2003 found there to
    be a risk in the home area bit concluded that internal relocation was a
    viable option (28 AB).

24. Therefore, the evidence discloses a firm  factual  nexus  between  what
    happened to the Appellant in Pakistan and the PTSD. It also provides  a
    strong basis for what was, and still  is,  the  Appellant's  subjective
    fear of returning to that country.

25. In turn, this fear bears on the desire and/or ability of the  Appellant
    to actually engage with any relevant treatment that may potentially  be
    available in Pakistan. As is made clear in a passage in the  report  of
    Ms Terri Porter, dated 14 September 2017:

         "It is vital that when undergoing trauma-focused work,  the  client
         [the Appellant] must feel  safe  in  their  immediate  environment.
         Given the strength of Mr [S]'s beliefs that he would be at risk  of
         further harm should he be returned to Pakistan,  it  is  my  belief
         that he would struggle to engage effectively in treatment delivered
         in Pakistan if it were available, due  to  those  fears  about  his
         safety." (58 AB)

26. Although that report post-dates the human rights  claim,  it  is  quite
    clear that the beliefs were held equally strongly in 2015 as they  were
    in 2017.

27. I place significant weight on the passage from the  2017  report  cited
    above. The author, whilst a trainee, was supervised  by  the  Principle
    Clinical Psychologist (Dr El-Leithy) and there is no reason for  me  to
    reduce the weight attributable to the evidence.

28. As regards the depression, two threads  run  consistently  through  the
    medical evidence: the strong feelings of hopelessness/worthlessness and
    the guilt held and expressed by the Appellant at  the  time  (see,  for
    example, 74). I find that these were genuinely  held  beliefs.  Arising
    from the sense of hopelessness, and expressed on several  occasions  to
    different professionals, was the fact, as I find it  to  be,  that  the
    Appellant was having suicidal ideations. Having said that,  taking  the
    evidence as a whole, I find that his had also truthfully stated that he
    had had no actual plans to take his own life.

29. In her report of June 2016 (which is otherwise in very similar terms to
    the 2015 report), Dr Stallworthy addresses the issue of the  impact  of
    removal on the Appellant's mental health and in particular the risk  of
    suicide. At 71 AB she notes that risk fluctuates over  time  and  is  a
    dynamic process. She goes on to say that  risks  connected  to  suicide
    involve numerous factors  including  hopelessness,  suicidal  ideation,
    depression, intent,  and  compliance  with  treatment.  An  absence  of
    suicidal intent at one point does not preclude a risk in the future.

30. Dr Smallworhty's view was that there was a "high" risk of the Appellant
    attempting suicide upon being notified of removal action and a  "marked
    deterioration" in his mental health post-removal, which  could  include
    active suicidality and psychotic symptoms (71 AB).

31. In light of the evidence before me, I find that the act of removal  and
    the Appellant's reaction to his situation in Pakistan would  have  very
    likely caused a significant deterioration in his mental health.  It  is
    highly likely that this  would  have  included  increased  thoughts  of
    suicide,  a  worsening  of  the  already  severe  depression,  and   an
    exacerbation of the PTSD symptoms.

32. I specifically reject Mr Lindsay's suggestion  that  removal  would  in
    fact act as a positive factor for the Appellant  by  finally  resolving
    his immigration position. That is, with respect, much  too  sanguine  a
    view. The reality would have  been  that  the  Appellant's  immigration
    status would have been resolved against him, thereby leading to  actual
    removal (rather than simply the threat thereof)  and  being  forced  to
    return to the country in  respect  of  which  he  held  a  very  strong
    subjective fear (which had of course contributed to his serious  mental
    health problems even whilst in the United Kingdom).

33. I find that the only potential source of any meaningful support for the
    Appellant at the time would have been his sister, who  is  married  and
    resides in Pakistan.  His parents and a brother passed away some  years
    ago. One surviving brother lives in South Africa. Although there is  no
    evidence from him, I accept the Appellant's evidence that there  is  no
    contact. Another  surviving  has,  I  find,  been  estranged  from  the
    Appellant for many years. The burden of proof rests with the Appellant,
    but in all the circumstances I find that it  is  highly  unlikely  that
    material support would have emanated from these quarters.

34. I agree with Mr Symes' point that the  sister  has  effectively  become
    part of her husband's family.  This is in line with well-known cultural
    norms, but also the Respondent's own view of these matters as expressed
    in guidance throughout the years, focussed mainly  on  the  ability  of
    married women on the sub-Continent to provide financial  assistance  to
    relatives.  On the face of it, it  is  unlikely  that  the  Appellant's
    sister could have taken a unilateral position  and  provided  financial
    and/or practical assistance to the Appellant.  Although I  accept  that
    no actual enquiries have been made with her as to whether she might  in
    fact be been able to help, it is more likely  than  not  that  relevant
    support was not feasible.

35. There has never been any serious suggestion  that  Mr  Butt  was  in  a
    position to provide financial support to the Appellant  if  the  latter
    were removed to Pakistan and I find that he was not.

36. Mr Lindsay submits that a mosque in this  country  could  have  been  a
    source of support. In my view  this  is  so  speculative  that  it  can
    properly be discounted. The Appellant has never  received  any  support
    from such an institution in the  past  and  in  any  event,  it  is  an
    undisputed aspect of his circumstances that  he  effectively  converted
    from Sunni Islam to Shia Islam whilst  in  Pakistan.  This  would  have
    amounted to a very real obstacle in the way of  seeking  and  obtaining
    meaningful support from the great majority of  mosques  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The Appellant's current circumstances

37. It is clear that the Appellant has required a good deal of input  since
    2015. He underwent a course of psychological  treatment  between  March
    and September 2017, has been under the care of his GP, and has been  on
    relevant medication throughout.  I  find  that  there  have  been  some
    "modest but reliable" improvements in his  mental  state  recently,  as
    confirmed by Dr El-Leithy's letter dated 15 August 2018.

38. However, notwithstanding the significant input, Dr El-Leithy is of  the
    view that  the  Appellant's  mental  health  "remains  unchanged";  his
    depression still  being  of  a  "severe"  nature  and  the  PTSD  being
    "moderate".

39. I find that whilst there have been the slight improvements noted in the
    most recent medical evidence,  the  Appellant's  overall  situation  is
    essentially very similar to that pertaining to the time  at  which  the
    human right claim was made in mid-2015.




Conclusions on Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)

40. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) states:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

                                                         (underlining added)

41. I direct myself to paragraph 14 of Kamara:

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms  of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."

42. I also bear in mind that the relevant threshold is  a  high  one.   The
    words "significant" and "very" are included in the test for  a  reason.
    Paragraph 9 of Parveen states:

         "That passage focuses more on the concept of  integration  than  on
         what is meant by "very significant obstacles". The latter point was
         recently addressed by the  Upper  Tribunal  (McCloskey  J  and  UTJ
         Francis)  in Treebhawon  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
         Department [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC). At para. 37 of its judgment the UT
         said:

             "The other limb of the  test,  'very  significant  obstacles',
             erects a self-evidently elevated  threshold,  such  that  mere
             hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere  upheaval  or
             inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  will  generally   be
             insufficient in this context."

         I have to say that I do not find that a very useful  gloss  on  the
         words of the rule. It is fair enough  to  observe  that  the  words
         "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold, and I  have  no
         difficulty with the observation that the test will not  be  met  by
         "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I am  not  sure  that  saying
         that "mere" hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even if  multiplied,
         will not "generally" suffice adds anything of substance.  The  task
         of the Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is
         simply to assess the obstacles to integration  relied  on,  whether
         characterised as hardship or difficulty or anything  else,  and  to
         decide whether they regard them as "very significant"."

43. Looking at the Appellant's circumstances as at the date of his claim in
    late June 2015, I conclude that there were "very significant obstacles"
    to his reintegration into Pakistani society.  In so concluding, I  have
    made a broad, fact-specific, evaluative judgment in light  of  all  the
    relevant circumstances.

44. My conclusion is based on the following matters.

45. At that time he had been away from  Pakistan  for  some  twelve  years.
    That is not exceptionally long, but nor is it inconsequential.  It  has
    some bearing (taken in conjunction with other matters)  on  my  overall
    assessment, going to the degree of ease with which the Appellant  could
    be expected to re-adjust to living in the country.

46. The Appellant left Pakistan at the age of 24 and clearly speaks Urdu as
    his mother tongue. It cannot be  said  that  he  would  be  a  complete
    "stranger" to Pakistani culture and society. To that extent,  he  would
    have been able to at least understand the underlying basis  upon  which
    life in that country is carried on.

47. What is of most significance in this appeal  is  the  Appellant's  very
    poor mental health as at the time of the human rights claim.  To  avoid
    simply repeating my findings of fact, I give a summary of  core  points
    relating to his mental state:

          i. he suffered from "severe" depression and "moderate" PTSD;

         ii. the  PTSD  arose  out  of  acknowledged  traumatic  events  in
             Pakistan;

        iii. his treatment was then only at its initial stages and had  had
             no material impact;

         iv. he held  strong  feelings  of  hopelessness/worthlessness  and
             guilt;

          v. he held equally strong beliefs that he would  be  at  risk  of
             harm on return to Pakistan.

48. He was clearly not functioning at anything much above  a  fairly  basic
    level, even when in the "safe" environment of the  United  Kingdom  and
    with the support of Mr Butt and medical professionals.

49. I have found that removal (indeed, even the immediate prospect thereof)
    would have had a significantly adverse impact on the Appellant's mental
    health. In other words, it would have got much worse  than  it  already
    was. I emphasise the fact that this state  of  affairs  was  not  based
    simply on the Appellant being unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom,
    but, importantly, also on the ground that he would be  returning  to  a
    country in respect of which he held a dread fear. He would  have  found
    himself in a society which was,  at  least  to  his  mind,  essentially
    hostile, without the support network in place in this country, and with
    close to no self-worth.

50. I have found that he would not  have  had  any  meaningful  support  in
    Pakistan. That would only have exacerbated  his  precarious  situation.
    Even if some form of financial  assistance  had  been  available,  this
    would not of itself have  done  much  to  alleviate  the  psychological
    barriers to re-integration, namely the feelings of hopelessness,  guilt
    and fear.

51. There is then the question of possible treatment  in  Pakistan  at  the
    relevant time. There is no evidence  before  me  to  indicate  that  no
    appropriate treatment exists at all in Pakistan.  I  conclude  that  it
    probably does, albeit that provision is highly likely  to  be  limited.
    However, on the basis that some  form  of  treatment  would  have  been
    available in principle, and even assuming that some form  of  financial
    assistance for the Appellant was in place, there is the  crucial  issue
    of effective engagement, as highlighted in paragraphs 24-27,  above.  I
    conclude that the combination of the deteriorated mental health and the
    sense of fear and instability would have precluded the  Appellant  from
    actually accessing relevant treatment. Thus,  there  was  no  effective
    mechanism to reverse the deterioration and  manage  the  mental  health
    problems at a reasonable level.

52. As the risk of suicide, the test under Article 3 is  higher  than  that
    applicable under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The Appellant does  not  need
    to show that there would have been a sufficiently serious risk  and  my
    conclusion on the "very significant obstacles" question does not depend
    upon such a risk. Having said that, there was in my view a  significant
    risk of increased contemplation of acting on ideations.

53. Mr Lindsay has referred me to MA,  but  the  Appellant's  case  is  not
    founded upon an assertion of destitution on return. In any event, in my
    view the test of "very significant  obstacles"  does  not  require  the
    Appellant to make such a claim out.

54. A further matter which is of  some  relevance  is  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant follows the Shia faith. I am fully  aware  that  this  appeal
    does not involve a protection claim. However, it is an  uncontroversial
    fact that Shias form a fairly small minority group in Pakistan and that
    they face hostility from certain sections of the Sunni majority.  I  am
    not concluding that there is a real risk to the Appellant on the  basis
    of his faith, but whether from his own perspective or that  of  others,
    there is likely to be an additional obstacle in his path.  Having  said
    that, I do not place great weight on this particular point.

55. The various matters discussed above go to show that the Appellant would
    have faced obstacles in respect of:

          i. his ability to find any form of legitimate employment;

         ii. his capacity to participate in Pakistani society;

        iii. his ability to see himself and act as an "insider";

         iv. the perception of others to see him as being an "insider";

          v. his ability to operate on a daily basis and  at  a  reasonable
             level, having regards to the essential components of life,  in
             the context of Pakistan;

         vi. his ability to establish social relationships to any effective
             extent.

56. I  conclude  that,  when  taken  cumulatively,  and  in  light  of  the
    particular facts of this case,  these  obstacles  and  the  Appellant's
    ability to deal with  them  went  far  beyond  "mere  inconvenience  or
    upheaval",  but  represented  "very  significant"  barriers  to  a  re-
    integration into Pakistani society.

57. In essence, he would have been, either  because  of  his  own  view  of
    himself and the world around him or the perception of him by others, or
    a combination of the two, a person having  to  try  and  exist  on  the
    periphery of Pakistani society.

58. As at the time of  the  human  rights  claim,  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  In light of this and applying
    TZ (Pakistan), he is entitled to succeed in his  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.



Article 3 and Article 8 outside the context of the Rules

59.  In  light  of  my  conclusions  on  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  it   is
    unnecessary to address Article 3 and Article 8 in its wider context.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remake the decision and allow the Appellant's appeal  on  the  basis  that
the Respondent's refusal of  his  human  rights  claim  was  unlawful  under
section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]    Date: 17 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and  have  decided  to  make  award  of
�140.00.

Signed   [pic]    Date: 17 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00595/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 August 2018                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Asif [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, Counsel, instructed by Sky Solicitors
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Taylor (the judge), promulgated on 16 April  2018,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 23 December 2016, refusing a human rights claim made  on
    29  June  2015.   That  claim  had  been  based  specifically  on   the
    Appellant's very lengthy residence in the United Kingdom  coupled  with
    his mental health problems.




The judge's decision

 2. The Respondent was not represented at the hearing.  The judge found  as
    a fact that the Appellant did not have  an  outstanding  NHS  debt  for
    certain medical treatment received ([11]).  The judge  finds  that  the
    Appellant was in fact aware of the refusal of a previous  asylum  claim
    in 2003.  The important passages  in  the  fairly  brief  decision  are
    contained in [16]-[18].  At  [16]  the  judge  considers  the  relevant
    immigration rules, specifically  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  and  states
    that the test thereunder was whether  there  would  be  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to the Appellant's reintegration on return to Pakistan.  The
    rest of that paragraph is dedicated to a consideration  of  article  3.
    In  [17],  and  with  reference  to  the  Appellant's   mental   health
    conditions, the judge considers two items of medical evidence, one from
    September  2017  written  by  a  trainee  clinical  psychologist  under
    supervision by a  consultant,  and  another  written  by  a  consultant
    psychiatrist in 2015.  The judge prefers  the  latter  to  the  former,
    giving as his reasons for this the apparent fact that in 2015 there had
    only been one contemplation of suicide by the Appellant  and  that  his
    strong Islamic faith prevented him from carrying such  an  action  out.
    It is said that the 2017 report was written  after  the  Appellant  had
    improved having attended a CBT course.  The judge  finds  that  medical
    attention would be available for the Appellant  in  Pakistan  and  that
    there was no significant risk of suicide if he were to be removed  from
    the United Kingdom.  A removal may have caused what he described  as  a
    "temporary negative effect" and the  Appellant  would  have  access  to
    relevant medical attention.  In the final sentence  of  that  paragraph
    the judge states that there would be no very significant  obstacles  to
    the Appellant's reintegration.  At [18] the judge considers the article
    8 claim outside the context of the rules and finds that  the  Appellant
    had not established a private life to  the  extent  that  would  engage
    article 8.

 3. The appeal was duly dismissed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The succinct grounds of appeal challenge the judge's treatment  of  the
    medical evidence, asserting that no adequate reasons were  provided  as
    to why the 2015 report was preferred to that from  2017.   It  is  also
    said that the judge misinterpreted the contents of the relevant medical
    evidence.  The second  ground  of  challenge  relates  to  the  judge's
    conclusion that there was no private life in the United Kingdom.  It is
    said  that  this  conclusion  was  reached  without  reference  to  the
    Appellant's mental health problems and  treatment  received  therefore.
    Finally it is  said  that  the  judge  applied  the  wrong  test  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi): the test was  not  "insurmountable  obstacles"
    but  whether  there  would   be   "very   significant   obstacles"   to
    reintegration.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 31 May 2018.




The hearing before me

 6. Mr Melvin provided myself and Mr Halim with a rule 24 response.

 7. Mr Halim made the following points.  The actual reasons stated  by  the
    judge in [17] for preferring the 2015 report to  that  from  2017  were
    unsustainable, with  reference  to  the  grounds  of  appeal.   He  had
    misdirected himself as to what the 2015 evidence was in fact saying  in
    any event.  At [16] the wrong test had been applied. Article 3 had been
    considered by the judge, when it had never  been  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant, and there had been  no  proper  consideration  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) in relation to the evidence as a whole as at the date  of
    the human rights claim in June 2015.  In addition, it was  clearly  the
    case that the Appellant had established a private life  in  the  United
    Kingdom over the course of time.  Mr Halim submitted  that  the  errors
    were all material.

 8. Mr Melvin relied on the rule 24 response.  He submitted that  the  very
    significant obstacles test had in fact been considered and  applied  by
    the judge and that what is said in [18] was sustainable.

 9. In reply Mr Halim responded to a point that I raised about  materiality
    by submitting that the potential availability of treatment in  Pakistan
    was certainly not fatal to the Appellant's case with reference  to  the
    2015 medical evidence, not only from the  consultant  psychiatrist  but
    the CBT practitioner and the consultant psychologist.  There  had  been
    significant evidence to show serious mental  health  problems  and,  if
    removal were affected, an increased risk in suicide.  It was the  whole
    mental health picture that went to the article 8 claim,  not  simply  a
    suicide  risk.   Finally,  Mr  Halim   submitted   that   the   trainee
    psychologist had been under the supervision of the  principal  clinical
    psychologist and there was no basis to reduce the  weight  placed  upon
    the 2017 report.




Decision on error of law

10. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that the judge
    did materially err in law in  certain  respects.   The  errors  are  as
    follows.

11. First, in my view the judge has failed to adequately  assess  the  2015
    medical evidence in the context of a correct application  of  the  test
    under  276ADE(1)(vi).   The   test   was   not   whether   there   were
    "insurmountable obstacles" to reintegration on return, as stated by the
    judge in [16], but whether there would have been, as at the date of the
    human rights claim  in  2015,  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  such
    reintegration.  The insurmountable obstacles test is higher  than  that
    which should have been applied and the very significant obstacles  test
    is lower than that required  under  article  3.   Insofar  as  [16]  is
    concerned, there is no clear expression  of  the  correct  approach  to
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   I   fully   appreciate   that   the   "very
    insignificant obstacles" test is referred to at the very end  of  [17].
    However, there is  nothing  at  that  point  to  show  that  the  judge
    considered the circumstances as at the date of the human rights  claim,
    rather  than  simply  the  date  of  hearing.   That   is   potentially
    significant in  this  case  because  earlier  in  [17]  the  judge  had
    apparently  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was,  at  least  in  2017,
    "improved" in terms of his mental health problems.   Thus,  it  is  not
    sufficiently clear to me that the judge was applying the  correct  test
    as at the date stipulated by the first paragraph under paragraph 276ADE
    (namely the date of application).

12. Turning to the medical evidence, and just leaving aside for the  moment
    the  2017  report,  the  2015  evidence  emanated  not  simply  from  a
    consultant psychiatrist, but also from a consultant  psychologist  (who
    had also produced a report in 2016) and  a  CBT  practitioner.   Having
    read this evidence for myself and  having  regard  to  what  the  judge
    himself noted by way of the Appellant's counsel's submissions in  [10],
    it is clear that the totality of this evidence indicated  that  serious
    mental health problems existed as at the time relevant under  paragraph
    276AD, and that the risk of suicide  was  one  aspect  of  that.   That
    evidence does indeed make reference to the Appellant's  faith  and  the
    way in which this might potentially have acted as a bar to him actually
    carrying out any suicidal ideation.  However, it is also  said  by  the
    consultant psychologist that a return to Pakistan, the source  of  past
    traumatic events, would potentially have caused a deterioration and  an
    increased suicide risk.  This point is also made very  clearly  in  the
    report of the consultant psychiatrist.   In  addition  to  the  suicide
    issue, PTSD had been  diagnosed  and,  importantly,  severe  depressive
    episode, something which the psychiatrist regarded  as  being  at  that
    time a barrier to any worthwhile treatment  for  PTSD.   All  of  these
    issues, supported by what appears to  have  been  unchallenged  medical
    evidence, were relevant to the "very significant obstacles"  test.   In
    my view the judge has simply failed to address the  evidence  that  was
    actually before him in the context of a correct approach to  the  legal
    framework.

13. Second, to the extent that it is relevant I agree with  Mr  Halim  that
    the judge failed to provide adequate reasons as to why he preferred the
    2015 psychiatrist report to the trainee psychologist report of 2017, at
    least in respect of the  context  in  which  this  evidence  was  being
    placed.  In my view there was certainly no basis for preferring the one
    to the other solely on the basis the author of the latter report was  a
    trainee.  As Mr Halim rightly observed, her report was  prepared  under
    the supervision of  the  principal  clinical  consultant  psychologist.
    Beyond that, the 2017 report was prepared after a significant course of
    treatment had been undertaken by  the  Appellant  and  the  author  was
    clearly in a position to present a good  overview  of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances over two years after the psychiatrist's report  had  been
    prepared.  In addition, I conclude that the  judge  has  misinterpreted
    the contents of both reports in respect of the specific reason  he  has
    provided for preferring one to the other, namely an apparent  reduction
    in the risk of suicide based upon the  2015  report.   I  have  already
    mentioned that the 2015 report in fact refers to  an  increase  in  the
    risk of suicide on return notwithstanding the Appellant's  faith.   The
    2017 report makes a similar point (page 58 of the Appellant's  bundle).
    Therefore, at least on the face of it,  the  judge's  sole  reason  for
    preferring one report to the other is based upon a flawed premise.

14. Third, in respect of [18], whilst the judge was entitled  to  take  the
    lack of a work record into account, he has failed to make any reference
    or give any reasons for rejecting the relevance of the Appellant's long
    residence  in  this  country  and,  significantly,  his  mental  health
    problems and the specialist treatment received over the course of  time
    in relation to these.  I conclude that the judge's finding  that  there
    was not even a private life established in this country is flawed.

15. In my view the errors are all material.  It certainly  cannot  be  said
    that taking the Appellant's case at its very highest,  the  appeal  was
    bound to fail in any event.

16. In light of the foregoing I set the judge's decision aside.




Disposal

17. Neither representative suggested that this appeal should be remitted to
    the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  entirely  agree:  remittals   are   the
    exception, not the rule.

18. Initially I was of the view that I could remake the decision  based  on
    the evidence currently before me.   However,  Mr  Melvin  made  a  fair
    observation in that the most  recent  medical  evidence  goes  back  to
    September 2017, now almost a year ago.  In  my  view  it  would  be  of
    assistance to obtain more current medical evidence, even in brief form,
    to establish what  the  Appellant's  present  state  of  health  and/or
    treatment is.  Mr  Halim  saw  the  sense  in  this.   Therefore  I  am
    adjourning this appeal for a resumed hearing before me in due course at
    which I will remake my decision in this appeal.

19. There is no reason to revisit the judge's findings that there is no NHS
    debt and that the Appellant was aware  of  his  original  asylum  claim
    having been refused by the Respondent in 2003 and the subsequent appeal
    dismissed.

20. I will issue relevant directions below.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing before me in due course.

I make no anonymity direction

Signed   [pic]    Date: 19 August 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





Directions to the Parties

 1. There is no need for additional oral evidence at the resumed hearing;

 2. The core issue in the appeal is that of  article  8,  both  within  and
    without the context of the immigration rules;

 3. The Appellant is to provide updated medical  evidence  and  an  amended
    skeleton argument in advance of the resumed hearing.  The evidence  and
    skeleton argument shall be filed with the Upper Tribunal and served  on
    the Respondent no later than 14 days before the resumed hearing;

 4. The Appellant shall file with the  Upper  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
    Respondent a copy of the skeleton argument that was before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  This shall be done no later than 14 days from the  date
    of the hearing before me.
