
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00876/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8 August 2019                |On 16 August 2019               |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                    [J A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, counsel
                    (instructed by Legal Rights Partnership)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith on 4
         July 2019 against the decision to dismiss the Appellant's Article 8
         ECHR appeal made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego in a decision
         and reasons promulgated on 13 December 2018.  The  Appellant  is  a
         national of Ghana, a minor born on 29 April 2003, who had  made  an
         entry clearance application to join his mother and sponsor pursuant
         to paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules.   His  application  was
         refused on 9 November 2017, and the refusal was upheld by the Entry
         Clearance Manager on 22  October  2018  following  service  of  the
         Appellant's Notice of Appeal.

    2.     Judge Housego found that the Appellant had not shown that he met
         the Immigration Rules and that refusal was not a breach of  Article
         8 ECHR.  He found the Appellant's mother shared responsibility  for
         the Appellant with  the  Appellant's  grandmother.  On  a  "balance
         sheet" assessment, the proportionality balance for Article  8  ECHR
         purposes  fell  against  the  Appellant,  and   amounted   to   the
         continuation of the status quo initiated by the sponsor many  years
         ago when she left her son in Ghana and came to the United  Kingdom.
         Hence the appeal was dismissed.

    3.     Permission to appeal  was  granted  because  it  was  considered
         arguable that the judge failed to explain how  he  had  applied  TD
         (paragraph 297(i)(e)  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
         00049 with sufficient reasoning or why he had reached that decision
         he did on sole parental responsibility, or  why  he  had  concluded
         that the Appellant's exclusion from  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
         undesirable.

    4.     There was no rule 24 notice from the  Respondent  but  Ms  Jones
         indicated at the start of the hearing that the appeal was opposed.

    5.     Mr Mackenzie for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  submitted
         and the grant of permission to appeal by the Upper  Tribunal.   The
         judge had erred in not recognising  that  the  Appellant's  sponsor
         held limited leave to remain rather than ILR but that  was  not  in
         itself a material error of law.  The problem was that the judge had
         not understood TD (Yemen) (above)  at  [49]  onwards  and  had  not
         applied the correct tests.   The  question  was  who  had  ultimate
         parental responsibility.

    6.     The "balancing exercise" conducted was also the wrong  approach,
         and was not as intended in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.  Family  life
         was accepted and the question  was  whether  or  not  the  relevant
         Immigration Rule was met: TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ  1109.   If
         the rule was met there was no public interest in exclusion  of  the
         Appellant.  The judge had not examined the current  position  which
         was one of shared responsibility, whatever  the  previous  position
         had been.

    7.     Paragraph 297(i)(f)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  had  not  been
         addressed and was nowhere mentioned  in  the  determination.   Were
         there serious and compelling circumstances? The submission  on  the
         Appellant's behalf was that there were exactly such  circumstances,
         particularly in the form of the declining health of the Appellant's
         grandmother.  The onwards appeal should be allowed and the decision
         remade in the Appellant's favour.

    8.     Ms Jones  for  the  Respondent  submitted  that  the  judge  had
         addressed all relevant issues  in  substantial  detail  and  depth.
         Careful findings of fact had been  made  and  the  judge  had  been
         entitled to find that the Appellant's mother and  sponsor  had  not
         demonstrated  sole  responsibility.   There  had  been  a  lack  of
         evidence., e.g., from the Appellant's school.  The  attack  on  the
         determination was in reality a dispute with the outcome.  Any error
         of law was not material. Reading the determination as a  whole,  it
         was clear that paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rule had been
         addressed within the overall evaluation of the case.   The  onwards
         appeal should be dismissed.

    9.     In reply Mr Mackenzie reiterated that the judge  ought  to  have
         found that the facts showed shared or  joint  responsibility.   The
         question of whether there were serious and compelling circumstances
         had not been answered at all.

    10.    The tribunal reserved its decision which now follows. Because of
         the long delay between the original  entry  clearance  application,
         refusal, review, First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing  and  decision,
         grant of permission to appeal and the present error of law hearing,
         the  Appellant's   situation   and   circumstances   have   changed
         significantly.  Sadly the Appellant's grandmother died on 19  March
         2019.  The ability to make fresh or indeed parallel entry clearance
         applications is the only way to deal with such developments, absent
         a decision by  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  to
         exercise discretion or an error of law finding  setting  aside  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  judge  decision.  An   application   by   the
         Appellant's  solicitors  to  admit  further,   post   determination
         evidence at the error of law hearing was rightly not pursued.

    11.    The tribunal ventures that few of the determinations promulgated
         in the First-tier Tribunal would escape Mr Mackenzie's  courteously
         and properly advanced strictures.  Those determinations have to  be
         prepared promptly after what are frequently compressed hearings, at
         which the level of  assistance  and  cooperation  provided  to  the
         judges can be variable.   The  fact  that  appeals  in  immigration
         cases are now human rights only has tended  to  result  in  a  more
         complex jurisprudential analysis. The  higher  courts  have  issued
         regular reminders  that  the  applicable  standard  for  First-tier
         Tribunal determinations is legal adequacy rather  than  perfection.
         In the tribunal's view, Judge Housego's determination  exceeds  the
         standard of legal adequacy by a comfortable margin and discloses no
         material error of law, as was submitted by Ms Jones.

    12.    In the present appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  at  first
         identified the relevant Immigration Rule as Appendix FM,  but  this
         was later corrected to paragraph 297 and the correct rule  was  set
         out in full, emboldened at key passages.   There  was  no  material
         error of  law  there.   Mr  Mackenzie  accepted  that  the  judge's
         misidentification of the sponsor's leave to  remain  was  similarly
         not material.  It is however  the  case  that  the  judge  did  not
         dedicate any  specific  part  of  his  determination  to  paragraph
         297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules  but,  as  is  explained  below,
         rather  addressed  that  and  the  closely  related  issue  of  the
         Appellant's best interests as part of his final evaluation  of  the
         appeal.

    13.     The  judge's  determination  set  out  the  relevant   law   at
         considerable length, including TD (Yemen), and  was  full,  careful
         and well structured.  Clearly no effort  had  been  spared  in  its
         preparation. The judge began  with  fact  finding,  considered  the
         Immigration Rules and then moved to the Article  8  ECHR  analysis.
         That was the correct approach in law.  The "balance sheet" analysis
         for Article 8 ECHR purposes was made at the right stage, only after
         the Immigration Rules had been considered and  it  had  been  found
         that they were not  met.   It  has  to  be  said  that  it  is  not
         altogether easy to see why permission to appeal was granted by  the
         Upper  Tribunal,  particularly  in  the  face  of  the  refusal  of
         permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes,  dated  7
         June 2019, which succinctly explained why the onwards  grounds  had
         no real substance.   That  refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  was
         correct, in this tribunal's view.

    14.    Indeed the real quarrel in  this  onwards  appeal  is  with  the
         judge's   findings   of   fact,   in   particular   that   parental
         responsibility was  shared  between  mother  and  grandmother.  The
         discussion of the evidence begins at  [42]  of  the  determination.
         Detailed findings of fact are set out at [50] onwards,  and  secure
         reasons for those  findings  were  made,  again  clearly  set  out.
         Weight was given to independent evidence and proper inferences were
         drawn from evidence which could have been provided  but  which  was
         absent.  The judge took a fact  sensitive  approach  in  accordance
         with [52] and [53] of TD (Yemen).  His  decision  was  an  entirely
         logical one, given the Appellant's history  and  the  grandmother's
         active parental role which  the  provision  of  a  carer  had  been
         enabled to continue despite her recent poor health.  Another  judge
         might perhaps have reached a different decision,  but  this  First-
         tier Tribunal judge heard and saw the witnesses  and  there  is  no
         proper basis for interfering with his decision.

    15.    It was asserted that the judge failed to address the question of
         whether or not there were compelling circumstances, as set  out  in
         paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration Rules.  That is not  a  fair
         reading of the determination.  As noted above, the  judge  had  not
         only set out the whole of paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules
         early in his determination, but he  had  emboldened  parts  of  sub
         paragraph 297(i)(f), which indicates that those elements were  much
         in his mind.  It  is  obvious  that  what  counts  is  whether  the
         substance of the sub paragraph was properly considered, rather than
         an empty repeated citation.

    16.    This important question, the last  matter  raised  in  paragraph
         297, envisages a stepping back and review.   This Immigration  Rule
         was not changed on 9 July 2012 when Appendix FM was introduced, nor
         was it thought necessary to amend  it  after  the  introduction  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.
         It overlaps or coincides with the "best interests" issue, as  noted
         at [65] of the determination.  The judge's analysis  of  the  facts
         encompassed all such matters, in true depth: see in particular [66]
         to [74] of the determination where the final review  is  conducted.
         The judge's findings were open to him on the evidence presented.

    17.    In the tribunal's  judgment,  the  very  experienced  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  produced  a  full  and   balanced   determination,
         reflecting current law, which securely resolved  the  live  issues.
         The tribunal finds that there was no material error of law and  the
         onwards appeal must be dismissed.




    DECISION

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 12 August 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


