
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
HU/00473/2015

                                                  HU/00476/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                 |            Decision & Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                              |
|On 9 December 2019                  |            On 23 December 2019          |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              mrs samina khalid
                           Mr mian khalid mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Holmes of Counsel instructed by Thornhill
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants  are  wife  and  husband.   They  have  a  son  born  in
    September 1994 and a daughter born in September 1996.  On 17 July  2019
    Designated Judge McClure of the First-tier Tribunal  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds the appeal of the  appellants'  son  but  dismissed  the
    appeals of the two appellants against the decision  of  the  respondent
    made on 20 May 2015 to refuse the first appellant's application made on
    31 January 2014 for leave to remain on family and private life grounds,
    with her husband, son and daughter as dependants.  Following a  hearing
    on 24 September 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup and myself  found  an
    error of law in the decision of Judge McClure.  We  consider  that  the
    judge had erred by failing to take into account the past appeal history
    and the fact that in 2015 the judge had failed to  apply  the  guidance
    given in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

2.   Given that few facts were in dispute, we decided to retain the case  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

3.   We stated at paragraph 16 that we pointed out that the  hearing  before
    Judge McClure had taken place over eighteen months ago  in  March  2018
    and, although not developed in  any  way  before  us,  the  appellants'
    grounds did contend that  the  credibility  of  the  first  and  second
    appellants concerning re-establishing their lives in Pakistan  and  the
    willingness of family and friends was in issue. We  concluded  that  on
    balance, in order to re-make the decision on  the  basis  of  the  full
    facts and in the light of submissions properly focusing on the merit of
    the appeal, the case was to be adjourned.

4.   I heard evidence from the son, Muhammad  Waqar  Khalid.   He  confirmed
    the truth of his witness statement dated 7 January 2019.  He  explained
    that he had had an accident  with  a  chainsaw  on  14  November  2019.
    Essentially his left middle ring and little finger had  been  amputated
    but then a replantation had been achieved He did not know at this point
    in time whether he would be able to regain full movement in his hand.

5.   Mr Khalid said he still lived with his parents and his sister.   During
    the five days he was in hospital,  his  parents  and  sisters  were  in
    constant attendance for all the period they were allowed.  His  parents
    had been very distressed by the  accident.   So  far  as  concerns  the
    financial situation of the household, his  sister  worked,  his  mother
    worked  from  home,  his  father  did  voluntary  work  and  gets  paid
    sometimes.  He himself had been pursuing studies and sometimes working.
    Now he was looking to take up full employment when he was  sufficiently
    recovered from his injuries.  He was applying for full time work.

6.   I then heard submissions. Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  appellants
    were not dependent on their  two  adult  children.   He  accepted  that
    theirs was a close family unit and that  there  were  strong  emotional
    ties.  The appellants were financially dependent  on  help  from  other
    family in the UK, so they were not financially  independent.   If  they
    returned to Pakistan they would be able to work.  They also had  strong
    cultural connections with Pakistan.  They had lived most of their  life
    in Pakistan.  They had linguistic ties with Pakistan.  They had  family
    there.  They had overstayed in the  UK  and  on  the  findings  of  the
    previous judge they had clearly come to  the  UK  with  the  deliberate
    intention of staying and not complying with the terms of  their  visit.
    It was now accepted that the judge who dealt with the appeal hearing in
    2015 had failed to apply the guidance given in MA (Pakistan).  However,
    it remained unclear whether if the judge had taken  into  account  that
    guidance he would have allowed the appeal.  Further on the basis of the
    guidance given by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53,  it
    was necessary now in the context  of  remaking  the  decision  to  have
    regard to the real world.  Both the children were now adults.  One, the
    daughter, was financially independent.  The other was in a position  to
    become financially independent in the near future.  There was a  strong
    public interest in the removal of the two  appellants.   There  was  no
    significant medical evidence regarding their own health  circumstances.
    There was no evidence that either child needed their parents' long-term
    care nor that their parents needed theirs.  In  short,  the  appellants
    could not show that there were  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  and
    their circumstances were not compelling.

7.   Mr Holmes for the appellants submitted that it was  important  to  take
    account of the significant delay  in  this  case  with  regard  to  the
    principles set out by the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41.
     The family had been trying to regularise their  position  since  2010.
    The respondent did not decide on their cases until 2014.   It  was  the
    family  that  had  been  taking  the  initiative  to  try  and  resolve
    proceedings.  The delay meant first of all that  the  family  put  down
    roots and secondly that the respondent showed no willingness to enforce
    removal.

8.   A second important factor, submitted Mr Holmes, was that half  of  this
    four person family had now been granted leave to remain.  First of all,
    the daughter had been granted leave to remain on 15 March 2017  on  the
    basis that she had now lived in the UK for over half her life  and  was
    between the age of 18 and 25.  It was this "half  of  his  life"  basis
    which had led Judge McClure to allow the appeal of the son  who  was  a
    third appellant in the appeals before him.  Accordingly, there was  now
    a threatened disruption of the family which would not have taken  place
    if all four appellants had been treated in the same way at the  outset-
    all to go or all to stay.  He emphasised that the  family  had  pursued
    avenues lawfully and there was no suggestion of the family biding time.
     In total there had been two sets of appeals before the Tribunal system
    and also judicial review proceedings.  These  considerations  mitigated
    the degree of weight that should be attached to the public interest.  A
    third important factor was the nature of the family relationship.   The
    two children although now adults  were  still  residing  together  with
    their parents.  It was clear that there was  strong  emotional  support
    between  the  family  members  and  an   unusual   degree   of   shared
    responsibility.  If the case was being considered under the Immigration
    Rules relating to family units, the daughter and  son  would  still  be
    considered to be part of the family because neither were independent.

9.   A fourth main point, submitted Mr Holmes, was that the  son's  accident
    clearly meant that he was going to have some kind of  disability  short
    or long term.  It was particularly important that  he  had  his  family
    with him to help him through what was likely to be a  difficult  period
    in his life in the immediate future.  The strength of the  family  ties
    had been demonstrated in the close care they took of this son  when  he
    was in hospital.  That is to say, the family's life ties in  this  case
    should be seen as ones of particular strength and quality.

10.  In relation to the appellants' financial circumstances,  although  they
    were not financially independent, it was clear, he submitted, that they
    had not been a burden on public funds.


My Assessment

11.  If I were to ignore the appeal history in this case, I  would  have  no
    hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  appellant's  appeals  should  be
    dismissed.  It is clear that the appellants came to the UK in 2006  and
    had overstayed.  It is clear from the judge's unchallenged  finding  on
    this issue, that it was a deliberate move on their part to overstay the
    duration of  their  visit  visas.   It  is  not  in  dispute  that  the
    appellants cannot meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  and
    can only succeed, if at all,  by  showing  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules. Both appellants  have  spent  most  of
    their life in Pakistan.  It is clearly the case that they  continue  to
    have cultural and linguistic  ties  with  Pakistan.  They  have  family
    members in Pakistan.  On the available evidence,  they  could  look  to
    other family members  in  the  UK  to  continue  to  assist  them  with
    financial support whilst they were re-adjusting to  life  in  Pakistan.
    Although the two children have made clear they wish to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom, and both now have leave to remain on the basis  of  the
    Immigration Rules applying to persons between the ages of 18 and 25 who
    have lived in the UK more than half  their  life,  they  are  now  both
    adults.  The daughter is working.  The  son  has  obtained  educational
    qualifications and is in a position to find work.  The medical evidence
    does not indicate  that  he  would  be  prevented  by  his  unfortunate
    chainsaw accident from working in the future.  There was no evidence to
    suggest that he will be permanently unable to work as a result of  this
    injury.  It is  true  that  the  family  enjoys  a  particularly  close
    relationship and that they live together and  give  each  other  strong
    emotional support.  It is also true  that  there  are  signs  that  the
    family has become significantly integrated into the UK, as can be  seen
    from the daughter and the son's educational activities.   The  daughter
    is now in the nursing profession.  At the same time, the  children  are
    adults and it would not be unduly harsh for them to be  separated  from
    their parents.

12.  However the above scenario  ignores  an  important  dimension  to  this
    appeal.  This relates to the fact that the appeals of the appellants in
    May 2015 were refused by the judge without  regard  to  the  prevailing
    policy of the Home Office relating to the parents of children  who  had
    been residing in the UK for seven years or more.  The  policy  at  that
    time required powerful reasons to be shown for requiring  the  children
    to leave. The respondent's refusal decision in relation to the previous
    appeal clearly did take account of the seven-year qualifying period  of
    the  daughter,  (as  we  have  noted,  it  concluded  that   it   would
    nevertheless be reasonable to expect her to relocate with  her  parents
    in Pakistan) but the same cannot be said for the decision of the  judge
    hearing that appeal, who failed to consider the seven-year issue at all
    in relation to reasonableness.  It was this failure which, following  a
    judicial review application led to the case returning  to  a  different
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McClure) who failed in turn  to
    consider the potential significance of  the  previous  failure  by  the
    judge to apply the guidance given in MA (Pakistan), guidance which  may
    well have been to the benefit of the appellants.



13.  As was stated by Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup and myself  in  the  error
    of law decision, it is by no means clear that the appeal in relation to
    the daughter would or should have succeeded back in 2015.  It  was  not
    practical for the Upper Tribunal, several years later, to go  back  and
    reconstruct exactly how the judge should have viewed the facts and gone
    about applying MA (Pakistan)  criteria  to  them,  since  the  relevant
    assessment  would  have  needed  to  traverse  a   diverse   range   of
    considerations However, paying regard to the real-world situation,  the
    fact of the matter is that the respondent did subsequently grant  leave
    to remain to the daughter.  Further the fact  of  the  matter  is  that
    Judge McClure concluded that the son should also benefit from leave  to
    remain and the respondent has not sought to  challenge  that  decision.
    In my judgment these developments  indicate  that  the  respondent  has
    accepted de facto that powerful reasons existed for granting  leave  to
    two out of four members of the family.  In light of those  developments
    it is appropriate to consider with hindsight therefore that there was a
    viable basis for applying MA  (Pakistan)  criteria  in  favour  of  the
    appellants in 2015, namely the fact that the daughter had been  in  the
    UK for nine years.  She was by then clearly  well  integrated  into  UK
    society.

14.  A further factor leading me to consider it realistic to  have  expected
    the parents to benefit from the seven-year policy in 2015 is  the  fact
    that the respondent did not make any decision in their case until March
    2014 (the appellants had applied for leave to remain on 13 April 2010).
     The complex procedural history of these appeals  featured  inter  alia
    judicial review proceedings and then the granting of a right of  appeal
    leading to the dismissal by the First-tier Tribunal of the  appeals  on
    25 August 2015.

15.  The core question I have to address is whether or  not  the  appellants
    have demonstrated  compelling  circumstances  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The question I have to ask is whether their being  required  to
    leave now would create unjustifiably harsh  consequences.   However,  I
    have to ask this question  by  striking  a  fair  balance  between  the
    appellants'  circumstances  and  the  weight  of  the  public  interest
    appropriate to this case. As was noted in Hesham Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60,
    the public interest is not a fixity and in this case,  the  failure  on
    the part of the First tier Tribunal judge in 2015 to  apply  applicable
    law and policy and the subsequent action by the respondent in  deciding
    to grant leave to remain  to  the  daughter  and,  most  recently,  the
    decision of Judge McClure to allow the appeal of the son,  are  factors
    that taken together reduce somewhat the public interest in  removal  of
    the remaining two appellants. Whilst as I have said, taking their facts
    of the family life circumstances in isolation,  the  appellants   would
    not be able to show such circumstances (in part because their action in
    defying immigration controls by becoming overstayers in 2006 or shortly
    thereafter  and  that  they  do  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules,  added  to  the  public  interest  in  removal),   I
    consider that when taking into  account  the  appeal  history  and  the
    significant change made by the respondent himself to the status of  the
    two children of this family to seek to remove the  two  appellants  now
    would be disproportionate and have  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.
    For the above reasons, the appellants' appeals are allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date: 18 December 2019
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



