
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/00073/2016

                                                       HU/00074/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2017                        |On 2nd January 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly

                                   Between

                            1) MISS RANA SHARMILA
                              2) MR RANA ARJUN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DEHLI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr      S Shepherd, Counsel instructed by N C
Brothers & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Chris Avery, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Miss Rana Sharmila and Mr Rana Arjun  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs, promulgated  on  the  14th
    July  2017,  to  dismiss  their  appeals  against  refusal   of   their
    applications for entry clearance (hereafter, "the  decision")  to  join
    their father (Mr Padam Bahadur  Rhana,  hereafter  "the  sponsor")  and
    their mother in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nepal. The first appellant was  born  on
    the 5th June 1986 and the second appellant on the 12th April 1989.  The
    sponsor was formerly a soldier in the Brigade of Gurkhas in the British
    Army. In recognition of that service, he  and  his  wife  were  granted
    settled status on the 21st April 2011. They entered the United  Kingdom
    on the 12th June 2011 and have resided here ever since. The  appellants
    made applications to enter the UK at the same time  as  their  parents.
    However, their applications were refused because they did not meet  the
    requirements for an 'adult dependent relative' under Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules, and because the respondent did not accept that  they
    qualified for entry  clearance  by  reference  to  their  rights  under
    Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 3. In giving reasons for dismissing their appeals, the judge  stated  that
    having considered the totality of the evidence she  was  not  satisfied
    that the facts as they had been presented to her at  the  hearing  were
    reliable. She found that the  sponsor  had  attempted  to  elevate  the
    appellants' level of dependency upon him  in  order  to  bolster  their
    chances of succeeding in their appeals [paragraph 12]. She  noted  that
    the sponsor had made no mention of his eldest son ('Mahender')  in  his
    witness statement, other than to say that he lived in  Nepal  with  his
    own family. He had perpetuated this impression during his  evidence-in-
    chief by saying that Mahender lived "separately".  However,  in  cross-
    examination it had become clear that the appellants  lived  with  their
    elder brother and his family on the family farm, which  was  where  the
    sponsor and his wife had lived prior to leaving Nepal  [paragraph  14].
    It also emerged in cross-examination that  the  Mahender  worked  as  a
    primary school teacher  as  well  as  on  the  farm.  The  sponsor  had
    initially claimed that  the  appellants  did  not  work  on  the  farm.
    However, he later accepted that they sometimes did help in the  fields,
    adding that they did not wish to do so [paragraph 15].

 4. The judge was satisfied that it was likely that the  appellants  worked
    on the farm in order to provide themselves with an income  as  well  as
    food for their daily living. It was not credible  that  Mahender  would
    undertake two jobs whilst the appellants did  nothing  [paragraph  14].
    She noted that the letters that had been submitted from the 'Office  of
    Village Development Committee' did not  refer  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellants lived on the farm with their elder brother and  his  family.
    She therefore concluded that these were  not  documents  to  which  she
    could attach weight [paragraph 16]. Whilst she acknowledged that  there
    was evidence to show that the sponsor sent money to Nepal, she was  not
    satisfied that this was anything more than the  sponsor  providing  his
    three children and two grandchildren  with  additional  spending  money
    rather than constituting essential financial  support  [paragraph  18].
    Equally, whilst there was evidence of communication between the UK  and
    Nepal, it was probable that all family  members  participated  in  that
    contact [paragraph 19].

 5. Given her primary findings (above) the judge was not satisfied that the
    appellants were either emotionally or financially dependent upon  their
    parents in the UK [paragraphs 17 and 20]. The existence of family  life
    between them had not therefore been  established  and  the  appellants'
    claim under Article 8 therefore failed at the first of  the  five-stage
    analysis of Lord Bingham in R  v   Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 [paragraph 20].

 6. Whilst drawing our attention  to  the  fact  that  the  judge  had  not
    rejected the evidence of the  sponsor  in  its  totality,  Mr  Shepherd
    acknowledged that the judge had made adverse credibility  findings  and
    did not invite us to go behind them. He nevertheless submitted that the
    judge had failed to have regard to the following factors:

   1) The period of, and reasons for, the appellants' separation from  their
      parents.

   2) Whether there was, as a matter of fact, family life  at  time  of  the
      parents' departure and whether it had endured beyond it.

   3) Whether the appellants had established a family life of their own.

   4) The fact that the parents had visited appellants for 90 days in 2013.

   5) The point at which family life ceased.

   6) The extent to which the circumstances  of  the  individual  appellants
      were different, with particular regard to their  differences  in  ages
      and the fact that the first appellant was an unmarried female.

 7. We do not accept those submissions. Whilst the period of separation  of
    an adult child from his parents may be relevant to the factual question
    of whether family life has continued to the present day, we cannot  see
    that the reason for the separation is material to this  issue.  On  our
    reading of the decision  in  Ghising  (Ghurkhas/BOCs;  historic  wrong:
    weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC), the fact that the that an adult  child
    has been prevented from following his or her parents due to an historic
    injustice or a change in policy is a factor relevant to the question of
    the proportionality of a decision that prevents family life  (where  it
    is found to exist)  from  being  enjoyed  in  the  United  Kingdom.  An
    historic injustice or change in policy is thus no more relevant to  the
    question of whether family life  exists  than  is  the  fact  that  the
    decision of the parents to live separately from  their  adult  children
    was one made through choice rather than  necessity [see Jitendra Rai  v
    Entry Clearance Officer - New Dehli [2017] EWCA Civ 320].

 8. The question of whether family life  had  endured  beyond  the  initial
    separation between parent  and  adult  child  to  the  present  day  is
    obviously central to a finding that it continues to subsist. We do  not
    however accept Mr Shepherd's submission that it was necessary  for  the
    judge to identify a precise point in time between  separation  and  the
    present at which family life ceased to endure. Sometimes the  cessation
    of family life between and a parent and  child  will  be  marked  by  a
    particular event, such as the  marriage  of  the  child  or  the  child
    leaving the parental home in order to  take  up  employment.  On  other
    occasions it will result from an accumulation of changing circumstances
    that has gradually led to the  loosening  of  emotional  and  financial
    ties. The greater the gap  between  meetings,  for  example,  the  more
    difficult it may become to establish that family life has continued  to
    endure to the present  time.  In  such  circumstances  it  may  not  be
    possible to identify a precise temporal dividing line  between  'family
    life' and the usual bonds of mutual love and affection existing between
    adult family members who no longer reside in  the  same  household.  As
    Stanley Burton LJ observed in Singh v Secretary of State for the  Hojme
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630, "it all depends on the facts".

 9. Whilst the fact that an adult child has started a family  life  of  his
    own will in all probability lead to  the  fact-finder  concluding  that
    family life with his parents has ceased to endure,  we  do  not  accept
    that its absence is a necessary indicator of continuing family life. It
    is perhaps stating the obvious to say that single  adult  children  are
    also capable of leading  independent  lives.  It  all  depends  on  the
    particular facts and circumstances.

10. With respect to the visit to  the  appellants  that  was  made  by  the
    sponsor and his wife in 2013, the judge was clearly aware of this visit
    given that she refers to it at paragraph 5 of  her  decision.  However,
    given also that she appears to have believed that it  had  taken  place
    very much more recently than was in fact the case  (the  visit  was  in
    2013 rather than 2015) we do not consider that her failure to factor it
    into her overall assessment could have resulted in  a  more  favourable
    outcome for the appellants.

11. Finally, we are not persuaded that it was necessary for  the  judge  to
    attach significant weight to the differences of age and sex as  between
    the appellants given her finding (which is not  challenged)  that  they
    were both now working on the family farm in order to provide for  their
    food and a personal income. The judge was  thus  entitled  to  conclude
    that their current circumstances were similar if not identical.

12. We conclude by  noting  that  the  truthfulness  and  accuracy  of  the
    sponsor's evidence concerning the appellants' current circumstances  in
    Nepal was central if not critical to  the  success  of  these  appeals.
    Given the unchallenged finding that the evidence  of  the  sponsor  had
    been exaggerated and was consequently unreliable, we consider that  the
    judge was almost bound to conclude that current  family  life  was  not
    established.



Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly


