
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/00823/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                    |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On January 8, 2019                     |    On February 1, 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                          MRS GILDA MAY MORGAN-COKE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jalal, Counsel instructed by 1st Call Immigration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a Jamaican national and she entered the United Kingdom
    on June 22, 2002 with entry clearance as a visitor until  December  22,
    2002.  She did not leave the United Kingdom at that stage but on  March
    31, 2007 she submitted an application for naturalisation, but this  was
    refused.  On November 8, 2008 she submitted an application  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules for leave to remain, but this was refused on  May
    24, 2009.

 2. She was served with papers for administrative removal on June 10,  2015
    and in response she lodged an application for leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds on June 15, 2015.   This  application  was  refused  and
    certified on June 29, 2015.  Further submissions were lodged in July of
    2015 and ultimately, by consent, the respondent  agreed  to  reconsider
    this matter when an application for judicial review  was  withdrawn  on
    November 27, 2015.

 3. The application was refused by the respondent on December 16, 2015  and
    the appellant lodged her grounds of appeal on December 29,  2015  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   It
    should be noted that additional grounds of appeal were lodged with  the
    Tribunal on May 16, 2017.  Her appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pacey on May 2017 and then in a decision  promulgated  on
    May 25, 2017 the Judge dismissed the appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was lodged on June 9, 2017 and Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Scott-Baker granted permission to appeal  on  January  5,
    2018 finding it  arguable  the  Judge  had  failed  to  deal  with  the
    additional grounds of appeal (Articles 9 and 12 ECHR) or made  adequate
    findings as to the effect the removal of the appellant  would  have  on
    the grandchildren.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Jalal adopted his colleague's grounds of appeal and  submitted  that
    the Judge had not dealt with Article 9 ECHR.  He acknowledged  that  at
    paragraph 32 the Judge touched on issues of religion but submitted  the
    consideration did not go far enough.  He conceded there  was  no  basis
    for an Article 12 ground and he withdrew that ground of appeal.

 7. Turning to the other issues Mr Jalal submitted the Judge had  erred  in
    the way he dealt with  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and with the way she  dealt  with  the  two  minor
    grandchildren.  The finding that the elder child (age  25)  could  look
    after his mother and take over the appellant's role was misconceived.

 8. Mr Mills opposed the application and submitted that the grounds were  a
    disagreement and that even if the Judge had dealt with those points  in
    more detail there  would  have  been  no  material  difference  to  the
    outcome.

 9. The appellant had claimed that she followed the Pentecostal  faith  and
    was part of a religious community and her husband stated that he wished
    to visit the graves of his parents.  Mr Mills submitted that the  Judge
    had dealt with the graves issue in detail at paragraphs 27  and  34  of
    her decision.  The appellant's husband was  not  being  prevented  from
    visiting his parents' graves, if he chose to live in  Jamaica,  because
    he was a British citizen and entitled to travel to and from the  United
    Kingdom whenever he wanted.  The Judge had noted that the  parents  had
    not recently died and that visits were limited to four times a year.

10. He submitted that the Judge had dealt  with  Article  9  and  that  the
    grounds were a disagreement.  Turning  to  the  appellant's  activities
    within the religious community he accepted that both the appellant  and
    her husband carried out significant work with food banks  but  referred
    to paragraphs 77, 93 and 94 of  Thakrar  (Cart  JR;  Art  8;  value  to
    community) [2018] UKUT 336 (IAC).  Whilst such activities can be  taken
    into account the courts had made it clear that  it  would  only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that such  behaviour  would  outweigh  public
    interest.  He submitted this was not one of those cases.

11. Turning to article 8, Mr Mills accepted the appellant did  have  strong
    connections to her grandchildren especially because what  had  happened
    to their  father.   However,  the  grounds  of  appeal  overlooked  two
    important factors namely:

      a) the grandchildren's mother was now in a new relationship and living
         with her partner; and

      b) the grandmother had moved out of the grandchildren's home at  least
         five years ago at the date of hearing.

12. The appellant's role therefore within the grandchildren's home was much
    more reduced than what it had been in the past and to suggest that  she
    was a primary carer overstated the role of  the  appellant.   Mr  Mills
    again referred to paragraphs 52 and 59 of Thakrar  and  submitted  that
    the Tribunal had concluded that relationships between grandchildren and
    their grandparents were unlikely to carry material  weight  unless  the
    grandparent had stepped into the shoes of the parent and  this  clearly
    was not  the  case.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  given  full
    consideration to the grandchildren's position and even  if  more  could
    have been stated in the decision he submitted that it  was  likely  the
    appellant's case would have been weaker rather than stronger.

13. The final issue related to the appellant's  daughter's  health  and  he
    submitted the Judge was entitled to find there was scant evidence about
    her health.  The only medical evidence was from June 2015 or before and
    at the date of hearing there  was  no  updated  evidence.   Whilst  her
    daughter did have some problems it was incumbent upon the appellant  to
    present up-to-date evidence if she was seeking to advance health as  an
    issue.  The Judge had noted that the son lived in the property and  was
    25 and the daughter now lived with  a  new  partner.   He  invited  the
    Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.

    FINDINGS

14. This is an appeal against the decision to refuse the appellant leave to
    remain.  The immigration history is set out above.  The  appellant  met
    and eventually married her husband in August 2012 at a time  when  they
    both were aware she had no leave to remain.

15. Grounds of appeal were lodged in which it  was  argued  the  Judge  had
    failed to consider Articles 9 and 12 and Section 55 of the 2009 Act.

16. Dealing with  Article  9,  I  am  satisfied  the  Judge  addressed  all
    religious issues.  Article 9 is concerned with the  right  to  practice
    your religion.  The Article states:

         "Everyone has the right  to  freedom  of  thought,  conscience  and
         religion; this right includes freedom to  change  his  religion  or
         belief and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in
         public or private, to manifest his religion or belief, in  worship,
         teaching, practice and observance."

17. The appellant and her husband were members of a Pentecostal church  and
    at paragraph 32 the Judge acknowledged this  membership  but  made  the
    clear finding that the appellant could continue that faith in  Jamaica.



18. Mr Jalal does not argue she would be unable to do this but simply  says
    the Judge failed to attach sufficient weight to this.

19. I find that the issue of Article 9  was  properly  dealt  with  by  the
    Judge.  I do not find Article 9 extends  to  contributions  within  the
    community as such a contribution is more properly dealt with by way  of
    private life (article 8).  On the specific point as to whether  Article
    9 was addressed I accept the Judge did not mention the Article but I am
    satisfied the issues were  dealt  with.   I  take  on  board  the  case
    submitted to me by Mr Mills and agree with him that there is nothing in
    the appellant's case which would lead to the engagement  of  Article  9
    and I do not accept that work within a community,  the  visiting  of  a
    grave or attendance at church  would  be  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in removal for the purposes of article 8 ECHR.

20. The appellant's husband is entitled to visit the graves as and when  he
    wishes as he is a British citizen.  Their work within the community  on
    food banks is admirable but ultimately if they were not there to do  it
    no  doubt  somebody  else  would  carry  out  that  role  within  their
    community.  Their work is significant but I do not find it falls within
    the class of rare cases identified by the court in Thakrar.

21.  The  second  issue  that  had  to  be  dealt  with  related   to   the
    grandchildren.  The Judge considered the grandchildren at paragraph  47
    and whilst I accept Mr Jalal's submission that it could  have  been  in
    more  detail  nevertheless  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between
    children and grandchildren.

22. The Judge acknowledged that all  but  one  of  the  grandchildren  were
    minors (although of course it transpires that two of the  grandchildren
    were no longer minors).  That error is not material as  ironically  the
    Judge has written the decision  more  in  the  appellant's  favour  and
    against the appellant.

23. The Judge acknowledged that the appellant had been  involved  in  their
    lives since 2002 but importantly the appellant had  moved  out  of  the
    family home five years prior  to  the  date  of  hearing.   Whilst  her
    involvement with the grandchildren may well have been more  significant
    while she was living there the reality is that the grandchildren  would
    still see the appellant, but she was no longer their primary carer.

24. I take on board the submissions made by both representatives  but  also
    have regard to the findings in Thakrar when  the  Tribunal  found  that
    relationships between grandparents and grandchildren  are  unlikely  to
    carry material weight unless they have stepped into the  shoes  of  the
    parent.  At the date of hearing this  clearly  was  not  the  case  and
    whilst the Judge has not specified this the reality  is  that  if  that
    observation had been included in paragraph  47  it  would  simply  have
    weakened the appellant's chances rather than improved them.

25. Issues were raised in submissions regarding the appellant's  daughter's
    health but there was, as identified in paragraph 26  of  the  decision,
    scant evidence of this.  It is simply not enough  to  rely  on  medical
    evidence dated approximately two years prior to the  date  of  hearing.
    Up-to-date medical evidence should have been produced if  reliance  was
    to be placed on it but in any event the appellant's daughter, who  gave
    evidence, told the Tribunal in her witness statement that she now lived
    with her partner.  The fact the Judge  found  the  son  could  aid  his
    mother should be read alongside  the  fact  her  daughter  also  has  a
    partner who can provide further assistance. The findings were  open  to
    the Judge.

26. Having made those findings, the Judge then  went  on  to  consider  the
    issue of proportionality.  The Judge set out in some  detail  the  pros
    and cons of the appellant's case and referred to case law.  The Judge's
    approach cannot be faulted, and I am satisfied that none of the  issues
    outlined either in the grounds of appeal or by  Mr  Jalal  lead  me  to
    conclude there is an error in law.

Notice of Decision

There is no error of law and I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     17/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date         17/01/2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
