
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00527/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 August 2019                    |On 21 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                              GAYAN GUNASEKURA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Hodgetts, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. The appellant has appealed against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') sent on 1 April 2019, dismissing  his  appeals  on
         human rights grounds.

      2. Mr Bates conceded that the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  contain
         errors of law such that the FTT decision must be set  aside.   Both
         parties therefore consented to the appeal  being  allowed  and  the
         FTT's  decision  being  set  aside.     I  decided  that   it   was
         appropriate to allow the appeal pursuant to rule 39 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I now give brief  reasons
         for doing so.

      3. This is an appeal that turned on the respondent's  contention  that
         the appellant had misrepresented his earnings such that  322(5)  of
         the  Immigration  Rules  applied.   The  FTT  concluded  that   the
         appellant employed deliberate repeated deception over  many  years,
         and for this reason dismissed his appeal.  I agree with the parties
         that the FTT's findings for rejecting that claim  are  infected  by
         material errors of law, as identified in the grounds of appeal, and
         must be remade entirely.  The  FTT  has  failed  to  take  material
         matters into account and failed to apply the principles set out  in
         Balajigari v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673, 16 April 2019  (albeit  this
         was not available at the time of the FTT hearing).

      4. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's
         Practice Statement  and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
         findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that
         this is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  Fresh findings of
         fact are necessary and this will involve detailed oral evidence and
         cross-examination  on  wide-ranging   matters   relevant   to   the
         allegation of sustained and deliberate deception.

Decision

      5. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a material error  of
         law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      6. The appeal shall be remitted to the FTT, where the decision will be
         remade on a de novo basis by any judge other than Judge Row.



Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 August 2019

