
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00157/2020;
HU/00160/2020
                                                HU/00162/2020; HU/00164/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 26 April 2021                           |On 05 May 2021                  |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                KINGSLEY [P]
                                   JOY [A]
                                    [P P]
                                    [D P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr J Plowright, counsel, instructed by Perera & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitewell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

     1. These are appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Plumptre ("the judge"), promulgated on 6 November 2020, in
        which  she  dismissed   the   appellants'   appeals   against   the
        respondent's decisions dated 10 December 2019 refusing their  human
        rights claims.

Factual Background

     2. The appellants are nationals of Nigeria. The 1st appellant was born
        on 25 May  1972  and  the  2nd  appellant,  the  wife  of  the  1st
        appellant, was born on 6 July 1981. The 3rd appellant was  born  in
        the UK on 1 September 2013. She is the daughter of the 1st and  2nd
        appellants. The 4th appellant was born in the UK on 11 August 2015.
        He is the son of the 1st  and  2nd  appellants.  The  3rd  and  4th
        appellants have continuously resided in the UK since their birth.

     3. The 1st appellant entered the UK in February 2002  concealed  in  a
        lorry. The 2nd appellant entered the UK in 2005. Her claim to  have
        been trafficked into the UK and to fear for her personal safety  in
        Nigeria as a result have been rejected by both the  respondent  and
        the First-tier Tribunal and are not the subject of  the  'error  of
        law' appeal to this Tribunal.

     4. The 1st and 2nd appellants  formed  a  relationship  in  2008.  The
        genuineness and subsisting nature of  their  relationship  has  not
        been disputed. A refusal of an earlier human rights claim  made  by
        the 1st appellant led to an appeal before Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Fox, which was heard on  15  April  2015.  In  a  decision
        promulgated on 28 July 2018 Judge Fox dismissed the 1st appellant's
        appeal concluding that the 1st, 2nd and  3rd  appellants  (the  4th
        appellant was not yet born) return to Nigeria would not  breach  of
        paragraph 276ADE(1) in respect of any of them and that the  refusal
        of the human rights claim was proportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

     5. The appellants made human rights claims on 12 August 2019.  In  her
        decisions dated 10 December 2019 refusing these human rights claims
        the respondent found there were no very significant  obstacles,  as
        required by  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
        preventing the 1st and 2nd appellants'  integration  into  Nigeria,
        and that the 3rd and 4th appellants did not meet  the  requirements
        of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) because they had not resided in  the  UK
        for at least 7 continuous years. Nor was the  respondent  satisfied
        that there were any exceptional circumstances sufficient to warrant
        a grant of leave to remain in accordance with Article 8  principles
        outside the immigration rules. The appellants had a right of appeal
        to the First-tier Tribunal which they exercised.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     6. The judge heard oral evidence from the 1st and 2nd  appellants  and
        considered a bundle of documents  running  to  172  pages.  In  her
        decision the judge accurately  set  out  the  relevant  Immigration
        Rules, she properly directed herself on the burden and standard  of
        proof, and noted that  relevant  case  law  included  KO  (Nigeria)
        [2018] UKSC 53 and Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano)
        [2020] UKUT 00129 (IAC). At [13]  the  judge  noted  that  the  3rd
        appellant was now a  qualifying  child  within  the  definition  in
        s.117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  As  she
        had lived in the UK for a continuous period of just over 7 years at
        the date of the hearing.  The  4th  appellant  was  and  is  not  a
        qualifying child.

     7. At [15] to [18] the  judge  summarised  the  medical  evidence  and
        school reports relating to the 3rd and 4th  appellants.  The  judge
        noted in particular, and by reference to  a  "Communication  Clinic
        Assessment" report written on 4 March 2020 by Dr  Jacqueline  Bold,
        Consultant Community Paediatrician, that the 4th appellant had been
        diagnosed with Autism Spectrum  Disorder  with  severe  speech  and
        language  difficulties  involving  both  expressive  and  receptive
        language schools and was not yet fully  toilet  trained.  A  letter
        from Holy Cross Catholic Primary  School  dated  28  February  2020
        relating to both the 3rd and 4th  appellants  indicated  that  both
        children had Special Educational Needs ("SEN") and were on the  SEN
        register. The judge referred to further evidence  relating  to  the
        provision of speech and language therapy and  support  to  the  4th
        appellant and speech therapy to the 3rd appellant.

     8. In the section  of  her  decision  headed  "Findings  of  Fact  and
        Credibility" the judge directed herself (at  [21])  that  the  best
        interests of the 3rd and 4th appellants  were  a  primary  but  not
        paramount consideration as  per  the  reasoning  in  ZH  (Tanzania)
        [2011] UKSC 4. The judge  reminded  herself  that  the  immigration
        history of the parents were not the fault of the children. At  [22]
        the judge found that all 4 appellants would be returned to  Nigeria
        as a family unit and that it was ...

             "... clearly in the best interests of the sadly  disadvantaged
             children that they remain living with their parents. I find as
             per the reasoning in  EV  (Philippines)  [a  reference  to  EV
             (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  874]  that  sadly
             both children will  have  the  same  linguistic  and  possibly
             medical or other difficulties to adapting to life  in  Nigeria
             as in the UK. I give weight to the terms  of  the  Holy  Cross
             Primary School report that neither of the children is  in  any
             position to socially integrate with other children  and  hence
             into society in the UK because of their learning  disabilities
             which applies with particular force  to  the  autism  spectrum
             disorder son who as Dr Bold noted prefers to play  by  himself
             and not interact with other children."

     9. At [23] the judge applied the principles established in  Devaseelan
        v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702 and, having considered the oral  evidence
        from the  1st  and  2nd  appellants,  found  that  both  had  given
        incredible evidence and concluded that the  2nd  appellant  had  to
        adult siblings living in Nigeria who could  provide  assistance  to
        the family unit on return. No  challenge  has  been  made  to  this
        finding.

    10. At [27], under the heading "Medical Evidence", the judge found that
        the 1st and 2nd appellants had made  few  if  any  enquiries  about
        facilities in Nigeria for children diagnosed with  autism  spectrum
        disorder. Having  referred  to  extracts  from  the  CPIN  'Nigeria
        Medical and Health care Issues Version 3.0 January 2020' the  judge
        noted that the appellants' barrister (Mr Plowright, who represented
        the appellants at their 'error of law' hearing) was  not  advancing
        their case on the basis  that  health  care  or  medical  care  was
        totally unavailable in Nigeria, but  was  relying  on  the  support
        network and private life available to the 3rd and 4th appellants in
        the UK coupled with the private lives of all 4 appellants.

    11. At [31] the judge indicated that she was applying the reasoning  in
        Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
        appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) that the starting point  was  that
        the best interests of children was to be with  both  their  parents
        and that it was generally in the interest of children to have  both
        stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision  and
        the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
        which they belong. At [32] the judge found again that it was in the
        best interests of the children that they remain living  with  their
        parents, with reference to their medical conditions.

    12. Given that the appellants could not meet the  requirements  of  the
        Immigration Rules, the judge  proceeded  to  consider  whether  the
        refusal  of  the   human   rights   claims   would   constitute   a
        disproportionate breach of Article 8. From [34] onwards  the  judge
        considered and applied the  factors  contained  in  s.117B  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The judge noted  that
        the private lives of the appellants have been established when  the
        parents' immigration status had  always  been  precarious  and  she
        attached little weight to the  private  lives  established  by  the
        parents in the UK. At [41] the judge again found that it was in the
        best interests of both children that they return  to  Nigeria  with
        their parents as per the reasoning in  Azimi-Moayed.  In  the  same
        paragraph  the  judge  considered  that  the  children's   learning
        difficulties  and  diagnosis  of  autism  spectrum  disorder   were
        relevant factors under the Article 8 balancing exercise.

    13. At [42] the judge stated:

             "Since the word "and" occurs between Section 117B(6)  (a)  and
             (b) the issue is whether or not it  is  reasonable  to  expect
             both  children  to  leave  the  UK  with  their  parents.  The
             compassionate circumstances of the children's disabilities are
             considerable but as found earlier, there is  health  care  and
             mental health provision in Nigeria. I find  it  reasonable  to
             expect both children to return to Nigeria with  their  parents
             and that the respondent's decision is proportionate  when  set
             against the provisions of Section 117B."

    14. The appeal was dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision

    15. The grounds of appeal, amplified by Mr  Plowright  in  his  further
        written  submissions  dated  8  February  2021  and  in  his   oral
        submissions, contend that the judge's  reasoning  and  approach  to
        s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  was
        inadequate and constituted an error of law. Although it was not  in
        dispute that it was in the best interests of the children that they
        remain with their parents, the issue whether  it  was  'reasonable'
        for the 3rd appellant to leave the UK was  of  critical  importance
        and the judge failed to refer to the Home  Office  policy  guidance
        'Family Policy: Family Life (as a partner or parent), private  life
        and exceptional  circumstances',  Version  10.0,  published  on  18
        August 2020,  which  had  been  drawn  to  her  attention  in  oral
        submissions. This reads, in material part:

             "The starting point is that we would  not  normally  expect  a
             qualifying child to leave the UK. It is normally in a  child's
             best interest for the whole family to remain  together,  which
             means if the child is not expected to leave, then  the  parent
             or parents or primary carer of the  child  will  also  not  be
             expected to leave the UK. In the case law  of  KO  and  Others
             [2018] UKSC 53, with particular reference to the  case  of  NS
             (Sri Lanka), the Supreme Court found that 'reasonableness'  is
             to be considered in the real world context in which the  child
             finds  themselves.  The  parents'  immigration  status  is   a
             relevant fact to establish  that  context.  The  determination
             sets out that if a child's parents are both expected to  leave
             the UK, the child is normally expected  to  leave  with  them,
             unless there is evidence that it would not be reasonable."

    16. The grounds contend, with reference  to  paragraph  12  of  SF  and
        others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT  00120  (IAC),
        that the judge should  have  treated,  as  a  starting  point,  the
        respondent's policy that she would not normally expect a qualifying
        child to leave the UK, but appeared instead to take as her starting
        point the fact that if the appellants are  removed  they  would  be
        removed together to  Nigeria  as  a  family.  The  grounds  further
        contend that the judge should have given consideration to s.117B(6)
        prior to making her best interests assessment.

Discussion

    17. I have considered version 10 of the respondent's policy, identified
        above at [15] of this decision, as it was when the judge  made  her
        decision. The full terms of the policy must be  considered.  Whilst
        the starting point is that the respondent would not normally expect
        a qualifying child such as the 3rd appellant to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom, that starting point is heavily qualified by  reference  to
        the remainder of the paragraph. The last sentence  of  the  extract
        quoted above is particularly relevant. "The determination sets  out
        that if a child's parents are both expected to leave  the  UK,  the
        child is normally expected to leave  with  them,  unless  there  is
        evidence that  it  would  not  be  reasonable."  Both  of  the  3rd
        appellant's parents were expected to leave the UK,  a  matter  that
        was not in dispute,  and  the  policy  makes  clear  that  the  3rd
        appellant would normally be expected  to  leave  with  them  unless
        there was evidence  that  this  would  not  be  reasonable.  It  is
        tolerably clear that this was the approach adopted by the judge.

    18. At [42] the judge specifically reminder herself that the issue  was
        whether or not it was reasonable for the children to leave  the  UK
        with their parents. This approach is entirely consistent  with  the
        policy. The starting point is no more than a  starting  point,  and
        the judge in any event gave full  consideration  to  the  issue  of
        reasonableness. The judge was demonstrably aware  of  the  evidence
        relating to the children's disabilities and she fully engaged  with
        that evidence, but she was nevertheless satisfied  that  there  was
        healthcare and mental health provision in Nigeria. In reaching this
        conclusion the judge noted that the 1st and 2nd appellants had made
        few if any inquiries  about  facilities  in  Nigeria  for  children
        diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. I note  that  neither  the
        letter from Holy Cross Catholic primary School  nor  the  documents
        produced by Lewisham and Greenwich NHS Trust  or  Lewisham  Council
        considered the impact on the children  (but  specifically  the  3rd
        appellant given that the 4th appellant was not a qualifying  child)
        of being returned to Nigeria. The judge had found as  a  fact  that
        the family would be provided with assistance on return  to  Nigeria
        from the 2nd's siblings and  that  the  family  would  be  returned
        together as a single unit. Although the judge did not make  express
        reference to the relevant policy guidance, her  assessment  accords
        with the  essence  of  the  guidance  and  the  binding  principles
        established in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.

    19. Mr Plowright relies on paragraph 12 of  SF  and  others  (Guidance,
        post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC). This reads:

             "On occasion, perhaps where it has more information  than  the
             Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a case
             is exceptional, the Tribunal may find a reason  for  departing
             from such guidance. But where there is  clear  guidance  which
             covers a case where an assessment has to be  made,  and  where
             the guidance clearly demonstrates  what  the  outcome  of  the
             assessment would have been made by the Secretary of State,  it
             would, we think, be the normal practice for  the  Tribunal  to
             take such guidance into account and to apply it  in  assessing
             the same consideration in a case that came before it."

    20. The policy in question in SF ('Immigration Directorate  Instruction
        - Family Migration - Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as  a
        Partner or Parent and Private Life, 10 year Routes", August  2015')
        contained guidance at 11.2.3 headed "Would it  be  unreasonable  to
        expect a British Citizen Child to leave the UK?" This guidance  was
        in different terms to that  relied  on  by  the  appellant  in  the
        instant appeal and  did  not  contain  any  qualification  such  as
        considered above. The application of the guidance set out  at  [15]
        of this decision did not, on any rational view, point clearly to  a
        particular outcome as understood by the panel in SF.

    21. I reject Mr Plowright's submission that the judge should have given
        consideration to s.117B(6)  prior  to  making  her  best  interests
        assessment. It is a trite proposition of law that the assessment of
        a child's best interests is conducted prior to an assessment of the
        proportionalty under Article 8 of a decision that affects the child
        (see,  for  example,  EV  (Philippines)).  Mr  Plowright  does  not
        identify any authority in support of his contention. Sections  117A
        to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 require
        courts and tribunals to consider a number  of  considerations  when
        assessing the "public interest question", i.e. when  undertaking  a
        proportionality assessment.  The  assessment  in  s.117B(6)  is  an
        assessment directly relating to the proportionality of a  decision.
        The judge did not consequently err in law in considering the  bests
        interests of the 3rd appellant before  approaching  s.117B(6).  The
        judge demonstrably had in mind the proper legal approach to a 'best
        interests'  assessment  as  detailed   in   Azimi-Moayad   and   EV
        (Philippines) and she took account of all material  considerations,
        either  expressly  or  by  necessary  implication,  including   the
        children's medical and education needs, the  support  the  children
        received from their parents, the network of  support  available  in
        Nigeria and  the  availability  of  healthcare  and  mental  health
        provision in Nigeria.

    22.  For  the  reasons  given  above  I  am  not  persuaded  that   the
        determination contains any material legal error.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain a material error of  law.
The appeals are dismissed.



D.Blum                              27 April 2021

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



