
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
HU/00728/2016

                                                       HU/00731/2016

                                                        HU/00733/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 April 2018                           |On 3 May 2018                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                          TAIWO OLUMAYOWA AJAYI (1)
                         BIODUN FOLASADE AWOLEYE (2)
                                  M D A (3)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N B Khan, instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second appellants, born respectively on 28 July 1976  and
    18 April 1981,  are  married.   They  are  the  parents  of  the  third
    appellant, who was born in the UK on 14 August 2008.  All are  citizens
    of Nigeria.

 2. The appellants' human rights claim was refused by the respondent on  22
    December 2015.  They appealed against that decision, as was their right
    under s.82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
    Their appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge M  B  Hussain
    on 7 August 2017.

 3. The appellants appeal with permission granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford to the Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  and  reasons
    statement.  Their grounds of appeal in summary challenge  the  approach
    Judge Hussain took to the question of  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to leave the UK.   The  grounds  acknowledge
    that the proper approach to this question has been  determined  by  the
    Court of Appeal in R (MA (Pakistan) & Ors) v SSHD &  Anor  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, [2017] Imm AR 53, which was handed down on 7 July 2016.

 4. Mr Khan reminded me that pages 20 to  105  of  the  appellants'  bundle
    contained evidence relating to the third appellant.   He  alleged  that
    Judge Hussain had not had proper regard  to  that  evidence.   Mr  Khan
    argued that Judge Hussain had failed to consider s.117B(6) of the  2002
    Act and had failed, therefore, to  assess  the  reasonableness  of  the
    third appellant's expulsion from the UK in light of all  the  evidence.
    Mr Khan  also  relied  on  an  argument  that  Judge  Hussain  had  not
    undertaken a full "best interests" assessment of the third appellant.

 5. Mr Bramble suggested that there was no legal error.  Judge Hussain  had
    approached the appeals from the perspective of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)
    of the immigration rules.  That provision required the judge to  assess
    the reasonableness of expecting the third appellant to  leave  the  UK.
    The  Court  of  Appeal  identified  in  MA  (Pakistan)  that  this  was
    equivalent to the similarly worded provision in s.117B(6). There was no
    material difference in approach.

 6. Judge Hussain accepted the third appellant was a  child  who  had  been
    resident  in  the  UK  for  more  than  seven  years  at  the  date  of
    application.   He  identified  the  best  interests  of  the  child  in
    paragraph 34 and 35, including his access to education, his  linguistic
    abilities and  what  linguistic  difficulties  he  might  encounter  in
    Nigeria, and the risk of destitution he might face in  Nigeria.   Judge
    Hussain assessed whether the expulsion of the appellants  as  a  family
    unit would be proportionate and, because of the very  poor  immigration
    histories and the lack of credibility  of  the  first  two  appellants,
    concluded it was.

 7. Mr Bramble argued that these findings were open to  Judge  Hussain  and
    that the complaint was merely a challenge to  those  factual  findings.
    For that reason, he submitted,  the  grounds  failed  to  identify  any
    sustainable legal error.

 8. Having listened to the competing submissions, and having  examined  the
    documents provided, I have decided that there is legal error  and  that
    it is such as to require the decision and reasons statement to  be  set
    aside.

 9. The legal error is evident in paragraph 38.  Judge Hussain states  that
    he was considering  the  situation  as  at  the  date  of  application.
    Although that would  have  been  correct  were  the  judge  limited  to
    reviewing  the  immigration  rules  and  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1), it must be recalled that the appeal was against a refusal of
    a human rights claim.  He had to decide  not  whether  the  immigration
    rules were or were  not  met  but  whether  the  refusal  decision  was
    unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

10. Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act specifies that the Tribunal "may consider
    any matter it  thinks  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
    including a matter rising after the date of decision."  It  is  evident
    from paragraph 38 of his decision that  Judge  Hussain  considered  the
    fact the third appellant was over nine years old at the date of hearing
    to be relevant to his human  rights  case  yet  restricted  himself  to
    considering the situation as he was at the date the human rights  claim
    was made, at which time the third appellant was just over  seven  years
    old.  The failure of Judge Hussain to consider  matters  arising  after
    the date of decision despite identifying those  issues  as  potentially
    putting the third appellant in a more favourable position is  wrong  in
    law.

11. In finding this to be an error  of  law,  I  recall  that  there  is  a
    plethora of case law recognising that the older a child  is,  the  less
    reasonable its expulsion will be (see for example  Azimi-Moayed  &  Ors
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals: Iran) [2013] UKUT  197).
    The fact the third appellant has spent a further two years  in  the  UK
    since the application was made cannot be ignored.

12. In addition, I have serious concerns that Judge Hussain has  failed  to
    have regard to the Court of Appeal's comments at  paragraph  46  of  MA
    (Pakistan):

        46.  Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the fact that a
        child has been here for seven years must be given significant weight
        when  carrying  out  the  proportionality  exercise.   Indeed,   the
        Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form  of
        Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled  "Family  Life  (as  a
        partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it  is
        expressly stated that once the seven years' residence requirement is
        satisfied, there need to be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing  leave
        (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the  cases
        now subject to appeal were determined, but in my  view  they  merely
        confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After
        such a period of time  the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
        developed social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that
        it is likely to be highly disruptive if the  child  is  required  to
        leave the UK. That may be less so when the children are  very  young
        because the focus of their lives will be on their families, but  the
        disruption becomes more serious as  they  get  older.  Moreover,  in
        these cases there must be a very strong expectation that the child's
        best interests will be to remain in the UK with his parents as  part
        of a family unit, and that must rank as a primary  consideration  in
        the proportionality assessment.

13. The respondent's  policy  requires  there  to  be  strong  reasons  for
    refusing leave.  The  respondent  cannot  apply  a  policy  arbitrarily
    because to do so would be contrary  not  only  to  public  law  but  to
    article 8(2).   Therefore,  it  was  necessary  for  Judge  Hussain  to
    identify  whether  strong  reasons  justifying  the  refusal  of  leave
    existed.  He made no such assessment.

14. Having found there to be legal error, and that the nature of the  error
    requires Judge Hussain's decision to be set aside, I considered whether
    the appeal could be remade in the Upper Tribunal.  I indicated this was
    not an appeal that needed to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a fresh  hearing  because  there  is  no  significant  dispute  in  the
    evidence.  I would need to hear evidence to bring the situation  up  to
    date, a further  seven  months  having  passed  since  Judge  Hussain's
    decision.  Mr Khan took instructions and confirmed that the  first  two
    appellants were present and willing to give  additional  evidence.   Mr
    Bramble had no objection.

15. Prior to the hearing, I had reviewed the documentary evidence  provided
    to the First-tier Tribunal.   This  includes  the  respondent's  bundle
    submitted on 13 March 2017 (in accordance with rule 24 of the 2014  FtT
    Procedure Rules and directions) and  the  appellants'  169-page  bundle
    sent on 11 July 2017.

16. The first appellant adopted his witness statement of 11 July 2017.   He
    stated that he would be unable  to  resettle  in  Nigeria  because  the
    situation  is  very  difficult  in  terms  of  the  economy,  security,
    employment, and access to basic amenities.  The  first  appellant  last
    visited Nigeria in 2008.  He had not maintained  regular  contact  with
    anyone in Nigeria other than his parents.  His father  is  82  and  his
    mother is 76.  The first appellant said the third appellant  could  not
    speak Yeruba.  He also explained that he did not apply for  his  eldest
    daughter to stay in the UK for financial reasons.

17. In response to questions from Mr Bramble, the first appellant confirmed
    the third appellant was currently in year 5 at school.  He was involved
    in football and kung fu outside of school.

18. The second appellant adopted her witness statement  of  11  July  2017.
    She stated that the family could not relocate to  Nigeria  because  the
    third appellant had friends here.  He  was  involved  in  kung  fu  and
    football clubs.  He also had church and  school  friends.   The  second
    appellant believed it would be very difficult for the  third  appellant
    to move.  The second appellant has not been to Nigeria since 2008.  She
    maintains contact with her parents who are in Nigeria but it has been a
    while since she contacted them.  The second  appellant  mentioned  that
    the third appellant has nosebleeds in hot weather.

19. In  response  to  questions  from  Mr  Bramble,  the  second  appellant
    clarified that the third appellant  was  prescribed  a  cream  for  his
    nosebleeds.  She also confirmed she had no medical  evidence  regarding
    the third appellant.  Neither of her  other  children  had  any  health
    concerns.

20. Mr Bramble relied on the reasons for refusal letter dated  22  December
    2015.  He  submitted  that  it  this  appeal  involved  the  first  two
    appellants only, then it would be  without  question  that  the  public
    interest would outweigh their personal circumstances because they  were
    overstayers.  They would be expected to  deal  with  any  economic  and
    employment difficulties  in  Nigeria,  particularly  as  there  was  no
    independent evidence to support their allegations of such  difficulties
    being present in Nigeria.

21. Mr Bramble recognised that the presence of the  children,  particularly
    the third appellant, changed  the  position  considerably.   The  third
    appellant was a qualifying child for the purposes of s.117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  the  question  was
    whether it was reasonable to expect him to leave the UK with the  first
    and second appellants.  Mr Bramble recognised that the third  appellant
    had lived all his life in the UK and at the date of re-hearing  in  the
    Upper Tribunal was 9 years and 8 months old.  Mr Bramble  accepted  the
    evidence that the third appellant was involved  in  activities  outside
    school and was developing his own social life.   Bearing  in  mind  the
    guidance given in MA (Pakistan), Mr Bramble candidly admitted he  could
    not go further.

22. With respect to the other two children who would  be  affected  by  the
    decision to expel the family unit, Mr Bramble reminded me they were not
    included in the applications and were not part of the appeals directly.
     He added that neither was a  qualifying  child  for  the  purposes  of
    s.117B(6) and neither benefited from paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) because no
    applications had been made and because they are too young.  However, Mr
    Bramble accepted these children are part of the same family unit.

23. Turning to the question of proportionality, Mr Bramble pointed  to  the
    factors making expulsion justified.   The  first  two  appellants  were
    overstayers and none of the appellants satisfied the immigration rules.
     Their positions in the UK were precarious and they had no  expectation
    to be permitted to remain.  The issue was whether the presence  of  the
    third  appellant  and  the  time  he  has  spent  in  the  UK  made  it
    unreasonable for him to leave the UK.   If  it  did,  then  the  public
    interest  might  be  outweighed.   Mr  Bramble  left  that  for  me  to
    determine.

24. Mr Khan relied on the documentary and oral  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellants.   Having  heard  from  Mr  Bramble,  Mr  Khan  focused  his
    submissions on the question of whether it was  reasonable  in  all  the
    circumstances to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.  This  had
    to be  considered  in  terms  of  the  child's  wellbeing.   The  third
    appellant was born in the UK and had experienced no life other than his
    life here.  He is well integrated into life here, being at  school  and
    having developed friends and a social life of his own  outside  school.
    He had no connection to Nigeria other than through  his  parents.   The
    level of disruption to his life would be very significant, and  perhaps
    too significant, to his future wellbeing.

25. Before I remake the decision in this appeal, I remind myself and  those
    reading this decision of the relevant law.  I  am  considering  whether
    the decision of 22 December 2015 is unlawful under  s.6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.  The approach I adopt is  that  of  a  balance  sheet,
    setting out first the factors in favour of the appellants before I  set
    out the public interest considerations (drawing on  the  provisions  of
    s.117B of the 2002 Act).  Once I have set out the  competing  sides,  I
    will assess what is proportionate in all the circumstances.

26. There is no dispute that the three appellants  are  part  of  a  family
    unit, which includes two additional children.  The first two appellants
    are the parents of the third appellant  and  the  other  two  children.
    These relationships are undisputed by the respondent and  the  evidence
    provided leads me to the conclusion that it is  more  likely  than  not
    that the parents and children enjoy family  life  together  in  the  UK
    within the meaning of article 8(1) ECHR.  I am aware that  this  family
    life has developed over a period  of  nearly  10  years  and  would  be
    significantly disrupted were the family required to move to Nigeria.

27. I also take account of the evidence relating to  the  third  appellant.
    He has developed well in the UK under the guidance and influence of his
    parents, educators and  friends.   Although  there  is  no  independent
    evidence as  to  how  moving  to  Nigeria  might  affect  him  and  his
    wellbeing, it is obvious from the evidence that the third appellant has
    only experienced life in the UK.  Moving him  will  be  disruptive  and
    poses a threat to his further wellbeing.  The respondent suggests  this
    will be ameliorated by the continued  guidance  and  influence  of  his
    parents, but are silent as to the possible impact his removal from  the
    other influences on his life, and from his social network, might affect
    him.

28. I find that the evidence presented, bearing  in  mind  well-established
    principles, his best  interests  are  to  live  with  his  parents  and
    siblings and to maintain the life he has experienced  and  established.
    I remind myself and those reading this decision that although this is a
    factor I must consider first, the fact that there  is  tension  between
    immigration control and best interests of a child,  it  does  not  mean
    that the best interests are to be given paramount  significance.   They
    are a powerful factor but not a trump card.

29. I add, for clarity, that I  give  no  weight  to  the  claimed  medical
    concerns.  There is no medical evidence.  It  is  unclear  whether  the
    nosebleeds suffered by the third appellant would be  made  worse  by  a
    move to Nigeria.

30. I move to consider the public interest  factors.   It  is  acknowledged
    that the appellants cannot benefit from the provisions of  appendix  FM
    to the immigration rules. In light of Mr Bramble's submissions,  it  is
    appropriate  to  examine  the  situation  relating  to  the  first  two
    appellants separately to the third appellants.

31. The first two appellants claim they would face significant difficulties
    moving to Nigeria and therefore they benefit from rule 276ADE(1)(vi) of
    the immigration rules.  But they have merely made  assertions  to  that
    effect and have not provided independent evidence about the  likelihood
    of them encountering economic or other problems  in  Nigeria.   In  the
    absence of reliable independent evidence, I am not prepared  to  accept
    their assertions.  In making this decision, I have considered the  fact
    the first two appellants are well educated and have  maintained  family
    connections in Nigeria.  In the absence of  reliable  evidence  to  the
    contrary, these facts would suggest any difficulties  faced  on  return
    would not be  very  significant  and  could  be  overcome.   For  these
    reasons, I do not accept that the first two appellants can benefit from
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules.

32. The first two appellants do not challenge the respondent's view they do
    not meet the provisions of appendix FM.  I am unable to  see  how  they
    could benefit from any of those provisions because either they or their
    child must be settled  in  the  UK.   They  do  not  meet  these  basic
    requirements.  Because of that, they cannot engage with paragraph  EX.1
    (see Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not  free  standing)  (Pakistan)  [2014]
    UKUT 63).

33. Because the first and second appellants do not meet the  provisions  of
    the immigration rules, and they have not claimed to  benefit  from  any
    other provision if immigration law or policy, I conclude their presence
    in the UK is contrary  to  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    control.  This  means  I  find  their  expulsion  to  be  justified  by
    s.117B(1) of the 2002 Act.

34. The respondent does not seek to justify the expulsion of the first  and
    second appellants in terms of s.117(B)(2) or (3).   These  factors  are
    neutral because the appellants  speak  English  and  have  shown  their
    ability to be able to support themselves in the past.

35. The respondent does identify in passing that expelling  the  first  and
    second appellants is also justified in terms of s.117B(4)  and  (5)  on
    the grounds they have established their family life in the UK at a time
    they have been here unlawfully and  their  status  is  precarious.   In
    terms of legal  technicality,  both  allegations  are  made  out.   The
    reasons  for  refusal  letter  identifies  that  both  appellants  were
    notified they were overstayers on 30 January 2015.  The representatives
    confirmed to me that the appellants last had leave to  remain  sometime
    between February and May 2013.

36. But I must take account of the fact that the appellants have not sought
    to evade immigration control.  They were here lawfully from 2008  until
    2013.  Their family and private lives in the UK were established during
    that time and have continued thereafter.  Although this is not a factor
    that ameliorates s.117B(4) and (5), it is a factor I must consider when
    looking at whether expulsion is  justified  when  the  public  interest
    factors are weighed against the family and personal circumstances.  But
    in terms of assessing the public interest, the fact s.117B(4)  and  (5)
    are engaged adds weight to the public interest in expelling  the  first
    and second appellants.

37. The third appellant is a qualifying child having resided in the UK  for
    over seven years continuously and the first and second appellants enjoy
    genuine and subsisting parental relationships  with  him.   This  means
    that the first and second appellants may benefit from s.117B(6) of  the
    2002 Act if it is unreasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave
    the UK.

38. The Court of Appeal has provided guidance about how to  assess  whether
    it is reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the UK.  I  have
    already identified the key issues to be  considered.   I  have  already
    found the best interests of the third appellant are to  remain  in  the
    care of his parents, to  continue  living  in  the  family  unit  which
    includes them and his siblings, and to remain in the UK  to  enjoy  the
    private life he has established.  The  issue  is  whether  in  all  the
    circumstances the parents' failure to comply with  immigration  control
    makes it reasonable  to  expect  the  whole  family  to  leave  the  UK
    notwithstanding the best interests of the third appellant.

39. The question I must consider is whether the poor immigration history is
    sufficient to make it reasonable to expect the third appellant to leave
    the UK.  He was born in the UK and has never lived in another  country.
    His age means he cannot be held  responsible  for  overstaying  or  any
    breach of the immigration rules.

40. It must be recalled that the family life between the first, second  and
    third appellants was established in  the  UK  between  2008  and  2013,
    during which period they were lawfully resident.  The first and  second
    appellants have sought thereafter to regularise their status in the UK.
     They have not hidden from  the  immigration  authorities.   They  have
    maintained contact.  It is also of note that  the  respondent  did  not
    regard the appellants as overstayers until 30 January 2015,  which  was
    after they made their second human rights claim.   There  has  been  no
    attempt to remove the appellants despite being overstayers because  the
    respondent  first  had  to  consider  their  human  rights  claim   and
    thereafter any expulsion was suspended by the appeal procedures.

41. There is an obvious tension between  the  parties  as  to  whether  the
    failure of the appellants to leave voluntarily should be  held  against
    them.  This is not a case where there is any significant  period  where
    the appellants have not been pursuing applications to regularise  their
    status.  In my opinion, this means their immigration  histories  cannot
    be regarded as being so poor as to undermine the best interests of  the
    third appellant.  It follows that I find it to be unreasonable  in  all
    the circumstances to expect the third appellant to leave the UK.

42. I conclude that all three appellants benefit from s.117B(6) of the 2002
    Act and that the weight to be given to the  provisions  of  s.117B(1)to
    (5) is reduced to a minimal level.

43. I turn to my final task, balancing the competing factors.   This  is  a
    case where I am satisfied the appellants have established  private  and
    family life rights in the UK within the meaning  of  article  8(1)  and
    that their expulsion would interfere with those rights because  of  the
    upheaval they would have to endure.  The public interest is reduced  to
    a minimal level because it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK because of the life  he  has  established  or
    himself here.  The former outweighs the latter, meaning the decision to
    expel the family is disproportionate in all the circumstances.

44. Because the decision to remove is unlawful under s.6 of the  1998  Act,
    the appeal is allowed.


Notice of Decision

 1. The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are allowed.
 2. The decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge M  B  Hussain  contains
    legal error.
 3. It is set aside.
 4. The decisions are remade to allow the appeals against the  respondent's
    refusal decision of 22 December 2015.


Signed                              Date         3 May 2018

















Judge McCarthy
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
