
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU008662015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 May 2017                       |On 30 May 2017                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                           Ms CHANICE OPAL JOHNSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Komusana, Counsel instructed by Igor & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant (hereafter the Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  brings  a
    challenge to the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge (FtTJ) M A  Khan
    sent on 29  September  2016  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent
    (hereafter the claimant), a citizen of Jamaica, against a decision made
    by the SSHD refusing her leave to remain.

2.   The SSHD's ground of appeal is short and blunt.  It is  submitted  that
    the FtTJ materially erred in law  because  he  treated  the  claimant's
    child as if he were British and on that basis treated this  fact  as  a
    "trump card" without carrying out a proper proportionality  assessment,
    contrary to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

3.   Having heard the submissions  of  both  representatives  and  noted  in
    particular Mr Deller's stated position that the error alleged  was  not
    material, it is unnecessary for me to give my analysis and  reasons  in
    detail.

4.   The principal target of the SSHD's grounds appears to be what was  said
    by the judge at paragraphs 22 and 23, the latter which reads:

         "23. I find on the evidence that it would not be right to  seek  to
             remove a child from the United Kingdom who has lived  in  this
             country for more than 10 years and is entitled to register  as
             a British citizen.  It is almost saying that a  British  child
             should be removed from the UK  because  his  mother  had  done
             wrong by overstaying and therefore the child should  also  pay
             the price of his mother's wrong doing.  I find  in  this  case
             that the best interests of [MM] are to remain in the UK  where
             his whole life of over 10 years has been spent".

5.   It is also pertinent to set out what the judge said  in  paragraphs  19
    and 20:

         "19. The appellant entered the UK on 2nd  of  December  2002  as  a
             visitor.  She was given 6 months leave  to  enter  until  June
             2003, she has never  left  the  country  and  remained  as  an
             overstayer.  On [ ] 2005, her son [MM] was born, he will be 11
             years of age on [ ] 2016.  The appellant has no leg  to  stand
             on, she is not in a relationship and does not meet any of  the
             requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   She  has  not  beeen
             residing in the UK for 20 years  and  therefore  private  life
             does not fall to be considered.  He  immigration  history  has
             been precarious to say the least.  The appellant was 25  years
             of age when she entered this country, having  spent  formative
             years of her life in Jamaica.

         20.  However, the story does not end there, she has a son  who  was
             born in the UK in November 2005, he has lived all his life  in
             this country.  Under Section 1  (4)  of  the  Nationality  Act
             1981, he is entitled to be registered  as  a  British  Citizen
             after 10 years of residence in this country.  The  application
             was made in July  2016.   For  all  intents  and  purposes,  I
             consider the appellant's son to be a  British  national.   The
             appellant's son is in a primary school education  and  I  have
             been provided evidence of his schooling.  In  considering  the
             appellant's case, I must also consider the  best  interest  of
             her son.  This consideration has to be both under  Section  55
             of 2009 Act and the case law".

6.   I fail to discern any error here on the part of the judge.  If  he  had
    said that "I consider the child should be regarded as a British citizen
    already", then he would arguably have fallen into error.   However,  in
    essence what the judge says is that the appellant's  child  is  someone
    who has an entitlement to be registered as a British citizen  and  that
    that is a relevant consideration.  Entitlement of  course  is  not  the
    same as possession and there are known cases of persons entitled to  be
    registered who are  not  in  the  event  granted  British  citizenship,
    although, that said, entitlement  is  based  on  specific  requirements
    distinct from the discretionary criteria that apply to  naturalisation.
    In my view the judge did not err in treating the child's entitlement as
    a relevant consideration.   It  meant  this  child  was  clearly  in  a
    different category from a third country national  child  with  no  such
    entitlement.

7.   It is submitted that the judge  also  erred  in  treating  the  child's
    entitlement to British  citizenship  as  a  "trump  card"  contrary  to
    authority.  I also fail to see that he did this.  It is clear from  his
    determination read as a whole that he:

    (i)  conducted a best interests of  the  child  assessment,  concluding
         that it would be in the child's best interests to remain in the  UK
         where his whole life of over ten years had  been  spent  (paragraph
         23);

    (ii) carried out a proportionality assessment in the course of which he
         counted against the claimant her poor immigration history  and  its
         precariousness (paragraph 19).

    Although somewhat telescoped, the judge's decision makes clear that  he
    concluded that there were compelling circumstances warranting  a  grant
    of leave to the claimant outside the Immigration Rules (see  paragraphs
    16-23 as a response to paragraphs 5 and  15).   I  would  observe  that
    whilst the SSHD in her refusal decision has maintained that  the  child
    could reasonably be expected to relocate with the claimant to  Jamaica,
    the judge emphatically rejected that assessment and the SSHD's  grounds
    raise no challenge to that rejection.

8.   For the above reasons, I conclude that the judge did  not  err  in  law
    and accordingly his decision to allow the claimant's appeal must stand.

9.   I would observe that even if I had allowed the SSHD's  appeal  (despite
    Mr Deller's acknowledgement that it was not viable, albeit  on  grounds
    of materiality), the decision I would then  have  gone  on  to  re-make
    would have been to allow the claimant's appeal.  That  is  because  the
    claimant's child has now been granted British citizenship  and,  as  Mr
    Deller acknowledged, that  means  that  the  claimant  is  entitled  to
    succeed under Section 117B(6) as it is an unchallenged finding  in  the
    claimant's case that it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the UK.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 26 May 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

