
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00258/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2016                  |On 17 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MRS MANDLINE NGOZI LADY OKEKE
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hoshi Counsel instructed by Sabeers Stone Green
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal  that  is  Mrs  Okeke  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The Secretary of State or respondent applied for permission  to  appeal
    against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Blake  who
    allowed the appeal of the appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 6 May 2015 in  which  she
    was refused entry clearance to the UK as a visitor  with  reference  to
    paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules HC395, as amended.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer's refusal  identified  that  the  appellant
    applied to visit the United Kingdom for two months and that  she  would
    be funding her visit herself.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  did  not
    accept the financial circumstances of the appellant and also noted that
    the appellant had previously made an application to the Home Office for
    indefinite leave to remain as a dependent parent and  that  application
    had been rejected on 7 November 2013.   He  concluded  that  given  her
    previous intention to remain through settlement,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that she was now  entering  for  a  different
    purpose, that being that of a visitor on this  occasion.   He  was  not
    satisfied as to her intentions in  wishing  to  travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom for a limited time and  purpose  and  refused  the  application
    under paragraph 41(i)(ii)(vi) and (vii) of HC395.  An  Entry  Clearance
    Manager maintained that decision and confirmed that  he  was  satisfied
    the decision had not violated the appellant's human rights as  provided
    under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 4. The Secretary of  State  appealed  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision on two grounds:

      i) in order for there to be a right of appeal under Section 82 it  was
         necessary for a decision to have  been  taken  to  refuse  a  human
         rights claim and it was submitted that no such human  rights  claim
         was made in this case and there was no decision to refuse  a  human
         rights claim and therefore the Tribunal made a  material  error  of
         law in hearing the appeal and had no jurisdiction to do so;

     ii) furthermore it was submitted that in any event there was no  family
         life for the purpose of Article 8 between the appellant and sponsor
         because there was  no  evidence  of  additional  dependency  beyond
         normal emotional ties  set  out  at  paragraph  25  of  Kugathas  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Tufan maintained that there was  indeed  no
    jurisdiction  because  on  reading  Section  82  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 no human rights claim had been made and
    there was no jurisdiction.

 6. He also applied to vary his grounds of appeal.  There was reference  at
    paragraph 28 to a previous  visit  visa  appeal  and  determination  in
    relation to the appellant but that was not placed before the  Tribunal.
    That was an appeal against  a  previous  visit  visa  refusal  and  the
    Tribunal in that case had clearly found that there  was  no  Article  8
    protected rights.

 7. Nevertheless Mr Tufan also stated the decision was  wrong  in  law  and
    there was a necessity to establish whether there was  family  life  and
    the judge did not engage  with  that  issue  at  all.   There  must  be
    dependence beyond normal emotional ties and that was not the case here.

 8. Hr Hoshi submitted that the Home Office at the First-tier Tribunal  had
    not mentioned the previous decision from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to the visit visa.  It was accepted that all points under  the
    Immigration Rules had been  met  by  the  appellant  and  human  rights
    grounds had been referred to in the grounds of appeal.  The Home Office
    had every opportunity to raise the previous decision and had  not  done
    so and therefore Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  00702  did  not  apply.   The
    appellant had made it clear  that  she  was  visiting  her  family  and
    grandchildren and had referred to this in her grounds of  appeal.   The
    judge's finding was not an error of law  and  he  had  applied  Mostafa
    (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112.  The Home Office  could
    not hide behind the fact that the Entry Clearance Officer had  made  no
    reference to Article 8 in the decision, particularly if Article  8  was
    engaged.

 9. There was some discussion as to the date relevant for the  purposes  of
    deciding the appeal but Mr Tufan was emphatic that Article  8  was  not
    engaged.  Mr Hoshi submitted that any decision  must  be  human  rights
    compliant under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act.  There  was  nothing
    specifically in the applicant's appeal but there was a reference to  an
    application to visit the children and grandchildren.  Mr Hoshi accepted
    that although the financial point was  conceded  by  the  Secretary  of
    State there was still the issue of the intention to  return  which  was
    not  conceded  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   Finally   both
    representatives appeared to agree that the relevant date  for  deciding
    the decision  further  to  the  new  Section  85  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was in fact the date of the hearing.

Conclusions

10. I do not accept Mr Tufan's submission that there  was  no  jurisdiction
    for the Tribunal to consider this application.  It is quite clear  that
    the nature of the application was for a visit visa and at  question  64
    the applicant stated that she was visiting her daughter,  grandchildren
    and son-in-law spending time with her family and son who is  a  student
    in the UK studying.  Mr Tufan submitted that in order for there to be a
    human rights appeal there  needed  to  be  a  human  rights  claim  and
    although the appeal was not anything other than opaque  it  nonetheless
    made reference to the fact that the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision
    had  breached  the  appellant's  rights  to  visit  her  children   and
    grandchildren in the UK and by "rights" I conclude that  the  appellant
    was referring to her human rights.  It is clear that for  the  purposes
    of paragraphs 41 to 46 of the Immigration  Rules  referred  to  general
    visitors including persons who come to the United Kingdom  as  tourists
    but nonetheless the application by the appellant clearly set  out  that
    she wished to visit her family which may raise a human rights issue.

11. The appeal rights regime  has  altered  since  2014  by  amendments  to
    Section 82 of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and there
    has been a restriction of the rights of  appeal  but  there  remains  a
    right of appeal where the Secretary of State has decided  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim (Section 82(1)(b).   I find this can apply to  visit
    visa appeals in relation to family visits.

12. The Home Office policy document entitled Rights of Appeal: Guidance  on
    when there is a right of appeal against decisions in immigration cases,
    including mechanisms to prevent repeat rights  of  appeal  and  prevent
    delays from appeals against unfounded  claims  Version  3.0"  (undated)
    provides a list of Immigration Rules deemed to engage Article 8 and  in
    relation to the entry clearance decisions, a decision  in  relation  to
    paragraphs 40 to 46, that  being  visit  visa  applications,  does  not
    encompass that of a human rights nature.  That however is the  decision
    by the Home Office in relation to guidance on a human rights claim  and
    it is not definitive or necessarily determinative of what  is  a  human
    rights claim.

13. In support of my contention that a human rights claim can  be  inferred
    is the decision was made is that the Entry Clearance Manager  was  also
    satisfied that the decision had  not  violated  the  appellant's  human
    rights as provided under Section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1988.
    Nowhere does Section 82 preclude an  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    against a visit visa decision by an Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the
    case of Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112  (IAC)
    clearly envisages that a visit visa application can engage human rights
    and a refusal result in subsequent appeal on human rights grounds.

14.  In  relation  to  the  point  on  jurisdiction  I  also  identify  the
    Presidential Guidance Note 2011 No. 1:  Permission  to  appeal  to  the
    UTIAT amended September 2013 which  accepts  that  a  decision  not  to
    accept a notice of appeal for absence of jurisdiction in a  preliminary
    or procedural decision and thus excluded but the position would  appear
    to be different if the First-tier Tribunal proceeds  to  entertain  the
    appeal and the Secretary of State has not taken the jurisdiction  point
    - see Anwar and Adjo [2010] EWCA Civ 1275 (paragraphs 18 to  23).   The
    Tribunal has proceeded to consider this appeal.

15. That said I do find an  error  is  in  relation  to  ground  2  of  the
    Secretary of State's application.  There was no appeal in  relation  to
    the Immigration Rules and an appeal was allowed only  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The judge does not make this clear in the decision but  would
    appear to allow the case in  relation  to  human  rights  grounds  with
    reference to Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  00112
    (IAC).  It was not the case that the legal representative on behalf  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer at the First-tier  Tribunal  conceded  that
    all the Immigration Rules were met but the judge made  a  finding  that
    the appellant could comply with  the  Immigration  Rules,  finding  her
    honest and credible, and that she had sums of money which had come from
    her ownership of property and then proceeded to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds; but he made no assessment of any protected Article 8
    right.

16. The judge made the following findings:

         "64.     I accepted the explanation as to the amounts of money that
             entered into her bank account.  I accepted these sums of money
             had come from her ownership of property.

         65.      In the round, I was satisfied that the Appellant's Sponsor
             was an honest and credible witness.  I accepted  in  full  the
             account of the Appellant's circumstances in Nigeria.

         66.      I had no hesitation in finding that  the  Appellant  would
             comply with the Immigration Rules.   I  accepted  her  account
             that her previous application for indefinite leave  to  remain
             had been abandoned  by  her  once  she  had  realised  it  was
             inappropriate.

         67.      I accepted she had made  the  application  without  proper
             advice and without realising the basis of the application.

         68.      I accepted her account in the light of the fact  that  she
             owned property in Nigeria and had an income and  other  family
             members who were living in Nigeria with her.  I found that she
             did have every incentive to return there after a visit to  the
             UK.

         69.      In conclusion, I found to the requisite standard of proof,
             that of a balance of probabilities, that the Appellant's  case
             came within the Immigration Rules.

         70.      In this respect I  took  into  account  the  authority  of
             Mostafa (Article 8  in  entry  clearance)  [2015]  UKUT  00112
             (IAC).

         71.      I did not find that the ECO's decision was  in  accordance
             with Article 8 ECHR.

         72.      I did not find there was any justification for  the  ECO's
             refusal.  I note that the appellant was a mother of  56  years
             of age who wish to visit her daughters  and  grandchildren  in
             the UK.  I did not consider that the  decision  was  compliant
             with Article 8 ECHR  or  that  it  was  proportionate  to  the
             legitimate aim of a fair and firm immigration control.

         73.       In  the  circumstances  I  found  that  the   Appellant's
             application did come within the Immigration Rules and that the
             ECO's decision was contrary to Article 8 ECHR."

17. In these findings the judge did not follow Adjei (visit visas - Article
    8) [2015] UKUT 261 (IAC):

         "The first question to be addressed in an appeal against refusal to
         grant entry clearance as a visitor where only human rights  grounds
         are available is whether article 8 of the ECHR is engaged  at  all.
         If it is not, which will not infrequently be the case, the Tribunal
         has no jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision of
         the ECO under the rules and should not  do  so.  If  article  8  is
         engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent to  which  the
         claimant is said to have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
         rule because that may inform the proportionality balancing exercise
         that must follow.[1] Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015]
         UKUT 112 (IAC) is not authority for any contrary proposition."

    Nor did the judge follow Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 00112.  That case at paragraph 24 confirms that  it  was  not  the
    case that all relationships would attract  the  protection  of  Article
    8(1) or indeed that other kinds of relationship would never come within
    its scope.  Those are errors of law which are material.

18. There can be no criticism of the judge for failing to take into account
    a previous decision before the First-tier  Tribunal  as  this  was  not
    raised by the ECO's representative, at the  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blake.  It was however raised before me.

19. I re-make the decision. In line with Devaseelan I  treat  the  previous
    unchallenged decision as the starting point but I have  considered  the
    new  evidence.  Within  that  previous  determination  from  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farmer dated 9th March 2015 there were some findings  of
    fact made but specifically that the appellant had not established  that
    there was a family life between the appellant and the sponsor.

20. On the fresh evidence before me, and applying the first  stage  in  the
    five stage test in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 the first  question  is
    whether there is engaged a protected Article 8 right.

21. I find there is no Article 8 protected right between the appellant  and
    the sponsor.  I accept that the appellant is a 56 year  old  widow  who
    was a mother and grandmother and whose husband died in Nigeria in 2004.
     That said, the appellant lives in Nigeria and she has two sons who are
    in business with her in Nigeria and her role in the family business was
    that of management.  That is the evidence that was given by the sponsor
    to First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake in the most  recent  hearing  and  I
    preserve paragraph 68.  There is also a younger sister in the UK and  a
    brother who was taking a masters degree as well as the sponsor.  It was
    accepted that there was a settlement application made but even  putting
    that aside in relation to the intention to return it is clear that this
    appeal was confined to the human rights ground and  axiomatic  to  that
    appeal is the relationship between the appellant and the  sponsor,  her
    daughter.

22. It is clear that the appellant has  ample  property  and  interests  in
    Nigeria such as to wish to return there - see  paragraph  63  of  Judge
    Blake's decision - and that the appellant has ownership of property and
    family in Nigeria.  It would appear that she last  left  the  UK  on  6
    December 2013 on a visit visa and has not entered the  UK  since  then.
    When considering this application in relation  to  Kugathas  I  am  not
    persuaded bearing in mind the appellant has family in Nigeria  and  the
    sponsor has family in the UK that there is any financial  or  emotional
    dependence over and above that of normal loving ties between  a  mother
    and a daughter.  Indeed the appellant and sponsor would both appear  to
    be independent financially and emotionally and the sponsor has her  own
    family here.

23. I was aware that the sponsor  has  unfortunately  and  sadly  developed
    considerable  medical  difficulties,  not  least  acute   lymphoblastic
    leukaemia and both the disease and side effects of  the  treatment  are
    life threatening.  This is set out in a letter from a Lymphoid Clinical
    Nurse Specialist, Eleanor Wellving, in a letter dated 7  October  2016.
    I accept that this is a  serious  cancer  diagnosis  and  that  she  is
    currently undergoing chemotherapy treatment which would be administered
    both as an inpatient and outpatient and  which  would  continue  for  a
    further two to three months.  The sponsor attended the  hearing  before
    me.  The  letter  confirmed  that  the  recovery  post  the  HSCT  took
    approximately a year depending on the side effects from the  treatment.
    What is clear from this letter is that Dr  Okoli,  the  sponsor,  lives
    with her husband and children in Rochester. She has two siblings in the
    UK, although it is stated that they were not  close  to  her,  and  she
    needed the support and comfort of her mother at this time  of  distress
    which was understandable.  I conclude,  however,  the  sponsor  who  is
    severely ill does have the support of her husband and  children  and  a
    finding of an Article  8  protected  right,  on  the  history  of  this
    particular case, would be contrary to  the  case  law  as  set  out  in
    Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).
     The mother has had her own family and business  interests  in  Nigeria
    and has long been separated from her daughter who has developed her own
    life in the United Kingdom over many years.

24. Ghising explored the concepts in relation to Article 8 and set out  the
    principles in relation to  family  life  and  adult  children.  Ghising
    (family life) at [62] accepted that each case is highly  fact-sensitive
    and that rather than applying a  blanket  rule  with  regard  to  adult
    children each case should be analysed on its own facts.

25. As stated in Gurung (CA) [45]:

         "Ultimately, the question whether an individual enjoys family  life
         is one of fact and depends on a careful consideration  of  all  the
         relevant facts of the particular case..."

    and at [46]

         "the Ghising case [2012] UKUT 160 contains a useful review of  some
         of the jurisprudence and the correct approach to be adopted"

26. Paragraphs 53-55 the court in Ghising (family life) recorded

         '53.     In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
         [2003] EWCA Civ 31 at [14],  Sedley  LJ  cited  with  approval  the
         Commission's observation in S v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196:

             "Generally the protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
             involves cohabiting dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
             dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it  extends  to   other
             relationships depends on the circumstances of  the  particular
             case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her  33  year
             old son in the present case, would not necessarily acquire the
             protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence  of
             further elements of dependency, involving more than the normal
             emotional ties."'

         '54.     Sedley LJ accepted the submission  that  'dependency'  was
         not limited to economic dependency, at [17]. He added:

             "But if dependency is read down as meaning  "support"  in  the
             personal sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence, "real" or "committed"  or  "effective"  to  the
             word "support", then it represents in my view the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life implies".

         55.      Arden LJ said at [24] and [25]

             "24. There is no presumption that a person has a family  life,
             even with the members of  a  person's  immediate  family.  The
             court has to scrutinise the  relevant  factors.  Such  factors
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life

             25. Because there is no presumption  of  family  life,  in  my
             judgment a family life is not  established  between  an  adult
             child and  his  surviving  parent  or  other  siblings  unless
             something more exists than normal emotional ties...  Such  tie
             might exist if the appellant were dependent on his  family  or
             vice versa."

27. In this case both  the  appellant  had  the  sponsor  have  formed  and
    developed their own adult lives independently of  each  other.   I  can
    sympathise that this may be a difficult decision for the appellant  and
    sponsor, but, following the case law of Adjei  and  Mostafa  I  am  not
    persuaded that there is any engaged Article 8 right. I  have  therefore
    not proceeded to any  analysis  on  proportionality.   The  appeal  is,
    however, refused on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons  identified.   I  set  aside  the
decision  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals   Courts   and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision under section  12(2)
(b) (ii) of the TCE 2007.  I dismiss the appeal of Ms Okere.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 17th January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 17th January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

-----------------------
[1] Now see SS (Congo) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]
EWCA Civ 387.

