
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
hu/00465/2016

                                                  hu/00474/2016

                                                  hu/00482/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 April 2018                          |On 3 May 2018                     |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                   K M C G
                                    A N G
                                    B N G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms U. Miszkiel, counsel instructed by Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are nationals of Sri Lanka and comprise a mother and her
    twin daughters.  The first Appellant was born on 7  November  1964  and
    her twin daughters on 28 June 2007.  One  of  the  twin  daughters  has
    Down's Syndrome and other health conditions.  The other twin does  not.
    It would seem that the three Appellants last entered the United Kingdom
    on 22 September 2012 and have remained in the United Kingdom since that
    time.  This was on the basis of their dependency upon  the  husband  of
    the first Appellant and father of the children, who was at  that  stage
    residing in the United Kingdom with leave to remain.  The  relationship
    subsequently broke down, it is said, in part because of his  difficulty
    in accepting the disability of one of his daughters.

 2. Applications for  leave  to  remain  were  made  and  the  most  recent
    application was refused on 18 December  2015.   An  appeal  was  lodged
    against that decision and came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Freer for hearing  on  4  August  2017.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 8 August 2017 the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  finding
    that it would be proportionate to expect the three Appellants to return
    to Sri Lanka.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made in time.  The  grounds
    of appeal dated 22 August 2017  and  which  are  extensive,  assert  as
    follows:

      1) The judge erred materially in  law  by  conducting  his  own  post-
         hearing research without giving the parties any indication of  that
         or the opportunity to comment.  It was asserted this is contrary to
         the decision of the Tribunal in EG (Post-Hearing Internet Research)
         Nigeria [2008] UKAIT 00015.  It was asserted that in  the  premises
         the Appellants have not had a fair hearing or  further  or  in  the
         alternative the judge could seem to be arguably biased;




      2) Ground 2 asserts that the judge failed to consider all the evidence
         before  him  with  the  most  anxious  scrutiny  when   considering
         paragraph 276ADE and Articles 3 and 8 of ECHR;




      3) Ground 3 asserts that the judge failed to assess adequately section
         55 of the BCIA 2009 as a primary consideration in his decision;




      4)  Ground  4  asserts  that  the  judge  has  made  unreasonable  and
         irrational  findings  at  [55]  and  [66]  which  impacted  on  his
         assessment of Article 8 both inside and outside the  Rules  and  he
         has failed to assess with the most anxious scrutiny  the  EHC  plan
         annual review dated 16 May 2017.




      5) Ground 5 asserts that the judge  unreasonably  failed  at  [68]  to
         assess with the most anxious scrutiny the evidence  submitted  that
         there is inadequate Down's Syndrome screening in Sri Lanka.




      6) Ground 6 asserts that the judge failed at [64] to assess adequately
         the expert report of Mr Abdullah-Zadeh at bundle 3 pages 29 to  42,
         even though the report was corroborated by independent  educational
         reports highlighted in the skeleton argument and oral submissions;




      7) Ground 7 asserts that the judge failed to assess adequately  or  at
         all the relevant considerations when assessing  Article  8  outside
         the Rules; and



      8) Ground 8 asserts that the judge failed to make  a  finding  whether
         the Respondent's refusal decision was in accordance with the law by
         virtue of its incompatibility with the  judgment  of  Paposhvili  v
         Belgium Application No.41738/10 referred to at [48] of the skeleton
         argument.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers in a decision dated 22 February 2018.  Although the  grant  of
    permission to appeal is not restricted it focusses upon  ground  1  and
    the allegation that the judge considered a  website  for  a  particular
    school in Sri Lanka, even though this had not  been  raised  by  either
    party either in the refusal decision or  at  the  hearing,  albeit  the
    school itself was named in the refusal decision.

 5. There was no Rule 24 response lodged on behalf of the Respondent.

     Hearing

 6. I heard detailed submissions from Ms Miszkiel, counsel on behalf of the
    Appellants.  In addition to the  judgment  in  EG  (op  cit)  she  also
    provided a copy of the judgment in Mengiste [2013] EWCA Civ  1003.   In
    respect of the test for apparent  bias  at  [4]  of  the  judgment  she
    asserted that it is still that based on Porter v Magill [2002] 2 AC 357
    at [102].

 7.  She  further  sought  to  rely  on  the  Practice  Statements  of  the
    Immigration and  Asylum  Chambers  of  both  Tribunals  at  7.2.   This
    provides as follows.

         "Disposal of Appeals in Upper Tribunal

         The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion...to proceed  to
         remake the decision instead of remitting the case to the First-tier
         Tribunal unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that

          a) The effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             the parties' case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal or




          b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade
             is such that having regard to the overriding objective in Rule
             2 it is appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal."

 8. Her position was that the decision was fundamentally flawed  by  virtue
    of procedural unfairness such that an error of law needed to  be  found
    and the appeal remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing
    de novo.

 9. Ms Miszkiel's primary submission is that it is clear from  the  judge's
    decision that he conducted post-hearing research in relation to  Chitra
    Lane, which is a school or a children's resource centre in Colombo, Sri
    Lanka, which apparently provides treatment  and  support  for  children
    with Down's Syndrome.

10. Whilst reference was made in the refusal decision to that  organisation
    the judge in his decision has gone further asserting as follows at  "70
    and 71".

         "70. The country evidence shows a real year on year improvement for
             DS children's outlook in Sri Lanka.

         71.  I find that Chitra Lane school is well-able to  take  care  of
             the   child   BN.    The   website   link   is   now    given:
             http://chitralane.org/childrens-resource-centre."

11. Ms Miszkiel's point is that neither party had relied on the web link or
    the website of that organisation and it was clear that  the  judge  had
    had regard to that evidence after the hearing as was evidenced  by  his
    comment that there has been a year on  year  improvement  for  children
    with Down's Syndrome in Sri Lanka.  She further submitted that, in  any
    event, that finding is not specified so it is not possible to know upon
    what evidence the judge was basing his conclusion in that  respect  and
    that that was not the position in terms of the evidence that was before
    him, primarily that submitted on behalf of the Appellant.

12. At [64] of his judgment the judge cites as follows:

         "There is a debate about mainstreaming the severely  disabled.   It
         is a debate conducted on  national  and  international  levels  and
         within it the experts disagree.  I find there  has  been  selective
         use of expert opinion for the Appellants.  The particular  material
         deployed here has its limitations and I am grateful to the HOPO for
         drawing some to my attention."

13. Ms Miszkiel's point in relation  to  this  is  that  the  debate  about
    mainstreaming the severely disabled was not raised  by  the  Respondent
    either  in  the  refusal  decisions  or  in  the  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions, nor was it raised in the Appellant's  evidence  which  was
    that it is in the second Appellant's best interests for her  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  She submitted that it is  the  conclusion  that
    the judge has used in finding against the  Appellants  but  it  is  not
    possible to know where it has come from.

14. At [91] and [92] of the judgment the judge holds as follows:

         "91. Dozens of countries have  worse  mortality  rates  for  Down's
             Syndrome than found in Sri Lanka, where matters  are  steadily
             improving. The mortality rate for Down's Syndrome in Sri Lanka
             has decreased by 2.6 per  annum  over  many  years  of  recent
             recorded history.

         92.  Life expectancy for people with Down's Syndrome in the UK  has
             increased dramatically in recent decades - from 25 in 1983  to
             60 today.  If, for the sake of argument, the  life  expectancy
             was about 25 years in Sri Lanka  that  cannot  pass  the  high
             hurdle in the case law not even in Paposhvili."

15. Ms Miszkiel's point was that mortality rates had not been  provided  to
    the judge by either party. but are cited and it is also not possible to
    verify these mortality rates or to know the source  that  they  emanate
    from.  Ms Miszkiel submitted that what should have happened is that the
    hearing should have been reconvened, instructions could have been taken
    from the experts instructed by the Appellant whose view  was  that  the
    mortality rate was in fact quite high in Sri Lanka.

16. Ms Miszkiel further submitted the judge had fell into error at [86]  of
    his decision where he finds as follows

         "86. The case will be far stronger if made by a poor family.   This
             is a wealthy family.  The evidence is that they  could  afford
             servants when they last lived in Sri Lanka.  The father  is  a
             dentist, a particularly  well-paid  occupation.   Squints  are
             often treatable during childhood.  The cost of plastic surgery
             around the eyes of the child, if  that  is  decided  upon,  is
             likely to be affordable."

17. Ms Miszkiel's submission in respect of this  finding  is  that  it  was
    inappropriate for the judge to raise the issue of  plastic  surgery  in
    respect of a Down's Syndrome child  and  it  was  a  very  unreasonable
    comment.  She submitted it goes to the issue of stigma.  If a child has
    to change her appearance by having plastic surgery around her  eyes  in
    order to  avoid  stigma  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  then  it  must  be
    disproportionate to expect her to return.  Ms Miszkiel submitted it was
    disrespectful to the first Appellant who was upset  and  crucially  the
    issue of potentially having plastic surgery was not raised by either of
    the parties and was something the judge had clearly looked at after the
    hearing and had then incorporated into his decision.  She submitted the
    decision was fatally flawed  by  procedural  unfairness.   Ms  Miszkiel
    continued with her submissions to the effect that all of this gave rise
    to the appearance of bias.  She further in this respect drew  attention
    to the judge's finding at [78]:

         "78. I do understand the concerns about social stigma in Sri  Lanka
             and the concept of karma (fruits of action) in  that  culture.
             However, it is a card that has been overplayed."

    The judge then went on to give examples of why he considered this to be
    the case.

18. Ms Miszkiel submitted that this was  clearly  an  unreasonable  finding
    when one is dealing with a  child  who  is  disabled.   She  also  drew
    attention to the fact that the judge's  finding  was  contrary  to  the
    equal treatment bench book which assumes that all  parties  before  the
    court are to be treated equally and that this does not appear to be the
    case in light of the finding at  [78].   She  also  drew  attention  to
    further comments by the judge which she  submitted  were  inappropriate
    and also potentially contradictory.

19. Examples of this that she relied on were at [2] where the judge held:

      "2.     I should emphasise that in Sri Lanka  it  is  considered  ill-
omened to have a child with     Down's Syndrome and the  usual  reaction  is
to think poorly of the family as it  is  the  result  of   sin,  bad  karma,
coming as some punishment for past misdeeds.  That is of course not  my  own
view; most people in the  UK  would  want  to  take  a  charitable  attitude
towards such  circumstances, I would have thought.   I  have  very  positive
views of the Down's Syndrome    (DS) people I have met in my life."

20. And at [11] the judge decided that anonymity was  required  because  of
    hostility to the third Appellant in the Sri Lankan community, which has
    a significant diaspora in the United Kingdom.

21. In respect of stigma,  Ms  Miszkiel  drew  attention  to  her  skeleton
    argument that had been before the First-tier Tribunal  and  which  sets
    out evidence of such social stigma and which makes clear that the child
    would be subjected to hostility and would not have access to mainstream
    schooling.  She submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  adequately
    assess the matters raised which go towards the assessment of the second
    and third Appellants' best interests and proportionality.

22. In respect of best interests, Ms Miszkiel submitted that the judge  had
    clearly erred at [60] in his finding that:

      "Section 55 BCIA has little effect on the outcome of these  particular
appeals and it largely     implies that the children should stay with  their
mother as they surely will.  It does not justify      a  wholesale  exercise
in country comparison which I have heard.

23.  Ms Miszkiel submitted that this compounds the appearance  of  bias  and
was  essentially unsustainable,  in  that  it  was  erroneous  to  start  by
assuming that the two  minor Appellants would stay with their mother and  in
fact one starts with the best   interests consideration and then goes on  to
consider whether the children  should     return  with  their  mother.   She
submitted it was in the best of the disabled  child  to      remain  in  the
United Kingdom in order to avoid social stigma and  for  example  to   avoid
having to have plastic surgery.  She submitted the judge had failed to  take
     account of the evidence before him and at [67] failed  to  take  proper
account of the    educational health care plan on the  basis  that  it  does
not apply in Sri Lanka.    However, there was also a report from Dr  Perrera
which the judge erroneously     disregarded on the basis  that  he  did  not
know anything about matters in Sri Lanka     when that was  the  very  focus
of the report.  Both the evidence of Dr  Perrera  and  John   Abdullah-Zadeh
were consistent with the educational health care plan report.

24.  Ms Miszkiel sought  to  rely  on  the  remainder  of  her  grounds  but
submitted that if the  Tribunal was in agreement  in  respect  of  ground  1
that that essentially would suffice      in  terms  of  indicating  material
error of law which would necessitate a hearing de     novo before the First-
tier Tribunal.

25.  Mr Melvin submitted a copy of a previous decision dated 7 January  2014
in relation   to an application made by the first  Appellant  for  leave  to
remain as a parent in the  United Kingdom.   This  decision  refers  to  the
fact that the second Appellant suffers  from  Down's  Syndrome  and  asserts
that she could receive treatment in Chitra Lane.

26.  In his submissions, Mr Melvin submitted  that  the  Respondent  opposed
the appeal in     its entirety. He submitted that the only issue before  the
judge was whether there    were facilities to treat a Down's Syndrome  child
in Sri Lanka.  He compared the case     to one where a  person  with  Down's
Syndrome had come to the United Kingdom as a     visitor  and  utilised  the
NHS.  He submitted that there  was  clear  evidence  within  the     judge's
decision that the core issue was satisfied.  He submitted that the  evidence
set  out in the refusal letter was  not  being  challenged  and  essentially
what was being said    is that the facilities  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
better.  He submitted that the grounds  created a fog but  did  not  detract
from the findings and were ultimately not material    as  they  were  doomed
to fail or the appeal was doomed to fail on any aspect  of  the   case  law.
He accepted that the point in respect  of  plastic  surgery  may  have  been
better phrased.  However, Mr Melvin submitted it was open to  the  judge  to
make the      comment that the card has been  overplayed  in  light  of  the
judgment in EV    (Philippines) which was analogous and where  it  had  been
found that  the  other    family  members  were  "piggybacking".  Mr  Melvin
submitted there was no     expectation on the part of the family  that  they
would be able to remain in the UK.  It  was clear from the refusal  decision
that there was no evidence that education and    treatment  for  those  with
disabilities was anything other than adequate.  There  was  no    indication
that stigma can make a material  difference  to  the  findings.   He  denied
there was any apparent bias on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

27.  In reply, Ms Miszkiel took issue with  Mr  Melvin's  submissions.   She
submitted that    when the second Appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom
although she was 5 years   and 3 months she had extremely  limited  language
skills essentially those of a 15 to  18   month  old  child.  Thus,  it  was
unfair to assert that there were adequate facilities in Sri     Lanka  given
the poverty of her language  skills.   She  submitted  that  the  Appellants
came lawfully as the dependants of the father of the two younger  Appellants
and  husband  of  the  first  Appellant.   He  subsequently  abandoned  them
otherwise they    would have  remained  lawfully  as  his  dependants.   She
submitted they had a   legitimate expectation that they  would  be  able  to
remain in the United Kingdom for    the duration of that leave.   Once  that
was no longer possible they made applications    for  leave  to  remain  and
the children's grandmother stepped in to look after the   family.

28.  Ms Miszkiel submitted that there are material errors of  law  and  when
one looks at  the circumstances it cannot safely be said  that  the  outcome
would be the same given    that there had  not  been  a  fair  hearing.  She
submitted in those circumstances the issue   of materiality  does  not  come
into it.

Findings

29.  I find an error of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Freer.  For the   reasons outlined in ground 1 of the grounds of  appeal  it
does appear on the face of      the decision and based on the fact there  is
no record of submissions or within the  Respondent's refusal  to  show  that
the judge made his determination on the basis of       the  evidence  before
him, which he was obliged to do.

30.  In EG (Post-Hearing Internet Research) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT  00015  the
Tribunal      held as follows at [5]:

         "It is, however, most unwise for a judge  to  conduct  post-hearing
         research on the internet or otherwise into the factual issues which
         have to be decided in a case.  Decisions on factual  issues  should
         be made on the basis of the evidence presented  on  behalf  of  the
         parties and such additional evidence as the parties  are  aware  of
         has been before the judge.  To conduct post-hearing research on the
         internet and to face conclusions on that  research  without  giving
         the parties the opportunity to comment on it  is  wrong.   If  such
         research is conducted and this determination  gives  absolutely  no
         encouragement  to  such  a  process  where  an  Immigration   Judge
         considers the research may  or  will  affect  the  decision  to  be
         reached then it will be the judge's duty to reconvene  the  hearing
         and supply copies to the parties in order that the parties  can  be
         invited to make such submissions as they might have on it."

31.  I accept Ms Miszkiel's  submission  that  the  judge  appears  to  have
conducted post-   hearing research in order  to  determine  the  appeal  and
that is a clear error of law and    contrary to the principle of  procedural
fairness.  That is sufficient to set the decision     aside  and  remit  the
appeal for a hearing de novo in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of    the
Practice Statement to the Tribunals.

32.  In respect of the other grounds of appeals, I  heard  partial  argument
and it would   seem  that  whilst  those  grounds  have  merit,  it  is  not
necessary for me to determine   those grounds in light  of  my  decision  to
remit the appeal for a hearing de novo on    the basis of the  first  ground
of appeal.

     Decision

33.  The decision of the First tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
remitted for a    hearing de novo at Taylor House, not to be  listed  before
First-tier Tribunal Judge  Freer.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 29 April 2018
