
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00802/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (remotely by    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Skype)                               |                                     |
|On 17 September 2020                 |On 19 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 oludare [K]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji of Counsel instructed by Oasis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.  A face
    to face hearing was not held to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    documents were available in paper format on the court file.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan promulgated on 12 December 2019, in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
    claim in the context of a refusal to revoke a Deportation Order dated 7
    December 2018 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 26 June 1968, who first
    entered the United Kingdom unlawfully in 2005.  On 7 November 2005,  he
    was convicted of having a false instrument with intent, namely a  false
    French passport used to enter the United  Kingdom,  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.  A Deportation Order was made  on
    14 February 2006, in the name of Charlie Davies (the name on the  false
    French passport and name in which  the  Appellant  was  convicted)  aka
    Oludare [K]; pursuant to which the Appellant was removed to  Nigeria  1
    March 2006.  The Appellant sought to re-enter  the  United  Kingdom  in
    breach of the Deportation Order on 6 October 2006, he was  arrested  on
    arrival and removed to Nigeria the same day.  On  10  March  2009,  the
    Appellant made an application to revoke the  Deportation  Order,  which
    was refused on 19 May 2010 with a right of appeal.

 4. The Appellant made an application for entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a person present and settled here 16 September
    2009.  That application was refused by the Respondent on the basis that
    the requirements of paragraph 281 the Immigration Rules  were  not  met
    and although the decision referred to the Appellants conviction,  there
    was no express reference to the  Deportation  Order.   The  Appellant's
    appeal against refusal was allowed in a  decision  of  the  Immigration
    Judge Abebrese promulgated on  13  May  2010.   At  that  hearing,  the
    Respondent was not present or represented and express consideration was
    only given to the reasons for refusal, by reference to paragraph 281 of
    the Immigration Rules and the Appellant's conviction.  Again, there  is
    no reference at all to the existence of a Deportation Order or, at that
    date, the very recent refusal of the application to  revoke  the  same.
    Further to the appeal being allowed,  the  Appellant  was  granted  and
    clearance as a spouse between 23 June 2010 and 23 September 2012.

 5. In September 2012, the Appellant was stopped on re-entry to the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of the extant Deportation Order against him.

 6. The Appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  resulting  in  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird promulgated on  26  February
    2013.  It is said in that decision that the  Appellant  had  sought  to
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent  to  make  a  Deportation
    Order against him but also includes reference to  the  Appellant  being
    refused leave to enter the United Kingdom in September 2012 and curtail
    his current leave to remain, but those  decisions  were  not  evidenced
    before the First-tier Tribunal, nor was it known whether  there  was  a
    right of appeal against the refusal of leave to enter  or  curtailment.
    There appears to be no express conclusion by the First-tier Tribunal as
    to what precisely was being appealed against by the Appellant,  but  it
    was stated that it could not be an appeal against the Deportation Order
    (which was not provided by the Respondent at the hearing) given that it
    would be significantly out of  time  and  the  only  fresh  Immigration
    decision appeared to be refusal of leave to enter  in  September  2012.
    The First-tier Tribunal considered that  if  there  was  a  Deportation
    Order, the application made by the Appellant  for  entry  clearance  in
    2009 would have acted as an application to have the  Deportation  Order
    revoked.  The overall conclusion was that on the information before the
    First-tier Tribunal (which was clearly limited  by  the  absence  of  a
    Respondent's bundle), the decision of the Respondent to  resurrect  the
    decision to deport taken in 2005 was not in accordance with the law and
    if the deportation decision was re-served, then an error had been made.
     The appeal was allowed to the extent that the matter was referred back
    to the Respondent to make appropriate immigration decision.

 7. On 3 December 2012, the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules which was  refused  on  18
    April 2013.  That does not appear to be a decision taken following  the
    appeal being allowed on 26 February  2013  and  no  reference  is  made
    therein to the appeal.

 8. An application permission to apply  for  Judicial  Review  against  the
    decision dated 18 April 2013 was refused and on 26 December  2013,  the
    Appellant was removed to Nigeria.

 9. The Appellant applied to revoke the Deportation Order on 1 October 2018
    on the basis of family life with his British citizen wife  and  British
    citizen child born on 4 May 2012 and on the basis  that  12  years  had
    elapsed since the Deportation Order was signed on 14 February 2006.

10. The Respondent refused the application in a decision dated  7  December
    2018, in which the Appellant's immigration and criminal history was set
    out.  The Respondent considered the Appellant's claimed family life and
    the exceptions in paragraphs  398  and  following  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Respondent  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  a  British
    citizen daughter in the United Kingdom but there was no evidence of any
    subsisting relationship between her and  the  Appellant  following  his
    removal to Nigeria in December 2013 and it was not  therefore  accepted
    that there was a genuine subsisting parental relationship at  the  time
    of decision.  In any event it was not  accepted  that  will  be  unduly
    harsh for the Appellant's daughter to live with him in  Nigeria,  given
    her young age she could adjust to  life  and  settled  there  with  her
    parents support and access education.  Further,  it  was  not  accepted
    that we unduly harsh for the Appellant's  daughter  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom with her mother, whom she has been cared for  throughout
    her life and for whom support is available if needed.

11. The Respondent accepted in part that the Appellant  was  in  a  genuine
    subsisting relationship with his wife, a British citizen living in  the
    United Kingdom, but that there was a lack of evidence of support  of  a
    financial,  emotional  or  physical  nature  to  indicate   a   genuine
    subsisting relationship.  The relationship was formed at a  time  after
    the  Appellant  had  been  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom.    The
    Respondent did not accept  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    Appellant's wife to live in Nigeria with him if she  chose  to  do  so,
    given that she was born there and has spent her formative  years  there
    before coming to the United Kingdom and is already  familiar  with  the
    lifestyle and culture in Nigeria.   In  the  alternative,  it  was  not
    accepted that will be unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without him, given that she is a British  citizen
    with access to work and able to support herself and  her  daughter,  as
    she has done since the Appellant's last removal.

12. Overall, the Respondent considered that the Deportation Order should be
    maintained, and it was in the public interest to do so,  with  no  very
    compelling circumstances to outweigh that public interest.

13. First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan dismissed the appeal in  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 December 2019 on all grounds.  The decision  contains
    a very detailed chronology, by reference to the evidence available from
    the parties and sets out  the  various  identities  used  by  both  the
    Appellant and his wife, and details of the  Appellant's  children.   In
    summary,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  grant  of  entry
    clearance in 2010 was invalid because of the extant Deportation  Order.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  find  that  there  was  a  genuine
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant  and  any  of  his  three
    children and in any event it would not be unduly harsh either for  them
    to live with the Appellant in Nigeria,  or  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without him.  When considering all of  the  circumstances,  the
    First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    spouse developed either at a time when he had no lawful leave to be  in
    the United Kingdom or when he was not in the United Kingdom at all, and
    although the Appellant was not lawfully in the United  Kingdom  between
    July 2010 and September 2013 (because his entry clearance was invalid),
    this was not found to be the result of any deliberate deception on  his
    part.  The Appellant had a further conviction on return to  the  United
    Kingdom for driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol.  Overall,  the
    Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  for  revocation  of   the
    Deportation Order and its continuation was found not  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

14. The Appellant appeals on eight grounds, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law as follows:

      i) in wrongly  applying  the  Immigration  Rules  applicable  to  pre-
         deportation  revocation  applications   rather   than   the   post-
         deportation revocation applications, resulting in  the  wrong  test
         and a higher threshold being applied to the Appellant's application
         than should have been;

     ii) in failing to take into account  the  full  sentencing  remarks  in
         relation to the Appellant and the context of his offence;

    iii) in attaching little  weight  to  the  Appellant's  relationship  in
         accordance with section 117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002, without considering the  power  to  adopt  a  more
         flexible approach;

     iv) in finding that the Appellant had not been in  the  United  Kingdom
         lawfully between  2010  and  2013  following  the  grant  of  entry
         clearance as a spouse,

      v) in failing to take the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bird
         in 2013 that the grant of entry clearance amounted to a decision to
         revoke the Deportation Order as the starting point by applying  the
         principles in Devaseelan;

     vi) in failing to consider the evidence of the Appellant's relationship
         with his children by his wife, including that  of  regular  contact
         and family holidays in Belgium;

    vii) in failing to consider that Article 8 of the European Convention on
         Human  Rights  embraces   the   opportunity   to   develop   family
         relationships and not just maintain existing ones; and  in  failing
         to properly consider the best interests of the children;

   viii) in failing to reduce the public interest in favour  of  maintaining
         the Deportation Order for the following reasons (a) in finding that
         the Appellant had sought to re-enter the United Kingdom  in  breach
         of a Deportation Order in  2006,  in  circumstances  where  he  was
         unaware of the signed Deportation Order and had an  existing  multi
         visit visa which he sought to use; (b) in circumstances  where  the
         Respondent had granted entry clearance; and (c) attaching too  much
         weight to the minor conviction in 2010 as sufficiently  significant
         to refuse to revoke the Deportation Order.

15. At the oral hearing, Counsel for the Appellant expanded on the  written
    grounds of appeal as follows.  In  relation  to  the  first  ground  of
    appeal, it was submitted that in paragraph  23  of  the  decision,  the
    First-tier Tribunal correctly identifies  that  paragraph  391  of  the
    Immigration Rules deals with an application  to  revoke  a  Deportation
    Order after a person has been deported, however erred in  paragraph  27
    when stating that it is essentially the same exercise under  paragraphs
    390A and 391 of the Immigration Rules.  However, Counsel accepted  that
    if the Court of Appeal's decision in Section  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v ZP (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 1197 is correct, then there was
    no error of law in paragraph 27 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

16. In relation to the second ground  of  appeal,  counsel  submitted  that
    there had only been limited reference to the sentencing remarks for the
    Appellant and that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into  account
    as a relative factor the positive points in relation to the Appellant's
    history, the circumstances of his  offence  and  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom as part of the relevant context  and  background  to  consider.
    Counsel accepted that the weight to be given to  this  evidence  was  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

17. As to the third  ground  of  appeal,  Counsel  submitted  that  section
    117B(4)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  simply
    does  not  apply  to  the  facts  of  this  case  as  the   Appellant's
    relationship was developed over time in both Nigeria and in the  United
    Kingdom and the reference to the relationship being developed at a time
    when the Appellant was not in the UK lawfully in paragraph  51  of  the
    decision is not accurate.  It was submitted  that  this  paragraph  can
    only be referring back to section 117B(4)(b), although it was  accepted
    that when this provision was quoted later on in paragraph 85, there was
    no express application of it to the facts in this appeal.

18. As to the fourth and fifth grounds of appeal, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    makes repeated references to the Appellant not being  lawfully  present
    in the United Kingdom following the grant of entry  clearance  in  2010
    and although finds that there was no  intention  by  the  Appellant  to
    deceive, this period has been weighed against  the  Appellant,  as  has
    what is said to be entry in breach in 2006.  Counsel was unable to make
    any legal submissions as to how, in accordance with section 5(1) of the
    Immigration Act 1971 or otherwise, that  the  entry  clearance  granted
    could have been valid or the Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom
    lawful when there was an extant Deportation Order; having not  prepared
    submissions on the basis of legal principles.  Counsel could only go so
    far as relying on the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  that
    the application for entry clearance was treated as  an  application  to
    revoke a Deportation Order and it was therefore no longer  extant,  and
    relied on the principles in Devaseelan to say that this should continue
    to apply.  The implication within the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bird allowing the appeal, was that the Deportation Order had been
    revoked and  there  was  no  appeal  by  the  Respondent  against  that
    decision.  The more recent decision simply  did  not  engage  with  the
    earlier findings.

19. As to the sixth ground of appeal, Counsel accepted  that  there  was  a
    lack of documentary evidence about the  Appellant's  relationship  with
    his family and children in particular  but  submitted  that  there  was
    written and oral evidence from the Appellant's partner about this which
    was not properly considered, nor were sufficient findings made on it by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The finding in paragraph 83 that there was no
    family life, even with a biological child was a stark one and an  error
    of law, even if there was no ongoing subsisting relationship due  to  a
    lack of family contact.  Further, that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to consider the impact of continued separation from  the  Appellant  on
    the children when assessing their best interests.

20. Finally, on behalf of the Appellant was submitted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to reduce the weight attached to the public interest in
    deportation in  relation  to  three  matters.   First,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to engage with the Appellant's explanation  as  to  his
    attempts to re-enter the United Kingdom in  2006;  secondly,  increased
    the public interest in deportation due to his presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to entry clearance where the  impact  of  this  should
    have been the reverse; and, thirdly, the conviction in 2010 was  not  a
    significant one, nor did it form a pattern  of  offending  which  could
    have increased the public interest in deportation.

21. Overall it was submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant  that  since  his
    first entry into the United Kingdom, the Appellant  had  a  history  of
    seeking to comply with immigration rules, he had  voluntarily  departed
    from the United Kingdom and had made appropriate applications for entry
    clearance and leave to remain.  Further, there had been a long  passage
    of time since his conviction and he has a partner and children  in  the
    United Kingdom.  These factors are not properly been reflected  in  the
    overall balance struck by the First-tier Tribunal.

22. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Whitwell opposed all of the grounds  of
    appeal.  On the first ground, it  was  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was simply quoting binding Court of Appeal authority  with  no
    error of law in the self-direction or application  of  the  appropriate
    test.

23. On the second ground of appeal as to sentencing remarks, in effect  the
    Appellant's counsel was suggesting that positive weight should be given
    to the Appellant's illegal working in France and the United Kingdom and
    rely on brief  comments  about  the  Appellant's  claimed  reasons  for
    entering the United Kingdom, in the absence of any asylum claim  having
    ever been made.

24. In relation to the third, fourth and fifth grounds of  appeal,  it  was
    submitted that the Appellant's presence in the United  Kingdom  between
    2010 and 2013 was not lawful by application  of  section  5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, whether or not the Appellant was aware  of  this,
    it could not add any positive weight in the balancing exercise  in  the
    Appellant's favour.  Further, it is entirely unclear from the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird what decision the appeal was  against
    and only went so far as to say  an  unspecified  decision  was  not  in
    accordance  with  the  law;  without  any  express  finding  that   the
    Deportation Order had been revoked.  Further,  there  was  no  specific
    findings by the most recent First-tier Tribunal as to  the  application
    of section 117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

25. In relation to the sixth ground of appeal, Mr Whitwell  submitted  that
    in relation to family life, the finding  was  that  the  Appellant  had
    simply not established to the correct burden of proof  that  he  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his children, for the  reasons
    given in paragraph 48 of the decision.   Further,  in  paragraph  48.8,
    there was a specific finding that the Appellant's wife's evidence could
    only be given minimal weight.  In relation to  the  seventh  ground  of
    appeal, there were clear findings on the best interests of the children
    and on the exceptions to deportation.  This was a case where there  was
    simply a lack of evidence from the Appellant and the findings  made  on
    the limited evidence that was available were  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

26. Finally, as to the last  ground  of  appeal,  it  was  noted  that  the
    Appellant was not suggesting that the weight being attached to  various
    matters by the First-tier Tribunal was impermissible, only that  either
    more or less weight should have been attached to these points.   It  is
    however trite that the weight to be attached to evidence  is  a  matter
    for the First-tier Tribunal and it is clear that all factors were taken
    into account.  The final ground of appeal  amounted  to  no  more  than
    disagreement with the findings made.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first ground  of  appeal  which  concerns  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal identified and applied the correct test for an application  to
    revoke a Deportation Order, after a person has been deported  from  the
    United Kingdom, has no arguable merit whatsoever.  Paragraph 27 of  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  summarises  and  then  expressly
    quotes from the Court of Appeal's decision  in  ZP  (India),  which  is
    binding on the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  is  therefore  unarguably  a
    correct assessment and self-direction as to the applicable law  and  in
    any event follows a detailed section within the decision of the part of
    the Immigration  Rules  dealing  with  deportation  and  the  different
    provisions in different scenarios for revocation.

 2. The second  ground  of  appeal  is  also  without  any  arguable  merit
    whatsoever.  The sentencing remarks from November 2005 are  very  brief
    and at best recount the  Appellant's  mitigation  for  his  use  of  an
    illegal document to both  enter  and  work  unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom, having already done  the  same  in  France  and  in  the  full
    knowledge of what he was doing.  Whether or not  the  Appellant  was  a
    hard-working and responsible person who did not seek to deprive anybody
    else of anything, was irrelevant to  his  conviction  then  and  wholly
    irrelevant to the assessment to be made by the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    appeal against the refusal to revoke the  Deportation  Order  in  2019.
    The reference to the Appellant being forced to  leave  Nigeria  through
    political difficulties falls very far short of any relevant context  to
    the current appeal,  particularly  when  the  Appellant  never  claimed
    asylum and has since been living in Nigeria for many years.  The First-
    tier Tribunal was clearly aware of the sentencing remarks but there was
    nothing material within them to which any significant weight  could  or
    should have been attached and there was no error of law in  failing  to
    take  them  into  account  expressly   in   their   entirety   in   the
    circumstances.

 3.  The  third  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    application of section 117B(4)(b) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, that little weight should be given to  a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying person that is established by a  person  at  a
    time when the person is in the United Kingdom  unlawfully.   Whilst  in
    paragraph 51 of the decision, it is stated that the Appellant developed
    his relationship with a wife during a time when he was not  in  the  UK
    lawfully, that was not an express application  of  section  117B(4)(b),
    nor did it contain any finding on the weight to  be  attached  to  that
    relationship.  That sentence  in  paragraph  51  was  no  more  than  a
    statement of fact that the relationship was developed in part when  the
    Appellant was in Nigeria and in part in the United Kingdom between 2010
    and 2013 when his entry clearance was invalid and he was not  therefore
    here lawfully.

 4. In paragraphs 85 and  following  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, there is express consideration of sections 117A  to  117D  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but no finding at all
    that little weight was given to the Appellant's relationship  with  his
    wife pursuant  to  section  117B(4)(b).   There  is  no  error  of  law
    identified by the third ground of appeal, it purports to be a challenge
    against a finding  or  application  of  the  provision  which  was  not
    actually made by the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The fourth and fifth grounds of appeal concern the question of  whether
    the Deportation Order remains in force against the  Appellant  and  the
    impact, or otherwise of the grant of entry clearance to  the  Appellant
    as  a  spouse  in  2010.   In  accordance  with  section  5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, any leave to enter given  while  the  Deportation
    Order is in force is invalid and  further,  an  application  for  entry
    clearance cannot be regarded as an application to revoke a  Deportation
    Order because of the wording and application of  the  same  provisions.
    This finding was supported by it being clear in the  Immigration  Rules
    that the revocation of a Deportation Order is  a  prerequisite  for  an
    application for entry clearance, as a separate application and  without
    which, a grant of entry clearance cannot be an implicit revocation of a
    deportation order.

 6. The Appellant does not challenge the lawfulness of this  conclusion  of
    the First-tier Tribunal by reference to any  legal  provisions  or  the
    construction of section 5 of the Immigration Act 1971, nor by reference
    to any of the supporting Immigration Rules, but seeks only to  rely  on
    the earlier decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird.  That  decision
    is far from clear as to what was actually the subject of the appeal and
    proceeded in the absence of  any  evidence  of  the  Deportation  Order
    having been revoked; without any reference  to  the  then  very  recent
    refusal of  an  express  application  to  revoke,  shortly  before  the
    application for entry clearance and in any  event  does  not  expressly
    find that the Deportation Order had in fact been revoked.

 7. The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bird  also  provides  no
    reasoning for the suggestion that an application  for  entry  clearance
    could by inference be treated as an application to revoke, contrary  to
    the express provisions of the  Immigration  Rules;  nor  is  there  any
    evidence, reasoning or explanation for the view that the Respondent was
    seeking to re-serve or revive a past Deportation Order.   Even  if  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird  expressly  found  what  the
    Appellant now relies on it to say, it would have been clearly wrong  in
    law and in those circumstances there  can  be  no  application  of  the
    principles in Devaseelan to perpetuate such an error.

 8.  Further,  neither  the  Appellant  nor  the  Respondent  appeared   to
    understand the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird  in  the  way
    now relied upon by the Appellant, given that all parties  continues  to
    proceed on the basis that there was an extant Deportation Order against
    the Appellant.  If  the  Appellant  had  understood  from  the  earlier
    Tribunal decision that his Deportation Order had been impliedly revoked
    by the grant of his entry clearance, there is no rational basis for him
    remaining in Nigeria and waiting until 2018 to make an  application  to
    revoke the Deportation Order.  The Respondent's decision  on  13  April
    2013 similarly proceeded on the basis of an extant  Deportation  Order.
    For these reasons, the claimed lack of  engagement  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird failing to
    consider this as the starting point is wholly  immaterial  when  it  is
    beyond doubt that the Appellant's entry clearance in 2010  was  invalid
    by virtue of section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 9.  The  sixth  ground  of  appeal  concerns  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    consideration  of  the  evidence  before  it  about   the   Appellant's
    relationship with his children.  The Appellant accepts that  there  was
    little, if any documentary evidence about the relationship  and  relies
    solely on the written and oral evidence from the  Appellant's  wife  on
    this.  The Appellant's written  statement  refers  to  his  family  and
    arranging family holidays to Belgium a few days  during  school  breaks
    and not being able to attend school or be involved  in  the  day-to-day
    lives of  his  children,  nor  attend  special  events.   There  is  no
    description or detail as to what, if any involvement the Appellant  has
    with his children, not even a summary of how frequent their contact is.
     The Appellants wife's written statement is similarly lacking in detail
    about the relationship between the Appellant and the children, only one
    of whom is his biological child, although the Appellant is said to have
    played an immense role in the lives of his stepchildren, recognised  by
    the change  of  their  names.   The  Appellant's  wife  said  that  the
    Appellant is in daily contact  on  the  phone  with  his  children  and
    provides financial support but that his  physical  presence  is  needed
    within the family home.

10. The written evidence from the Appellant and his  wife  is  recorded  in
    paragraphs 44 and 45 of the decision, with paragraph 46 setting out the
    oral evidence  from  the  Appellant's  wife.   This  was  primarily  in
    relation to the Appellant's wife and children  living  in  Nigeria  for
    year between 2017 and 2018.  There  is  later  reference  to  the  oral
    evidence of the Appellant's wife about the family  meeting  up  once  a
    year in Belgium in the past.  The First-tier Tribunal notes that  there
    was  no  supporting  documentary   evidence   about   the   Appellant's
    relationship with his children,  no  evidence  to  show  the  Appellant
    spending any time with them in Belgium or Nigeria and nothing  to  show
    the Appellant's involvement or input into the children's lives.

11. Taking the very limited evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  about
    the Appellant's relationship with children, including the evidence from
    the Appellant's wife, it was entirely open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to makes findings that it did that there was no genuine and  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and any of his  children.   This  is
    not a case where the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  to  take  into
    account the Appellants wife's evidence, which was  incredibly  limited,
    lacking in detail and wholly unsupported by any  documentary  evidence.
    This is simply a case where the Appellant has failed to  establish  his
    claim in this regard and the burden was on him to do so.

12. The seventh ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    properly assess the best interests of the children in  accordance  with
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009  and
    that  family  life  includes  the  opportunity  to  further  develop  a
    relationship between a parent and minor child.  The First-tier Tribunal
    makes detailed findings in relation  to  each  of  the  three  children
    between paragraphs 48 and 50 of the decision (broken down into multiple
    subparagraphs), dealing  in  detail  in  particular  with  the  medical
    evidence and time living in Nigeria but also  refers  significantly  to
    the absence of relevant evidence in relation to each child  as  to  the
    parental relationship and in relation to each  of  the  children's  own
    current circumstances.  On the extremely limited,  almost  non-existent
    evidence about each of the children before the First-tier Tribunal, the
    only conclusion rationally open to the First-tier  Tribunal  about  the
    best interests of the children, was  for  them  to  remain  with  their
    mother, as they had throughout their lives.  This  is  again  simply  a
    case where the  Appellant  has  failed  to  submit  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, sufficient relevant evidence which  could  have  led  to  any
    other findings than those made.

13. The final ground of appeal amounts to no more  than  disagreement  with
    the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal  when  making  a  holistic
    assessment of all of the circumstances as to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining the Deportation Order and the Appellant's right to  respect
    for his family life.  It is trite that the weight  to  be  attached  to
    evidence and elements of an appeal is primarily a matter for the First-
    tier Tribunal and there is no  suggestion  in  this  case  that  either
    matters were not expressly taken into account at all, or that there was
    any irrationality or perversity in the First-tier Tribunal's assessment
    of the public interest in all of the  Appellant's  circumstances.   The
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take into account  the  Appellant's
    attempted re-entry to the United Kingdom in breach of  the  Deportation
    Order in October 2006,  the  unlawful  period  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 2010 and 2013 (as a matter  of  law,  albeit  with  an  express
    finding that there was no intention to deceive by  the  Appellant  when
    making his  application  for  entry  clearance),  and  the  Appellant's
    conviction in 2010, however minor, was similar to a previous conviction
    in 2005 (not the index offence for  the  purposes  of  the  Deportation
    Order).   None of these are matters which could possibly  have  reduced
    the public interest in maintaining the Deportation  Order  and  it  was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that the combination  of  these
    matters, in addition to the reasons for deportation itself,  gave  rise
    to strong public policy reasons for refusing to revoke the  Deportation
    Order.  There is no error of law on this final ground of appeal.

14. For all of these reasons, I do not find any material error  of  law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on any of the grounds of appeal
    identified by the Appellant, many  of  which  were  wholly  unarguable,
    based  on  incorrect  facts  or  law,  or  amounted  to  no  more  than
    disagreement with the cogent and detailed findings made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in this case.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         5th October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

