
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00738/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 November 2018                      |On 26 November 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                    [o h]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Youssefian
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt.  He was born on 20 September 2012.
     His application for entry clearance as the dependent child of a person
    present and settled here was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    dated 27 November 2017.  The appeal was dismissed by Judge  Juss  in  a
    decision promulgated on 24 May 2018.

 2. The grounds claim the judge erred because he jumped to  conclusions  he
    was not entitled to reach,  ignored  evidence  from  the  sponsor  "...
    despite him being credible ..." and mentioning evidence which  was  not
    produced by the appellant.  The grounds go on to say  that  given  that
    the oral evidence was significant, such error was material.  Given  the
    judge may have relied upon evidence which was never in  front  of  him,
    the decision was "infected with error".

 3. The grounds took issue with  [18]  of  the  decision  where  the  judge
    commented that the evidence of sole responsibility of the  sponsor  was
    lacking.  The grounds claim that there was evidence in terms of a sworn
    declaration that the mother had given up responsibility of her  son  to
    the sponsor.  The grounds claim the judge was obliged to make a finding
    about the sponsor's credibility and that the mother's  declaration  was
    as the grounds put it, "not correct" but he failed to do so.

 4. The grounds claim the judge misapplied the test in  TD  (Yemen)  [2006]
    UKAIT 00049.

 5. Judge Nightingale granted permission on 20 September  2018.   She  said
    inter alia as follows:

         "2.  The grounds argue that the judge failed to make  any  findings
             with regard to the oral evidence given by the sponsor  father.
             The judge also failed to make any findings with regard to  the
             role of the sponsor in the continuing  control  and  direction
             over the appellant's upbringing.  The judge  referred  to  two
             affidavits from the  appellant's  grandparents,  but  no  such
             affidavits   were   submitted.    The   judge   limited    his
             consideration of the situation of the appellant and his mother
             rather than making any findings on the evidence as a whole.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge made no proper findings  on  the
             evidence of the sponsor, who did give oral evidence before the
             Tribunal.  It is arguable that the judge gave no  reasons  for
             rejecting his account, if indeed he did  reject  his  account.
             It is also arguable that the judge erred with  regard  to  the
             existence of the affidavits which do not appear on  the  court
             file.  It is also arguable that the judge erred in failing  to
             make any adequate consideration of the sponsor's role  in  the
             appellant's life in accordance with the test in TD (Yemen)."

Submission on Error of Law

 6. Mr Youssefian relied upon the grounds.  The judge had  failed  to  take
    into account material evidence and had failed  to  carry  out  a  fact-
    sensitive analysis as he was obliged to do in terms of TD.

 7. Mr Clarke conceded that there were errors but submitted that they  were
    not material.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. The judge said at [17] that he had given careful consideration  to  all
    the documents before him and to the oral evidence and submissions which
    he said were set out in the Record of Proceedings.

 9. He carried out an analysis at [18]-[24].  The judge did not accept that
    the sponsor father had sole responsibility and commented  that  it  was
    insufficient simply to make a declaration to that effect.  The evidence
    before the judge was that the sponsor father accepted that he had joint
    responsibility.  See statement at P6[2].

10. There was no credible evidence as  to  why  the  child's  mother  would
    become less willing to care for him  and  to  formally  relinquish  all
    parental responsibilities.

11. The judge did not accept as credible that  the  child's  mother  should
    suddenly just decide not to look after her 5 year old son but  continue
    looking after her 3 year old daughter.  The judge took the  view  which
    he was entitled to come to, that there had been a  decision  made  that
    the appellant was able to travel alone to join his father here.

12. The judge found at [22] that parental responsibility was jointly shared
    until the declaration was made but that in any event both children were
    still jointly cared  for.   The  judge  rejected  the  claim  that  the
    appellant aged 5 years or thereabouts was now with the sponsor father's
    cousin.

13. The judge's decision contains various errors:

14. On the front sheet, the judge refers to the respondent being the  Entry
    Clearance Officer Islamabad and there being an Urdu interpreter.

15. At [2] the judge refers to the burden of proof as of the  date  of  the
    decision to refuse,  whereas,  he  was  meant  to  be  considering  the
    circumstances as of the date of the hearing.

16. At [5] the judge includes the  following  wholly  erroneous  paragraph,
    nothing to do with this appeal:

         "5.  Second, two affidavits have been provided from the appellant's
             grandparents stating that the appellant had been residing with
             them since the father migrated to the UK in 2007.  From  these
             affidavits, which were amounted (sic) to a self-declaration in
             any event, there was limited evidence  demonstrating  that  he
             was living with the grandparents."

17. I must consider whether these errors of law which appear to  have  been
    caused by "copy and paste" are material, bearing in mind  the  findings
    the judge made.

18. The judge carried out  an  analysis  of  TD  at  [20].   Unfortunately,
    although he refers to  the  legal  application  of  the  role  of  sole
    responsibility set out in TD, the judge fails to set the facts  of  the
    appellant's case against the TD criteria.

19. I bear in mind ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844.   Lord  Justice  Moses
    said  inter  alia  in  [1]  quoting  Carnwath  LJ  describing  "anxious
    scrutiny" in R (YH) [2010] EWCA Civ 116:

         "...... it underlines 'the very special human context in which such
         cases are brought, and the need for  decisions  to  show  by  their
         reasoning that every factor  which  might  tell  in  favour  of  an
         applicant has been properly taken into account'.  It  follows  that
         there can be no confidence that that approach has been taken  where
         a Tribunal of fact plainly appears to have taken into account those
         matters which ought not to have been taken into account."

    And at [2] Moses LJ said inter alia "the instant appeal is yet  another
    unfortunate example where the First-tier Tribunal displayed an  absence
    of care ......".

20. In agreeing with Moses LJ, Sir Stanley Burnton said inter alia at [16]

         "A material error of fact is  an  error  as  to  a  fact  which  is
         material to the conclusion.  If there is any doubt as to whether or
         not the incorrect fact in question was material to the  conclusion,
         that doubt is to be  resolved  in  favour  of  the  individual  who
         complains of the error."

21. It is clear from the judge's decision and for the reasons  I  have  set
    out above that the appellant's appeal was not considered with the  care
    that was required.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
    errors of law which infect his findings and render them unreliable. The
    errors are material.

22. I have found that the judge  materially  erred.  The  remaking  of  the
    appeal will require significant fact-finding.  Having regard  to  [7.2]
    ([of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of
    the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal), I consider this is  an
    appeal which is appropriate to be remitted de novo  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision is set aside and will be remitted to be heard de  novo  in  the
First-tier.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 9 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart






