
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: HU/00109/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 April 2016                         |On 29 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Nicola Melissa Anderson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Iveson of Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting publication  of
    the details of this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  MCDade  allowing  the  appeal  of   the   present
    respondent, hereinafter  "the  claimant",  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to deport her.

 3. The claimant does not have a distinguished history.   She  has  been  in
    trouble in the United Kingdom on  several  occasions  for  theft,  often
    stealing from shops, and in 2009 she was  sent  to  prison  for  fifteen
    months.  Significantly, at  about  that  time  she  was  served  with  a
    liability to deportation notice and subsequently a deportation order was
    served.  She appealed and then got into further trouble.  The appeal was
    unsuccessful and she became appeal rights exhausted in October 2010.

 4. The Secretary of State then recognised that the  claimant  had  made  an
    asylum claim. She refused that claim and  appears  to  have  been  in  a
    strong position to deport the applicant. However the Secretary of  State
    requested further submissions on human rights grounds and in August 2011
    decided not deport the claimant but  gave  her  discretionary  leave  to
    remain until September 2014.

 5. There has been a significant change in circumstance.  The  claimant  was
    already the mother of three British citizen children and in  April  2014
    she gave birth to another child who is also a British citizen. No  doubt
    because her leave was running out the claimant made an  application  for
    further leave and that application was refused.  Her discretionary leave
    was not renewed but a decision was made to deport her.

 6. There is no record that the claimant has reoffended.

 7. I asked Mr Norton if he could tell me what had happened since the  grant
    of discretionary leave other than the claimant  having  behaved  herself
    for longer than she has managed to do for a long time and  the  claimant
    producing a fourth  British  national  child.   He  could  not.   I  was
    concerned that I had missed something of importance.  If I  have  it  is
    not in the papers.

 8. Judge MCDade clearly erred.  He asked himself if it was unduly harsh  to
    separate the children from their mother but asked himself that  question
    in the context of the Immigration  Rules  rather  than  the  context  of
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   The
    test is exactly the same.  He would have given exactly the  same  answer
    if he had applied the right test.  The mistake is wholly immaterial.

 9. I really do not  understand  why  the  recent  decision  to  deport  the
    claimant was made.  I understand completely why the appeal was dismissed
    by Judge MCDade.  I find no material error in his decision and I dismiss
    the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  for  the  reasons
    given above.

    Notice of Decision

10. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 28 April 2016                  |







