
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/00626/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th November 2018                         |On 12th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     lrc
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who entered  the  United  Kingdom
    as a visitor on 5th  December  2001.   Since  30th  July  2003  he  has
    remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

2.   Between 2003 and 2005  he  was  convicted  on  thirteen  occasions  for
    twenty offences.  In particular on 4th March 2015 he was  convicted  at
    the Inner London  Crown  Court  of  drug  offences  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to 30 months' imprisonment.

3.   On 8th October 2015 he was made the subject  of  a  deportation  order.
    Following the  end  of  his  custodial  sentence  he  was  detained  on
    immigration powers finally being released on 7th February 2017.

4.    On  25th  October  2016  his  legal   representatives   made   further
    submissions which were treated as a request to revoke  the  deportation
    order.   In the refusal decision of 23rd December 2016  the  respondent
    refused to do so and maintained the original decision.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal against that refusal, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger  on  21st  March  2016.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 4th April 2018 the appeal was dismissed in  all
    respects.

6.   The appellant has seven children all of whom are British nationals.

7.   The practical focus of the appeal was in respect of M born on  1st  May
    2009 and RR(1) and RR(2) twins born on 6th December 2010.   These  were
    his children by a former relationship with Ms MA

8.   It was the contention advanced on behalf of the appellant, that he  was
    in an existing parental relationship with  those  three  children.   By
    reason particularly of the autism of the twins his  presence  was  much
    needed to support Ms A and that it would be unduly harsh in  any  event
    for those children to be without his care and attention in  the  United
    Kingdom.

9.   So far as R was concerned she had been made the subject  of  a  special
    guardianship order until her 18th  birthday.   A  special  guardianship
    order also had been made in respect of J, who at the material time  was
    in foster care.

10.  The appellant sought to challenge the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rodger on the basis that it had been  wrongly  concluded  by  the
    Judge that  there  was  absence  of  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship and that the Judge had failed adequately to deal with  the
    issue of whether the appellant's absence from the United Kingdom  would
    be unduly harsh upon such children.   Leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted on those grounds.

11.  The hearing was initially scheduled to take place on  18th  July  2018.
    That was adjourned because it was said that new solicitors had taken on
    the case on behalf of the appellant and time was needed to be made  for
    preparation.

12.  A new hearing date was set for 6th September 2018.  The  appellant  and
    his legal representatives Law Eagles Ltd were so notified.

13.   On  2nd  September  2018  the  legal  representatives   requested   an
    adjournment on the grounds that certain  documents  were  required  and
    that the solicitors had yet to obtain the details  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal from the previous lawyer.  Given that  the  solicitors  had  had
    since July to obtain such evidence the request was refused.

14.  At the hearing of 6th September 2016 there was  no  appearance  by  the
    legal representative nor by the appellant himself.  Enquiries conducted
    of the solicitor at that stage produced no effective contact.

15.  Thus the matter was adjourned with a  direction  that  the  appellant's
    solicitors provide a  written  explanation  as  to  why  they  had  not
    attended the Tribunal, to which direction a reply was sent by a  letter
    of 11th October 2018 on the basis  that  the  representatives  did  not
    attend because it clashed with another case in Birmingham.  Further  it
    was said that the appellant was still awaiting particular documentation
    which he did not have.  The letter concluded "we hope that you will  be
    able to consider the above reasons faithfully and issue a  new  hearing
    date for our client for which he will be duly prepared for."

16.  it was following the receipt of the letter of 11th  October  2018  that
    the hearing date of 14th November 2018 was set, with notification being
    given both to the legal representations and to  the  appellant  at  his
    stated address.

17.   On  7th  November  2018  a  further  letter  was  received  from   the
    appellant's legal representatives requesting a further  adjournment  on
    the basis that the appellant's representative  would  be  appearing  in
    another case at a different court on the same day.  It  was  also  said
    that the appellant was yet to receive documentary evidence  that  would
    be relevant to the appeal.

18.  That application was refused, a copy of which refusal was sent both  to
    the representatives and to the appellant at his stated address.

19.  At the hearing of 14th November 2018  neither  the  appellant  nor  the
    representative attended.  An attempt to contact the solicitors resulted
    in an answerphone.  No explanation had been offered  by  the  appellant
    for his absence  from  the  hearing.   Although  it  would  clearly  be
    desirable for the person  facing  deportation  to  be  present  and  or
    represented at the appeal, it is abundantly clear that  every  facility
    had been made by  the  Tribunal  for  that  to  have  happened.   I  am
    satisfied that the appellant was aware of the hearing and indeed of the
    refusal to adjourn the hearing.   Consequently  I  considered,  in  the
    light particularly of the long delay, that it was in the  interests  of
    justice and not unfair to  proceed  to  determine  the  appeal  in  the
    absence of the appellant and or representative.

20.  The first issue that is raised is the contention by the appellant  that
    he has a subsisting relationship with his  children  particularly  with
    RR(1), RR(2), M and R, given that in the decision letter that  position
    was accepted by the respondent. It was submitted  that  it  was  wholly
    wrong for the Judge to go behind that concession.

21.  As has been noted R is under a special  guardianship  order  and  lives
    with her aunt.

22.  In terms of the other children they live with their natural  mother  A,
    who was the former partner of the appellant.  It was common ground that
    he did not live with them.  It  was  noted  that  both  the  twins  had
    behavioural and communication difficulties.  There  were  a  number  of
    reports which were considered by  the  Judge  including  an  education,
    health and care  plan  for  RR(1)  issued  on  5th  September  2016;  a
    paediatric assessment clinic report dated 3rd  June  2016  relating  to
    RR(2); a letter dated 18th July 2016 relating to RR(2) and referral  to
    the autism and related disorder service.  There were also various other
    reports which were dated 26th July 2016 and 24th June 2016.  There  was
    an occupational therapy report dated 3rd June 2016 relating to R(1) and
    a further report  a  social  communication  clinic  report  dated  20th
    October 2014.  Of significance also, for the conclusions of the  Judge,
    was the social care assessment report of 9th May 2017.

23.  Although Ms A did not attend the hearing the Judge  has  made  specific
    reference to an e-mail from her dated 19th October 2016.  She refers to
    the twins having autism and maintains that  the  appellant  was  always
    very active with school runs and appointments and that it was  hard  to
    look after the children without his help.  Given the difficulties  with
    the twins it was very difficult coping particularly when the  appellant
    was in custody.   Although  she  comes  from  a  large  family  it  was
    impossible for the twins to be left with anyone.

24.  In terms of M he misses his father.  He  likes  playing  with  him  and
    enjoys being with him.

25.  This is of course  an  e-mail  written  whilst  the  appellant  was  in
    custody and, in one sense, it is the social care assessment  report  of
    9th May 2017 which sets out the more current situation so  far  as  the
    children were concerned.  No concerns were raised about the children or
    the care they were receiving from their mother.

26.  Ms A had six sisters who lived locally to her and were all noted to  be
    present in the children's lives and  who  provided  emotional  support.
    The family was very close.  Ms A and the  appellant  were  assessed  as
    being attentive and loving parents.

27.  In the concluding parts of  the  report,  the  author  noted  that  the
    appellant was  focussed  on  engaging  with  his  probation  and  drugs
    services in order to free himself of addiction.  He was observed to  be
    a loving, attentive and hands on parent.  It was felt that if Ms A  had
    concerns about his presence in her children's lives she  would  respond
    accordingly.   The appellant's evidence was noted that he and Ms A  had
    a good relationship and communicated well. He indicated that he saw the
    three youngest children nearly every day as he dropped them  at  school
    and at weekends they would come to stay with him.  It was  an  informal
    arrangement to give Ms A some respite at the weekend.   In  support  of
    that particular relationship the appellant relied upon the evidence  of
    a Mr B and Ms B who were next door neighbours to Ms A.

28.  Those witnesses  gave  evidence  but  the  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    credibility of what they had had to say as to the  involvement  of  the
    appellant with the children.  It was observed that it  was  unfortunate
    that  Ms  A  had  not  provided  up-to-date  information   about   that
    relationship.  The  Judge  found  Mr  B's  evidence  to  be  vague  and
    particularly unhelpful as to the extent  to  which  the  appellant  was
    currently involved with his children.  Though the impression  had  been
    given that he observed the appellant take the children to school,  that
    would not seem not to be the case when  questioned  about  the  matter.
    According to Mr B, however, he had  visited  some  three  weeks  or  so
    before the hearing and the appellant  and  children  had  been  at  the
    house.  He unable to say when pressed when he last  saw  the  appellant
    take any of the children to the school as his children were  no  longer
    at the same school as M.

29.  The Judge considered the evidence of Ms B and found her evidence to  be
    vague and not consistent on that same topic.

30.  Ms W spoke also of the appellant seeing the three children,  regularly.
     The Judge gave little weight to that evidence, particularly as it  did
    not sit well with the lack of up-to-date supporting evidence  from  the
    mother (or guardians) of any of the children.

31.  Essentially the Judge, having analysed the  evidence  on  that  matter,
    came to the conclusion that she was unable to rely upon the appellant's
    account as being truthful and reliable and did not find that there  was
    any significant or current contact with the three younger children.

32.  It seems to me that that was a factual assessment which the  Judge  was
    entitled to make on the evidence when considered as a whole.  It  might
    have been the position, as accepted by the respondent in  the  original
    decision, was found not to be quite so at the hearing of the appeal.

33.  The Judge found no evidence of subsisting  parental  relationship  with
    R, T or N and also considered J for who the appellant is not  J's  main
    carer.  There was no evidence from J's mother or  guardian  to  confirm
    the ongoing nature of any relationship between him and his father.

34.  As the Judge noted, however, whether or not there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  another  issue  that  was  required   to   be
    considered under paragraph 398 was whether or not it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    appellant's presence and support.

35.  Challenge is made to the findings of the  Judge  in  relation  to  that
    matter on the basis that the Judge had used best interests rather  than
    unduly harsh and had ignored the evidence from Ms A in  the  e-mail  of
    19th October 2016.

36.  I find little merit in that challenge.  It  is  clear  that  the  Judge
    specifically noted in the determination the evidence from Ms A of  19th
    October 2016.  What was however particularly relevant was  the  absence
    of any up-to-date statement from her as  to  the  current  relationship
    between the appellant, herself and the children or, indeed  any  up-to-
    date assessment as  to  their  needs.   The  Judge  found  it  somewhat
    undermining of  the  strong  position,  as  seemingly  adopted  by  the
    appellant, that Ms A did not attend the hearing to lend her support  to
    him.  The Judge could only go on the  situation  as  presented  in  the
    various reports that were before her.

37.  Although the  Judge  does,  from  time  to  time,  refer  to  the  best
    interests of the children in the analysis, it is  entirely  clear  that
    the context of that concern is to determine whether or not the  absence
    of the appellant  would  create  difficulties  or  problems  for  them.
    Indeed the Judge at paragraph 45 indicates that it would not be  unduly
    harsh on any of the children were the appellant to  be  deported.   She
    was not persuaded that the appellant currently had any real input  into
    the lives of any of the children or that contact could not otherwise be
    made through modern forms of communication.  The Judge noted  that  the
    contact,  even  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  account,  was  an
    occasional contact although the children lived with their mother.

38.  The Judge returned the issue of unduly harsh in  paragraph  47  of  the
    determination  and  found  that  appellant  had  not  shown  that   his
    deportation would be unduly harsh on any of his children  or  that  the
    emotional or mental symptoms suffered by any of them, and  particularly
    RR(1) and RR (2) would be made significantly worse by his absence.  The
    Judge noted the sadness of M  when  his  father  was  away,  but  found
    nothing to indicate that the absence of the appellant  would  have  any
    duly harsh effect upon the lives of any of the  children  or  in  their
    development.

39.  The Judge assessed the evidence in  the  round  including  the  medical
    reports and letters and  statements.   The  Judge  noted  the  help  of
    mothers, guardians, external agents  or  support  providers  and  found
    nothing to indicate that his absence would be unduly harsh.  It  is  to
    be noted of course that the appellant had been absent from the lives of
    his children for some two years whilst in custody.  The  children  were
    either on special measures or being supported or assisted by others.

40.   I find that the conclusion by the Judge that it would  not  be  unduly
    harsh for Ms A or  the  children  to  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
    appellant was a conclusion properly reasoned and open to the  Judge  to
    conclude. The Judge found no very compelling circumstances  within  the
    meaning of paragraph 398

41.  The Judge considered also the provisions of Section 117C  and  399A  of
    the Rules.

42.  Further the Judge considered quite  properly  whether  there  were  any
    very compelling circumstances over and above  399(a)  and  399(A)  that
    that should be applied in favour of the appellant.  In that  connection
    the Judge considered the appellant's mother and her needs, Ms A and her
    needs and indeed the steps  taken  by  the  appellant  to  address  his
    offending behaviour. No such compelling circumstances were found

43.  The determination is a comprehensive and a detailed one addressing  all
    the relevant issues, as such I find there to be no error of law.

44.  It has been contended by the solicitors in their various  letters  that
    there may be more relevant evidence to come.  That  can  of  course  be
    presented by way of an application for a fresh claim.  It is  a  matter
    of speculation what that evidence is or indeed the  relevance  of  such
    evidence to an error of law determination.


Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal before the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  on  human
rights grounds is upheld.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                          Date 7th December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
