
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00358/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 23 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  dean [m]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Professor W Rees instructed by Chris & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  brought  with  the
    permission of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge N  J  Bennett)  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Loughridge)  which  allowed
    the appeal of the  respondent  (hereafter  "the  claimant")  against  a
    decision taken on 20 December 2017 to refuse  his  human  rights  claim
    under Art 8 of the ECHR following a decision  refusing  to  revoke  the
    deportation order made against the claimant.

 2. The claimant's history can be briefly  stated  as  follows.   He  is  a
    citizen of Jamaica who was born on 16 August 1976.  He  first  came  to
    the United Kingdom in 2001 as a visitor.   His  leave  for  six  months
    expired and he overstayed.

 3. On 14 November 2013, the claimant was convicted at  the  Bristol  Crown
    Court of conspiracy to supply a Class  A  controlled  drug  and  on  19
    November 2003 was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of five years and
    six months and recommended for deportation.

 4. A decision was taken to deport the claimant  and  a  deportation  order
    made on 22 February 2005.  The claimant appealed  but,  on  12  October
    2005, the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal confirmed that  the  claimant
    had withdrawn his appeal.

 5. On 22 December 2005, the claimant was deported to Jamaica.

 6. In October 2006, the claimant married Ms P,  a  British  citizen.   The
    marriage took place in Jamaica where she visited the claimant  together
    with their son ("JQ") who was born on 15 October 2003.

 7. Sometime in 2007, the claimant entered the United Kingdom in breach  of
    the deportation order.

 8. On 17 October 2008, the claimant and Ms P had a second son ("JV").

 9. On 31 March 2015, the claimant's representatives  made  submissions  to
    the Secretary of State under Art 8 and sought  the  revocation  of  the
    deportation order made against him.

10. Those submissions were rejected on 20 December 2017  and  it  was  that
    decision that the claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Judge's Decision

11. Judge Loughridge  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  under  Art  8.   He
    accepted that the claimant had a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    with Ms P and also had a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with his two children, JQ and JV.

12. In approaching Art 8, and in particular the issue  of  proportionality,
    the judge applied the regime set out in Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  NIA  Act  2002").   The  judge
    recognised that, as a result of the claimant having been  convicted  of
    an offence and sentenced to five years and six months' imprisonment, he
    was a foreign national  offender  and  that  the  claimant  could  only
    succeed if he established the requirements set out in s.117C(6) of  the
    NIA Act 2002.  The judge accepted that the claimant could  not  succeed
    simply by establishing Exception 1  in  s.117C(4)  or  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(5).  He recognised that the claimant could only  succeed  if  he
    met the requirements in s.117C(6) which provides that:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2."

13. The judge approached the claimant's case first, on the basis of whether
    he fell within Exception 1 or Exception 2, in  particular  the  latter.
    Thereafter,  having  concluded  that  the  claimant   could   establish
    Exception 2, the judge went on to consider  whether  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances, over and above" that Exception.

14. Exception 2 focuses upon the impact of deportation upon  a  "qualifying
    child".  It was accepted both JQ and JV were that  as  they  were  both
    under  the  age  of  18  and  are  British  citizens  (see  s.117D(1)).
    Exception 2 is in the following terms:

         "Exception 2 applies where C  has  ...  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the ... child would be unduly harsh."

15. At [17]-[19] the judge concluded that it would  be  "unduly  harsh"  to
    expect the children to remain in the  UK  without  the  claimant.   The
    judge said this:

         "17. The issue for me  to  determine  is  whether  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances against the Appellant's removal  from
             the UK.  The first factor for me to consider is the  children,
             specifically whether it would be unduly harsh for them to live
             in Jamaica, and whether it would be unduly harsh for  them  to
             remain in the UK without the Appellant.   These  are  the  two
             'limbs' of paragraph 399(a), and a similar issue arises  under
             section 117C(5).

         18.  [JQ] is now 14 years old and has lived his whole life  in  the
             UK.  He is a British citizen.  He attends secondary school and
             will be starting his GCSEs in September 2018.  He is  unlikely
             to have any significant knowledge or experience of the culture
             in Jamaica and moving to  that  country  would  be  enormously
             disruptive for him.  It is not in my view remotely  realistic,
             or fair, to expect him to go to live in Jamaica,  and  I  find
             that doing so would indeed be  unduly  harsh,  and  very  much
             against his best interests.  Much the same  can  be  said  for
             [JV] albeit as a nine-year-old the disruption would  be  at  a
             slightly lower level.

         19.  As for the children remaining in the UK without the Appellant,
             other than when [JQ] was a very young child the Appellant  has
             always been in their lives and he has been an  active  father.
             [Ms P] says, and I accept, that the children need  a  positive
             male role model and that there would be a negative  impact  on
             them if the Appellant has to go  back  to  Jamaica.   This  is
             particularly the case for [JQ] who she describes  as  being  a
             typical teenager, thinking that he knows it all,  and  needing
             his father in his life to keep him on the straight and  narrow
             at a time when there is a lot of peer pressure.   I  recognise
             that [Ms P] herself is a committed parent and appears to be  a
             very stable  and  hard-working  influence,  and  that  if  the
             Appellant returned to Jamaica she would do the best she can as
             a single parent, and is likely to have some support  from  her
             mother.  However, it is widely acknowledged  that  it  is  far
             better for children to have both  parents  involved  in  their
             lives and this argument is particularly strong in the case  of
             a male teenager and his father.  This obviously depends on the
             father being a positive influence which is not inevitable  but
             is, in my view, very much the position in this  case.   Taking
             all of this into account I find that expecting the children to
             remain in the UK without the Appellant would be unduly  harsh,
             and very much against their best interests."

16. Recognising that that was not sufficient for the  claimant  to  succeed
    because of s.117C(6) (see [20]), the judge went on to consider  whether
    there were "very compelling circumstances" at [21] - [28] and reached a
    finding in the claimant's favour:

         "21. Clearly under the Rules themselves the relationship  with  [Ms
             P] attracts little weight because it was formed at a time when
             the Appellant's  immigration  status  was  unlawful/precarious
             (see paragraph 399(b)(i)).  Similarly,  the  Rules  themselves
             make  no  provision  for  any  weight  to  be  given  to   the
             Appellant's broader private life, such as the help he provides
             to his mother-in-law and her elderly uncle.

         22.  I recognise that  in  a  case  of  deportation  of  a  foreign
             criminal  the  Article  8  balancing  exercise  is   different
             compared  with  a  case  of  effective  immigration   control.
             However, the difference, essentially, is that  the  weight  of
             the  factors  against  removal  needs  to  be  greater  in   a
             deportation case because the need to be able to deport foreign
             criminals is greater than the need for  effective  immigration
             control.  Accordingly, under Article 8 itself factors such  as
             [Ms P] and the Appellant's broader private life should not  be
             completely disregarded, and to do so would be  to  ignore  the
             'holistic'/rounded approach  required  under  Article  8.   In
             particular, it seems to me that the relationship with  [Ms  P]
             is properly regarded as an additional factor  because  I  have
             not yet specifically taken it into account elsewhere.  It is a
             relationship with potentially forms an  alternative  basis  to
             meeting the requirements of paragraph 399 (or section 117C(5))
             but given that those provisions have already been satisfied by
             the relationship with the children, the relationship with  [Ms
             P] needs to be 'added' to the assessment.  The important thing
             is that there  is  no  double  counting  and  approaching  the
             assessment in this way does not in my view cause this.  As for
             the help provided to the  Appellant's  mother-in-law  and  her
             uncle, there is no specific scope for this to  be  taken  into
             account under either paragraph 399 or section 117C(5), but  it
             is   legitimate   to   include    it    as    an    additional
             factor/circumstance as part  of  the  assessment  of  whether,
             overall there are very compelling circumstances.

         23.  I note with particular interest the comment by [Ms P's mother]
             that "my son-in-law is a very devoted father to his  children,
             and a loving husband to  my  daughter.   He  is  a  valid  and
             extremely important member to my family unit, which is a small
             family that only consists of myself,  my  daughter,  my  uncle
             [and] my two grandsons".

         24.  Giving due weight to the relationship  with  [Ms  P]  and  the
             Appellant's broader private life, the case is  very  near  the
             'tipping point' and is finely balanced.

         25.  However, the key deciding this Article 8 appeal is in my  view
             to look carefully at the factors in favour  of  removal.   The
             starting point  in  a  deportation  case  is  that  there  are
             fundamentally two reasons for removal: firstly, as a deterrent
             to others and a positive expression of society's  condemnation
             of serious  criminal  activity;  and  secondly,  in  order  to
             prevent re-offending and thereby protect society from  further
             harm from the individual in question.

         26.  It is highly significant that since  re-entering  the  UK  the
             Appellant has not been in any trouble of  any  kind  with  the
             police.  I do not regard this as  a  positive  factor  in  his
             favour but it strongly suggests that in this  particular  case
             preventing re-offending is not a  weighty  factor.   In  other
             words, the Respondent's case must logically rest solely on the
             factor of deterrence of others  and  condemnation  of  serious
             criminal activity.  The consequence of this is  that  somewhat
             less weight is required on the other side of the  balance,  in
             the Appellant's favour, than would otherwise be the case.

         27.  I acknowledge that the Appellant returned to the UK in 2007 in
             breach of the deportation order.  However,  it  was  precisely
             because of his commitment to his  family  that  he  took  that
             decision, even though he knew it was wrong.  I do not  condone
             his actions but it is important to recognise that what he  did
             was for the  'right'  reasons,  in  terms  of  seeking  to  be
             reunited with his wife and young son.  It was not  a  case  of
             returning to the UK to continue a life of crime.  I am sure it
             was not a decision he took lightly, and that he did so out  of
             considerable emotional desperation.

         28.  Taking all these factors into account and  giving  appropriate
             weight  to  each  I  conclude  that  there  are  indeed   very
             compelling  circumstances   against   removal.    It   is   an
             exceptional  case  and  one  in  which,  looking  beneath  the
             'veneer' of a deported criminal who  returned  to  the  UK  in
             blatant contravention of a deportation order  and  then  lived
             here clandestinely for many years, there  is  a  more  complex
             story and an individual who is part of a  small  and  closely-
             bonded family in  which  he  plays  an  important  significant
             role."

17. At [29]-[35], the judge went on to consider submissions that were  made
    on  the  claimant's  behalf  concerning  the  weight  to  be  given  to
    mitigation put forward by the claimant which,  in  effect,  would  have
    required the judge to look  behind  the  sentencing  judge's  comments.
    Correctly, the judge declined to do so and did not  take  such  matters
    into account.

The Submissions

18. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Aboni submitted that the  judge
    had been wrong in law to find that  the  claimant  met  the  very  high
    threshold of "very compelling circumstances" over and  above  Exception
    2.  In fact, Ms Aboni submitted, the judge had been  wrong  in  law  to
    even  find  that  the  impact  upon  the  claimant's  children  of  his
    deportation  was  "unduly  harsh".   She  accepted  that  the  children
    (together with Ms P) could not be expected to relocate to Jamaica  but,
    she submitted, the impact upon them of remaining in the UK  with  their
    mother (but without the claimant) was not such as to be "unduly harsh".
     They could, she submitted, continue their life in the  UK  with  their
    mother and could maintain contact with their father including  visiting
    him in Jamaica.

19. On behalf of the claimant, Professor Rees submitted that the judge  had
    carefully  and  properly  considered  the  high  threshold   of   "very
    compelling circumstances". He  submitted  that,  having  accepted  that
    there was a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
    children, the judge had properly identified the factors, especially  at
    [22], [23] and [28]  that  demonstrated  that  the  circumstances  went
    beyond the "unduly harsh" which the judge had found in  the  claimant's
    favour at [19].  Professor Rees submitted that the children were 15 and
    10 years old respectively and there was the risk of them  falling  into
    bad company if they had no father.  Professor Rees also referred to the
    fact that the  claimant's  conviction  was  in  2005.   Professor  Rees
    submitted that the judge had correctly directed himself  in  accordance
    with s.117C(6) and had reached a reasonable and rational  finding  that
    its terms were met.

Discussion

20. There was no real issue between the parties as to  the  application  of
    Part 5A of the NIA Act 2002 to the claimant.  As  is  well  recognised,
    Part 5A sets  out  a  number  of  considerations  generally  irrelevant
    (s.117B) and those additionally relevant to deportation cases  (s.117C)
    and which a Court or Tribunal "must (in particular) have regard" to  in
    determining whether any interference with an individual's  private  and
    family life is justified under Art 8.2 (see s.117A).

21. It is equally uncontentious that the "considerations" are relevant  not
    only when an individual is subject to deportation but  also  when  they
    seek to revoke an existing deportation order.

22. Of particular reference is s.117C which provides as follows:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)      The more serious the offence committed  by  a foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C")  who  has not
                  been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  four  years
                  or more, the  public  interest  requires  C's  deportation
                  unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)       C  has  been  lawfully  resident  in  the United
                      Kingdom for most of C's life,

                  (b)      C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in the
                      United Kingdom, and

                  (c)      there would be very significant obstacles  to C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)       Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine and
                  subsisting relationship with a qualifying  partner,  or  a
                  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with   a
                  qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                  partner or child would be unduly harsh.

             (6)      In the  case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who  has been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four
                  years, the public  interest  requires  deportation  unless
                  there are very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above
                  those described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted."

23. As will be clear from s.117C(6), where  an  individual  is  subject  to
    deportation and has been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of "at  least  four  years",
    the public interest requires their deportation unless there  are  "very
    compelling circumstances" which are "over and above" those described in
    Exceptions 1 and 2.

24. For the purposes of this appeal, the central issue concerned  Exception
    2 where the person subject to deportation has a "genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship" with a "qualifying child, as JQ and JV are,  and
    whether the effect of deportation on the child would be "unduly harsh".
     Of course, simply to establish that the individual's deportation would
    be "unduly harsh" on the qualifying child is not sufficient because  of
    the terms of s.117C(6).

25. As the Court of Appeal made plain in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 662 at [37], in the case of a person  to  which  s.117C(6)  applies
    because he has been sentenced to "at least four years' imprisonment":

         "It will often be sensible first to see whether his  case  involves
         circumstances of a kind described  in  Exceptions  1  and  2,  both
         because  the  circumstances  so  described  set  out   particularly
         significant factors bearing upon respect of private life (Exception
         1) and respect for family life (Exception 2) and because  that  may
         provide a helpful basis on which an assessment can be made  whether
         there are 'very compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and  2'  as  is  required  under  Section
         117C(6).  It will then be necessary to look to see whether  any  of
         the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and 2 are  of  such  force,
         whether by themselves  or  taken  in  conjunction  with  any  other
         relevant factors not covered  by  the  circumstances  described  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy the test in section 117C(6)."

26. Exception 2 - and the requirement that the  effect  on  the  qualifying
    child be "unduly harsh" - was considered by the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  There, the  Supreme  Court
    adopted the "authoritative guidance" given by the Upper Tribunal in  MK
    (Sierra Leone) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) and applied in MAB (USA)  v
    SSHD [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC).  In MK, the Tribunal said that:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.  Rather,  it  possesses  a  considerably  more  elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

27. Both the Upper Tribunal in MK and in MAB noted that  the  effect  on  a
    "qualifying child" must be "excessive, inordinate or severe"  in  order
    for the effect to be "unduly harsh" (see e.g. [80] of MAB).

28. These passages were approved by the Supreme Court at [27]-[29] in which
    the Supreme Court also resolved, authoritatively,  that  the  issue  of
    whether the effect on a "qualifying child" is "unduly harsh" looks only
    to the position of the child  and  there  is  "no  balancing  exercise"
    taking into account the public interest.

29. At [23], Lord Carnwath (with whom Lords Kerr, Wilson, Reed  and  Briggs
    agreed) distinguished between the test of whether it  was  "reasonable"
    to expect a child to leave the UK (as in s.117C(6)) and the requirement
    that the effect of deportation be "unduly  harsh"  (as  in  s.117C(5)).
    The latter imposed a more onerous test.  Lord Carnwath said this:

         "Further the word 'unduly' comprise an element of  comparison.   It
         assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is a level
         which may be acceptable or justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.
         'Unduly' implies something going beyond that level.   The  relevant
         context is that set by section 117C(1), that is the public interest
         in the deportation of foreign criminals.   One  is  looking  for  a
         degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved
         for any child faced with the deportation of a parent."

30. It is of course self-evident that in order to establish that there  are
    "very compelling circumstances, over and above" Exception 2, the impact
    must be more than "unduly harsh" and therefore the test sets  a  hurdle
    of required impact going even beyond Exception 2,  albeit  that  hurdle
    may have regard to other factors not directly relevant under  Exception
    2.

31. In my judgment, Judge Loughridge fell into error in concluding that the
    impact upon JQ and JV would be "unduly harsh",  let  alone  that  there
    were "very compelling  circumstances"  (even  having  regard  to  other
    factors) over and above Exception 2.

32. Leaving aside [18] which is concerned with whether it would be  "unduly
    harsh" to expect JQ and JV to relocate to Jamaica (which the  Secretary
    of State now accepts cannot be expected), [19]  sets  out  the  factors
    which led the judge to conclude  that  the  impact  of  the  claimant's
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon them.  I have set the  passage
    out in full above.  In my judgment, the factors set out in  [19]  could
    not rationally be described as creating an "unduly harsh"  impact  upon
    JQ and JV.  The judge, of course, recognises that to separate a  caring
    father from his two sons aged 15 and 10 would  not  be  in  their  best
    interests.   It  would  be  difficult  to  contemplate  any   different
    conclusion unless there  was  something  about  the  relationship  that
    called into question their continued contact with their  father.   None
    is, of course, suggested here.  But, in effect, the  judge's  reasoning
    in para [19] recognises no more than the inevitable effect upon JQ  and
    JV of the claimant's deportation.  It is the  kind  of  separation  and
    impact which unavoidably follows from deportation.  That cannot, in  my
    judgment, be rationally brought within the high threshold  accepted  in
    KO (Nigeria) where the enquiry is to search for "a degree of  harshness
    going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced
    with a  deportation  of  a  parent"  (per  Lord  Carnwath  at  [23]  in
    KO(Nigeria)) and which can reasonably and rationally be described as an
    "excessive, inordinate or severe" impact.  Nothing in para [19] of  the
    judge's determination comes even close, in my judgment, to establishing
    that high threshold.

33. Further, the judge's reasons in [21]-[28], cannot sustain  his  finding
    that there were "very compelling circumstances" over and above those in
    Exception  2.   The  judge  recognised  at  [22]  that  the  claimant's
    deportation would have an effect on Ms P and to some  extent  upon  the
    family of the claimant's  spouse.   At  [23],  the  judge  went  on  to
    recognise the importance of the family's unit but this adds  little  to
    the conclusion in relation to Exception 2.   Then,  at  para  [28]  the
    judge appears to give his reasons for concluding that  the  requirement
    in s.117C(6) was met.  I have already set out his reasons above  but  I
    repeat them here for convenience:

         "It is an exceptional case and one in which,  looking  beneath  the
         'veneer' of a deported criminal who returned to the UK  in  blatant
         contravention  of  a  deportation  order  and   then   lived   here
         clandestinely for many years, there is a more complex story and  an
         individual who is part of a small and close-bonded family in  which
         he plays an important and significant role."

34. That again, with respect to the judge,  is  to  state  the  normal  and
    ordinary situation when, in the context of a  family  where  there  are
    genuine relationships not only between spouses and with their  children
    but also with other family members, there is an inevitable impact  upon
    those relationships by as a result of an individual's deportation.

35. At para [34] the judge again returned to the issue under s.117C(6)  and
    stated that:

         "34. Deporting the Appellant would utterly tear  apart  the  family
             and would have a hugely detrimental effect on [JQ]  and  [JV],
             such that I would have serious concerns about the paths  their
             lives might take in the next few years.  The circumstances  of
             this case can be regarded as very compelling circumstances but
             additionally/alternatively they  are  circumstances  in  which
             deportation  would  be  disproportionate  in  the  context  of
             Article 8 itself, particularly bearing in mind the absence  of
             any risk of the Appellant re-offending.   I  acknowledge  that
             the fact  that  he  returned  to  the  UK  in  breach  of  the
             deportation order is a serious matter but, taking into account
             the desperate circumstances in which he found himself, and his
             motives, it is not something which tips  the  balance  against
             him."

36. As Ms Aboni submitted, the judge's statement that the impact  upon  the
    claimant's deportation would have a "hugely detrimental effect"  on  JQ
    and JV was not particularised by the judge.  It is wholly unclear to me
    what evidence, set out in his determination, could have justified  such
    a characterisation of the impact upon  them.   The  judge's  words  can
    reflect no more than that which he had previously concluded in [19] and
    which went no further than recognising the  inevitable  impact  of  the
    claimant's deportation on his children.

37. In my judgment, the circumstances  of  the  claimant's  children  taken
    together with such impact as the judge  recognises  on  the  claimant's
    spouse and her family could not rationally amount to  "very  compelling
    circumstances" over and above those in Exception 2.

38. I do not  accept  Professor  Rees'  submission  that  the  age  of  the
    appellant's offending (he was convicted in 2005) affects whether  there
    were "very compelling circumstances".  Of course, if the  Secretary  of
    State inordinately delayed in seeking to  deport  an  individual,  that
    might be relevant in assessing the public interest and,  at  least  for
    these purposes I am prepared to assume, would be relevant  in  applying
    the "very compelling circumstances" test in s.117C(6).  Here,  however,
    there was no such delay.  The claimant was convicted in  November  2003
    and  sentenced  to  five  years  and  six  months'  imprisonment.   The
    deportation order was made in February 2005  and  he  was  deported  in
    December 2005.  He then returned in breach of that deportation order in
    2007.  His further representations were not made until March 2015.   It
    was only at that point that he sought to  have  the  deportation  order
    revoked.  The judge explored with the claimant why he had  delayed  and
    set out his response at para [4] of his  determination.   The  claimant
    confirmed that he was "keeping his head down" because  he  was  worried
    that he might be deported again.  That behaviour by the claimant simply
    cannot assist him in establishing "very compelling circumstances" or in
    any way dilute the public  interest  recognised  by  the  very  serious
    criminal offence and sentence he received.

39. For these reasons, therefore, the judge erred in law  in  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal by  concluding  that  the  public  interest  did  not
    require his deportation because he fell within s.117C(6).

40. In response to a question from me, Professor Rees acknowledged that  if
    the Secretary of State's grounds were made out, not only had the  judge
    materially erred in law but the decision would necessarily have  to  be
    remade dismissing the  appeal.   That,  in  my  judgment,  is  entirely
    correct.  As I have already  indicated,  the  claimant's  circumstances
    could not rationally fall within Exception 2  in  s.117C(5)  and,  even
    having regard to other factors, his circumstances were  not  rationally
    capable of amounting to "very compelling circumstances, over and  above
    those described in Exceptions 1 and 2" as set out in s.117C(6).

41. In my judgment, therefore, the judge's decision must be both set  aside
    and remade dismissing the appellant's appeal.  The only proper  factual
    finding on the evidence before the judge (and which  I  make)  is  that
    there were not "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2".  It follows, in my judgment, that the
    public interest engaged by the claimant's very serious  criminality  is
    not outweighed and so his deportation is a  proportionate  interference
    with his private and family life in the UK.  No breach  of  Art  8  has
    been established.

Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the claimant's  appeal
    under Art 8 involved the making of an error of law.   It  cannot  stand
    and is set aside.

43. I remake the decision dismissing the claimant's appeal under Art  8  of
    the ECHR.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            10, January 2019

