
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00928/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 10 January 2019                    |On 24 January 2019                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                            MRS LETICIA TIEKUBEA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Kathiva, counsel instructed by Jeff-Leonard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre, promulgated on  20  April  2018.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge ID Boyes.



Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

 3. On 7 February 2013, the appellant entered the United Kingdom with leave
    to enter as a student, valid until 30 October  2014.  She  was  granted
    further leave to remain in the same capacity until 4 April 2016.  Prior
    to her leave to remain expiring, the appellant sought further leave  to
    remain as the partner of a British citizen.

 4. The Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's  application  on  26
    September 2016 primarily on the basis that  the  relationship  was  not
    genuine and subsisting. Furthermore, the respondent considered that the
    appellant had provided no evidence to show  that  she  would  have  any
    problems reintegrating in Ghana. There were said to be  no  exceptional
    circumstances.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge  noted  the
    absence of witness statements in the appellant's bundle  and  that  the
    statements served at the hearing did  not  address  the  issues  raised
    following the marriage interview.  The judge put the matter back in the
    list for counsel for the appellant  to  handwrite  further  statements.
    Thereafter the appellant and  her  partner  gave  evidence.  The  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal,  concluding  that  theirs  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience for a  series  of  reasons,  which  included  some  of  the
    inconsistencies highlighted in the refusal letter.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge ought to have adjourned the
    appeal on the basis that the appellant would not have a  fair  hearing.
    The  reasons  given  included   serious   allegations   regarding   the
    appellant's legal representatives. It was said that the  appellant  was
    not advised that witnesses were required; that there had been a failure
    to prepare a "proper" bundle of documents; that there were  no  witness
    statements which could stand as evidence-in-chief and  owing  to  these
    factors the appellant was in no state of mind to give evidence  at  her
    hearing.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The error of law hearing was initially heard on 25  July  2018  in  the
    appellant's  absence.  That  decision  was  set  aside  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7 November 2018 because the appellant had  not  received
    the notice of hearing.

The hearing

 9. Prior to the hearing, the  appellant  sought  an  adjournment  for  the
    purpose of awaiting  a  response  to  her  complaint  from  her  former
    solicitors, namely Adam Bernard Solicitors. Ultimately, the  said  firm
    responded by way of a letter dated 19 December 2018 and the application
    was not renewed.

10. Mr Duffy had yet to see the response from Adam Bernard and I  gave  him
    time to peruse it before inviting submissions.

11. Mr Kathiva relied on the grant of  permission  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boyes and referred to the  decision  in  BT  (Former  solicitors'
    alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311.  He  submitted  that  the
    appellant received woefully inadequate representation; that the  former
    solicitors appeared to accept that the appellant was not  prepared  for
    the hearing; the witness statements did not address the issues and,  in
    any event, were not submitted; photographs and witnesses were available
    but the appellant was not advised as to  their  relevance.  Mr  Kathiva
    advised me that the current instructing solicitors had been  unable  to
    obtain  information  from  counsel  who   represented   the   appellant
    previously because of legal privilege and the back-sheet referred to in
    Adam Bernards' response to the complaint  had  not  been  enclosed.  He
    argued that the judge's assessment of the alleged  inconsistencies  did
    not take into account cultural  difficulties  and  had  the  case  been
    adequately prepared,  a  different  view  could  have  been  taken.  He
    reminded me that counsel had had to handwrite  the  statements  at  the
    hearing; the process was materially flawed and that the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

  12. Mr Duffy firstly drew my attention to what was  said  at  [16(xi)]  in
      Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
      [2013] UKUT 00197(IAC) regarding the  high  threshold  for  complaints
      about the incompetence of previous  representatives.  He  argued  that
      witness statements were drafted,  albeit  which  did  not  answer  the
      points made by the Secretary of State. The appellant was not prevented
      from addressing points in her oral evidence, which she had. It did not
      seem that calling additional witnesses would address anything  as  the
      judge was concerned with a lack of familiarity between  the  appellant
      and her husband.

  13. At the end of the hearing I announced that the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal was unsafe, that the appellant had an unfair hearing and
      that had her appeal been professionally prepared it might have led  to
      a different outcome. My reasons are set out below.

      Decision on error of law

  14. I have had regard to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 regarding  the  power  the
      First-tier Tribunal has to adjourn or postpone  a  hearing  under  its
      case management powers. Regard should have been had to the  overriding
      objective set out in Rule 2 requiring the Tribunal to deal with  cases
      fairly and justly.

  15. I have also considered the decision in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: Fairness)
      [2014] UKUT 00418  (IAC).  The  crucial  question  being  whether  the
      refusal of an adjournment deprived the affected party of a right to  a
      fair hearing and not whether it was reasonable of the  judge  to  have
      proceeded with the hearing.




  16. I have also taken into consideration the  Presidential  Guidance  note
      no. 1 of 2014 and note that factors  weighing  against  adjourning  an
      appeal include where a party seeks "more time to  prepare  the  appeal
      when adequate time has already been given."   At  the  same  time  the
      Guidance states that a failure to comply with directions will  not  be
      sufficient of itself to refuse an adjournment.

  17. In this case, there is no indication that an  adjournment  application
      was made. Perhaps it ought to have been. The former solicitors did not
      provide the back-sheet from counsel who attended the  hearing  despite
      indicating that  it  had  been  enclosed  in  their  response  to  the
      appellant's complaint.

  18. Mr Duffy's submissions rested on what was said at [16(xi)]  of  Azimi-
      Moayed;

         "Although we do not rule out that unfairness could  be  established
         through the incompetence of the advocate, there is a high threshold
         to establish. ... there must be demonstrated incompetence such as a
         course of action that no reasonable advocate would have taken."

  19. Those representing the appellant have acted in  accordance  with  what
      was said in the headnote in BT (former solicitors alleged  misconduct)
      Nepal UKIAT 00311; that being; "If an appeal is based in whole  or  in
      part on allegations about the conduct of former representatives, there
      must be evidence that those allegations have been put  to  the  former
      representative, and the Tribunal must be shown either the response  or
      correspondence indicating that there has been no response."

  20. In this case, the appellant criticises her  former  solicitors  rather
      than  the  advocate.  Those  criticisms  include  that  she   attended
      appointments at the offices of Adam Bernard on several occasions prior
      to the hearing date without being seen.  She further complains that as
      late as the day prior to the hearing, no witness statement nor  bundle
      had been prepared,  whereas  she  had  provided  the  solicitors  with
      documents a month earlier.  While  a  statement  was  taken  from  the
      appellant late into the evening prior to the  hearing,  the  appellant
      did not see it until the day of the hearing. She was also expected  to
      produce photocopies for her counsel and for  the  Tribunal.  Mr  Qamar
      Bilal Hashmi replied to the appellant's complaint on  behalf  of  Adam
      Bernard Solicitors.  The response admits that the  witness  statements
      were drafted the day before the hearing, that no copies were provided,
      that there were difficulties in making photocopies on the  morning  of
      the hearing and that the judge had permitted 3 hours for the  drafting
      of further statements. The response also questions  the  relevance  of
      calling witnesses. There is  no  recognition  in  this  response  that
      witness statements fully  addressing  the  reasons  for  refusal  were
      necessary and that the appellant's evidence was required to be  served
      on the  Tribunal  in  advance  of  the  hearing,  in  accordance  with
      directions.

  21. As rightly stated by the judge at [7] of the decision and reasons, the
      witness statements did not address even one  of  the  numerous  issues
      identified by the respondent in the reasons for refusal letter.

  22. Where the judge erred was to decide that the omissions in the  refusal
      letter could be addressed by counsel handwriting statements on the day
      of the hearing under pressure of time. Perhaps counsel ought  to  have
      resisted this pressure.

  23. As explained by the appellant in  her  complaint,  most  of  which  is
      inadvertently admitted by Adam Bernard, she had spent an hour  roaming
      the  streets  of  Hatton  Cross  prior  to  the  hearing  looking  for
      photocopying facilities and the  barrister  was  forced  to  hurriedly
      prepare a statement for the appellant and one for her partner so  that
      the appeal could proceed at 2pm. The reasons for  refusal  letter  did
      not list the issues but merely referred to  a  substantial  number  of
      question and answers by number. Fairness in this case required that an
      adjournment should have been granted for the purpose of  allowing  the
      appellant  and  her  husband  to  give  detailed  instructions   which
      addressed the respondent's  many  concerns,  rather  than  the  rushed
      attempt which was made on the day.  I  have  considered  whether  this
      course of action could have led to a different outcome and I find that
      it  could.  Many  of  the  alleged  inconsistencies  upon  which   the
      respondent and judge focused concerned the  appellant's  knowledge  of
      her  partner's  finances.  There  was  some  weight  in  Mr  Kathiva's
      submissions that cultural differences were not taken into account.  It
      also  might  well  have  assisted  the  appellant   if   witness   and
      photographic evidence was before the judge.

  24. Having regard to the case law and the 2014  Rules,  I  find  that  the
      decision to proceed with the appeal was unfair in the circumstances. I
      accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

  25. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      regarding remitting an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
      decision. However, I am satisfied that the effect  of  the  error  has
      been to deprive the appellant of  an  opportunity  to  have  her  case
      properly put and  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  is
      accordingly  an  appropriate  case  for  remittal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.

Conclusions


The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre.


Signed                                  Date 18 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
