
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00317/2018
     HU/00319/2018
     HU/00320/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th April 2019                           |On 17th April 2019            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                             Kripa Shankar Rana
                                 Bimal Rana
                                 Bharat Rana
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Jaisri, instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are brothers born respectively on 31 May 1987,  2  March
    1986 and 26 August 1984. They are citizens of Nepal and appeal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R Sullivan, dated 10  January
    2019, dismissing their appeals against the refusal of  entry  clearance
    on human rights grounds.


2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  for
    the following reasons:


         "Although it was open to the judge to comment on  the  presentation
         of the evidence by the Appellants' legal representatives, it is  at
         least arguable that she failed to make  findings  on  the  evidence
         given by the Appellants' father as to the up to date  situation  in
         light of (i) the finding that is  said  to  have  been  made  by  a
         previous Tribunal in 2016 that  family  life  existed  between  the
         Appellants and their parents; and (ii) the fact that the issue  did
         not appear to be raised by the Respondent in the decision  letters.
         Although the grounds are not well  particularised,  in  particular,
         the third ground is entirely general in nature, they  justify  more
         detailed consideration at a hearing."


Submissions

3.   Mr Jaisri submitted that the  Sponsor  had  demonstrated  in  his  oral
    evidence that he had frequent contact with the Appellants and this  was
    corroborated by the documentary evidence  of  telephone  calls  in  the
    supplementary bundle. The application for entry clearance  was  refused
    on the basis that the Appellants had failed to establish emotional  and
    financial  dependency  on  the  Sponsor.  The  judge's  conclusion   at
    paragraph 31(b), that there is no current documentary evidence that the
    Appellants received money transfers from the Sponsor, was  contrary  to
    the evidence in the Appellants' bundle which showed transfers  made  up
    until April 2018.

4.   Further, the judge failed to deal with the Sponsor's evidence that  the
    Appellants were emotionally and financially dependent  on  the  Sponsor
    which was contained in the Sponsor's witness statement in the following
    paragraphs, namely:


         "43. We feel settled and we feel that the  United  Kingdom  is  our
             home.  My wife and I require Kripa Shankar, Bimal and Bharat's
             practical support.  Kripa Shankar, Bimal and Bharat depend  on
             us emotionally and financially.


         44.   My  wife  and  I  communicate  with  our   children   through
             international calling and viber frequently to maintain contact
             with them. I enclose evidence to confirm this.


         45.  My wife and I have travelled to Nepal to  see  Kripa  Shankar,
             Bimal and Bharat in Nepal to spend time with them, our  travel
             history is as follows..."
             The history indicates visits in September  2012,  April  2014,
             February 2015, April 2016, January  2017  and  November  2017.
             All the visits last between one month and four months.

5.   Mr Jaisri submitted that the judge failed to deal  with  the  Sponsor's
    evidence and ignored the pattern that existed  of  money  transfers  up
    until April 2018. The previous decision  acknowledged  that  there  was
    dependency in  2016  such  that  it  gave  rise  to  family  life.  The
    documentary evidence showed  that  financial  dependency  continued  up
    until 2018 and this combined with the evidence in the Sponsor's witness
    statement at 43  onwards  was  sufficient  to  show  that  family  life
    continued between the Appellants and their Sponsor.

6.   Mr Jaisri referred to paragraph 31(c) of  the  judge's  decision  which
    states: "There is evidence indicating that the Sponsor was  unaware  of
    the 1st and 2nd Appellants' educational achievements; unaware that  one
    of them had attended college and  unaware  that  another  had  attended
    university.  Consequently I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  Sponsor  is
    closely involved with the Appellants' affairs or that he has  played  a
    role in helping them to make education choices." He submitted that  the
    judge could not go behind the previous decision  which  considered  the
    Appellants' educational achievements in 2015 and 2016 and the Sponsor's
    lack of knowledge of those achievements did  not  prevent  the  finding
    that there was family life at that stage.

7.   The only issue raised at the hearing was whether  there  was  emotional
    and financial dependency.  The documents  provided  showed  that  there
    was. There was no challenge by the Respondent in the refusal notice  as
    to whether the Appellants were married.  This matter was not put to the
    Sponsor and there was no evidence that  there  had  been  a  change  in
    circumstance since 2016.  Mr Jaisri  submitted  that  the  Sponsor  had
    asserted that family life still existed. There had been  no  change  in
    circumstances. The Appellants were still dependent  and  there  was  no
    specific challenge to say that the situation  had  changed.  The  judge
    erred in law in finding that there was no family life and  this  matter
    was not raised at the hearing.

8.   Mr Whitwell submitted that there was no  evidence  of  money  transfers
    between April and November 2018 or  up  until  January  2019  when  the
    decision was promulgated. The  judge  had  asked  for  the  documentary
    bundle to be resubmitted and  the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account the lack of evidence for that period.

9.   The fact that the  Sponsor  was  unaware  of  the  Appellants'  college
    courses could also be taken into account in deciding whether there  was
    emotional and financial dependency such that there was family life over
    and above normal emotional ties. Mr Whitwell accepted that  there  were
    no findings as to the Sponsor's assertions in  his  witness  statement,
    but this was not material because there was insufficient evidence given
    by the Sponsor which could result in a different conclusion.

10.  This was a human rights appeal and the judge was not under  a  duty  to
    give the Appellants an opportunity to  deal  with  issues  which  would
    inevitably arise under Article 8. There was a large bundle of documents
    and the judge may well have  given  some  documents  more  weight  than
    others.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  look  at  family   life   again
    notwithstanding the previous findings. Family life  moves  on  as  time
    progresses and all the Appellants were now over  the  age  of  30.  The
    judge had to assess the situation at the date of hearing. The judge was
    not satisfied that family life continued since  the  previous  decision
    because there was insufficient evidence to establish that.

11.  In response Mr Jaisri submitted that a lack of knowledge  in  2016  had
    not given rise to a finding that there  was  not  family  life  so  the
    Sponsor's lack of knowledge of the Appellants' educational achievements
    was not  relevant  now.  The  Appellants  were  directed  to  submit  a
    supplementary bundle in relation to evidence of contacts, namely  phone
    schedules, not  in  relation  to  further  remittances.  The  Sponsor's
    evidence in any event was enough to counter  any  lack  of  documentary
    evidence and his evidence was not challenged  orally.  The  judge  only
    appears to have considered evidence in relation to  education  and  not
    dealt with the assertion in the witness statement and said why this was
    not enough.  In  terms  of  emotional  and  financial  dependency  this
    amounted to an error of law.


Discussion and Conclusions

12.  This is a human rights appeal.  The relevant date  for  the  assessment
    of whether family life exists is the date of the hearing and the burden
    is on the Appellants to show that there is family life. The judge found
    that, on  the  evidence  before  him,  the  Appellants  had  failed  to
    establish family  life.  The  judge  took  into  account  the  previous
    decision and properly applied Devaseelan.

13.  The previous decision found that although there was family  life  there
    was insufficient evidence of historic injustice such that  the  refusal
    of entry clearance was proportionate. There was no evidence before  the
    previous Tribunal that, but for the  historic  injustice,  the  Sponsor
    would have applied for settlement sooner when the Appellants would  all
    have been dependent children.

14.  I find that the judge was not bound by the  finding  that  family  life
    existed in 2016 and was entitled to look at the  up-to-date  situation.
    The judge found that there  was  a  lack  of  documentary  evidence  to
    support the contention that there had been regular contact and  regular
    financial support. Whilst some of the  confusion  in  relation  to  the
    evidence could be the fault of the Appellants' representative's failure
    to submit clear and cogent bundles, the judge looked at  the  situation
    since the previous decision. He took  into  account  the  reduction  in
    financial support and the lack of remittances  since  April  2018.  The
    Sponsor and his wife had not visited since March 2018. The judge  found
    that  there  was  no  current  documentary  evidence  to  confirm   the
    Appellants' place of residence or their respective marital  status.  In
    essence the judge found  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  that
    family life currently existed.

15.  The judge's concluded at paragraphs 31 and 32:


         "31. In the light of  the  evidence  summarised  above  I  find  as
             follows:


             (a)  I am not satisfied that the Appellants, or any  of  them,
                  are now financially dependent on the Sponsor;


             (b)   There  is  no  current  documentary  evidence  that  the
                  Appellants receive money transfers from the Sponsor;


             (c)  There is evidence indicating that the Sponsor was unaware
                  of the 1st and 2nd Appellants'  educational  achievements;
                  unware that one of them had attended college  and  unaware
                  that another had attended university.  Consequently  I  am
                  not satisfied that the Sponsor is  closely  involved  with
                  the Appellants' affairs or that he has played  a  role  in
                  helping them to make education choices;


             (d)  I am not satisfied that there has been regular or  recent
                  telephone contact with the Sponsor and the Appellants  (or
                  any of them);


             (e)  I am not satisfied that the Appellants (or any  of  them)
                  are currently emotionally dependent on the Sponsor;


             (f)  I am not  satisfied  that  the  three  Appellants  remain
                  unmarried and have not formed family units of their own.

         32.  In light of the findings set out above  as  to  financial  and
             emotional dependency, the ages of the  three  Appellants,  the
             evidence that they live together (thus being in a position  to
             give one another practical support) and the intervals  between
             the Sponsor's visits to Nepal, I am not satisfied that any  of
             the Appellants share family life  with  the  Sponsor  for  the
             purposes of Article 8.  It has not been suggested that any  of
             them has established private life calling  for  protection  in
             the United Kingdom."

16.  These findings were open to the judge on the evidence before  him.  The
    assertions made at  paragraphs  43  to  45  of  the  Sponsor's  witness
    statement were insufficient to  substantiate  emotional  and  financial
    dependency, or family life, given  the  lack  of  documentary  evidence
    which the Appellants  ought  to  have  been  able  to  produce  if  the
    dependency had continued up until the date of hearing.

17.  The judge's finding  that  at  the  date  of  the  decision  there  was
    insufficient evidence of family life was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before him. There was no need for the judge to put matters  to
    the Sponsor when it was  clear  in  a  human  rights  appeal  that  the
    Appellants had to establish family life and  the  burden  was  them  to
    produce sufficient evidence to show that. The fact that in the previous
    decision the judge was satisfied on the evidence that there was  family
    life did not prevent the judge from looking at  the  situation  at  the
    date of hearing.

18.  The judge properly considered whether family life existed at  the  date
    of hearing. There was insufficient evidence to show  that  family  life
    had continued since the previous decision in 2016. There was  no  error
    of law in the decision promulgated on 10 January 2019.  Accordingly,  I
    dismiss the Appellants' appeal.  No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 15 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


