
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00032/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 6 December 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             PRAKASH RAMALINGAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Wood, IAS (Manchester)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent ('Mr Ramalingam') is a citizen of India.  He  entered
       the UK as a student in 2011.  On 3 January 2013 he  relied  upon  an
       English  language  test   certificate   ('the   certificate')   from
       Educational Testing Service ('ETS') he received after sitting an ETS
       test at South Quay College ('SCQ') on 28 November 2012, as part of a
       successful application to extend his leave as a student.  Thereafter
       he was granted leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his  family
       life.  His most recent application to remain on  the  basis  of  his
       relationship with his spouse dated 27 October 2016  was  refused  by
       the Appellant ('the SSHD') in a decision  dated  13  December  2016.
       The  SSHD  was  satisfied  that  the  certificate  was  fraudulently
       obtained and as such he did not meet the 'suitability'  requirements
       of the Immigration Rules.   The  SSHD  said  this  in  the  decision
       letter:

           "ETS  has  a  record  of  your  speaking  test.    Using   voice
           recognition software, ETS is able to detect when a single person
           is undertaking multiple tests.  ETS undertook a  check  of  your
           test and confirmed  to  the  SSHD  that  there  was  significant
           evidence to conclude  that  your  certificate  was  fraudulently
           obtained by the use of a proxy test taker."

Appeal proceedings

    2. The SSHD has appealed against a decision of the First-Tier  Tribunal
       ('FTT') dated 7 February 2018, allowing Mr  Ramalingam's  appeal  on
       human rights grounds.  After hearing evidence  from  Mr  Ramalingam,
       the FTT  accepted  his  evidence  as  entirely  credible.   The  FTT
       expressly accepted that he genuinely took an English  language  test
       at SQC on 28 November 2012.

    3. The SSHD applied for permission to appeal  the  FTT's  decision  and
       relied upon three grounds of appeal:

           1) The FTT erred in law in concluding that the  evidence  relied
              upon by the SSHD was insufficient to meet his  initial  legal
              burden, in light of the relevant authorities.


           2) When addressing Mr Ramalingam's innocent explanation, the FTT
              failed to  take  into  account  relevant  matters:  (i)  mere
              presence at the centre must be viewed in the context  of  the
              known  practice  of  applicants  using  proxy  takers  whilst
              present at the test centre, and (ii)  even  those  who  speak
              English adequately have other reasons for using a proxy.


           3) The  FTT  failed  to  identify  compelling  circumstances  to
              support a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ McGeachy in a decision dated
       29 June 2018.  He observed that the FTT did  not  address  the  fact
       that there could be many reasons why a person would use a proxy test
       taker.

Submissions

    5. At the beginning of the hearing  both  representatives  agreed  that
       there are three stages  to  be  followed  when  determining  whether
       deception was employed in a case such as this - see Majumder & Qadir
       v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1167: (i) has the  SSHD  met  the  burden  of
       identifying  evidence  that  the   certificate   was   obtained   by
       deception?; (ii) has Mr Ramalingam satisfied the  evidential  burden
       of raising an innocent explanation?; (iii) if so, has the  SSHD  met
       the legal burden of showing that deception in fact took place?


    6. Mr Bates submitted that there was clear and  cogent  evidence  of  a
       generic and specific nature to support the SSHD's submission that he
       met the burden of establishing prima facie  deception  and  the  FTT
       misunderstood or mischaracterised the nature of the SSHD's evidence,
       in finding otherwise.  Mr Bates invited me to find that ground 1 was
       therefore made out and this error in  approach  infected  the  FTT's
       findings relevant to ground 2.  Mr Bates did not place any  reliance
       on ground 3 in the light of the SSHD's  concession  before  the  FTT
       (recorded at [6] and [27] of the decision) that if it was found that
       Mr Ramlingam had not used deception, he met the requirements of  the
       Immigration Rules and his appeal should be allowed on  human  rights
       grounds.

    7. Mr Wood candidly acknowledged that he was in  a  difficult  position
       regarding ground 1.  This is because the FTT did not engage with the
       more up to date authorities in support of the proposition that where
       the ETS Look Up Tool identified an applicant's specific test  result
       as invalid, this together with  the  updated  generic  evidence  was
       sufficient for the SSHD to establish prima facie deception with  the
       result that it was then for the applicant  to  provide  an  innocent
       explanation - see SSHD v Shehzad  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  615.   Mr  Wood
       however submitted that in this particular case the specific Look  Up
       Tool result was defective.  This is because whilst all other details
       personal  to  Mr  Ramalingam  were  correct,  his  nationality   was
       incorrectly recorded  as  UK.   Mr  Wood  submitted  that  in  these
       circumstances the FTT was entitled  to  find  the  generic  evidence
       insufficient and  to  entirely  accept  the  evidence  given  by  Mr
       Ramalingam.

    8. After hearing from both representatives I reserved my decision.

Discussion

    9. There was clearly detailed generic and specific  evidence  available
       to the FTT to support prima  facie  deception  on  the  part  of  Mr
       Ramalingam's test results at SQC on  28  November  2012.   The  SSHD
       adduced generic evidence that explained in  detail  the  methodology
       used by  ETS  to  determine  whether  a  test  result  was  invalid,
       questionable or genuine.  The SSHD also relied upon the ETS Look  Up
       Tool which concluded that Mr Ramalingam's test result  was  invalid.
       That clearly includes the wrong nationality.  Mr Wood invited me  to
       find that if the wrong  nationality  was  selected,  other  mistakes
       might have been made by ETS.  The difficulty with this submission is
       that there are other perhaps more significant ways in which the Look
       Up Tool identifies the test result as being linked to Mr Ramalingam:
       certificate number, date of birth and passport  number.    Moreover,
       although the FTT made passing reference to the wrong nationality  at
       [44], this was not the articulated  reason  for  not  finding  prima
       facie deception justifying an explanation.  This is based  upon  the
       overall frailties within the generic evidence and the  unreliability
       of ETS processes - see [40] and [42] of the decision.   As  Mr  Wood
       accepted, these are inadequate reasons in the light of the  more  up
       to date authorities as set out in the SSHD  grounds  of  appeal.   I
       therefore find that the SSHD has established a material error of law
       for the reasons explained in ground 1.

   10.  I  entirely  accept  that  the  consideration  of  the  appellant's
       explanation, for the purposes of ground 2,  is  intrinsically  fact-
       sensitive - see MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016]  UKUT  00450  (IAC))
       and was for the FTT to determine having considered all the  relevant
       evidence in the round.  The FTT was of course entitled to  make  the
       factual findings it did but  only  after  having  acknowledged  that
       there was evidence of prima facie deception.  The FTT was obliged to
       make its credibility findings in  context:  there  was  prima  facie
       evidence that the certificate is invalid because it  relies  upon  a
       voice recording that is not that of  Mr  Ramalingam.   As  Mr  Bates
       submitted,  the  FTT  failed  to  acknowledge  this  and   therefore
       proceeded to make its  factual  findings  from  the  wrong  starting
       point.  The FTT did not squarely deal with Mr Ramlingam's concerning
       evidence at [24] that notwithstanding the invalid test result he did
       not want to contact ETS for an explanation, even though this  was  a
       course open to him as explained in Arsan  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
       2009.  The FTT did not engage with the submission that mere presence
       at the test centre was inconclusive given the  evidence  of  Rebecca
       Collins to the effect that this could  well  involve  attending  the
       test centre as a registered candidate but allowing another, a  'fake
       sitter', to take the test on his behalf.  The  FTT  also  failed  to
       take into account the possible alternative reasons for the use of  a
       proxy.  As pointed out in MA (ETS) at  [57]  there  is  a  range  of
       reasons why those proficient in English may engage in fraud.


   11. It follows that the FTT decision contains material errors of law for
       the reasons advanced by the SSHD in grounds 1 and 2.


Disposal

   12. I have had regard to para 7.2 of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the factual findings
       required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that  this  is
       an appropriate case to remit to the FTT.  This is because the  FTT's
       findings of fact are tainted by a fundamental error in  approach  to
       the SSHD's evidence  and  completely  fresh  findings  of  fact  are
       necessary.

Decision

   1) I allow the SSHD's appeal and set aside the FTT decision.


   2) It is remitted to the FTT (judge other than  Judge  Austin)  where  it
      shall be remade on a de novo basis.


Signed                                             Dated:  4 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
