
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00030/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 April & 20 June 2017             |On 31 July 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr abdilahi ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Toal, Ms V Easty and Ms M Sirikanda, instructed
                    by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

A: Issue of Jurisdiction

Introduction

 1. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT Judge Nightingale) allowing an appeal  by  Mr  Ahmed
    ("the claimant") on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

 2. I initially heard submissions from the parties relating to the issue of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal's ("FtT's") decision contained an error
    of law capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal  such  that  it
    ought to be set aside. When drawing up my decision  in  this  regard  I
    observed that  it  was  potentially  the  case  that  the  FtT  had  no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal at all. This not having  been  a  point
    previously  raised,  I  invited  further  submissions  on  the   issue.
    Subsequent both to this invitation and to the written response thereto,
    but prior to a decision having been made, the Upper  Tribunal  reported
    its decision in Nkomo (Deportation: 2014 rights of appeal) [2016]  UKUT
    00285 (Vice President and Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin).  Both  parties
    thereafter requested a further hearing  in  order  to  ventilate,  what
    turned out to be, their joint position  as  to  the  relevance  of  the
    decision in Nkomo.

Claimant's history in the UK

 3. The claimant's history in the United Kingdom is of some importance.

 4. The claimant, born 17 May 1980, arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  13
    October 1995. He was granted leave to  enter  until  20  January  1997,
    which was subsequently extended until 20 January 2000.  His mother (and
    three dependants) had already arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  June
    1989.  The claimant was granted indefinite leave to remain on 16  March
    2000.  An application for British citizenship was refused on 3 May 2002
    as a consequence the claimant's convictions in February 2001 for  theft
    and drug possession.

 5. On 4 June 2004, the Secretary of State for the Home Department ("SSHD")
    notified the claimant of his liability to deportation as a  consequence
    of his conviction on 25 October 2004 for robbery, for which he received
    a sentence of three years' imprisonment. This conviction  was  preceded
    not only by those convictions referred to in  paragraph  4  above,  but
    also by convictions for being drunk and disorderly (which led to a fine
    on 14 June 2002), and possession of a  class  A  drug  and  failing  to
    surrender to bail - which led to further  fines  being  imposed  on  27
    October 2003.  On 4 June 2004, the claimant was once again notified  of
    his liability to deportation.

 6. The claimant made an asylum  claim  shortly  thereafter,  but  did  not
    attend his asylum interview. His claim was subsequently refused on non-
    compliance grounds on 18 September 2007. A deportation order was signed
    in the claimant's name on 11 December 2007, but not served on him until
    he was arrested on 19 August 2008 by  which  time  he  had  accumulated
    convictions for a further five offences - the most significant of which
    was a conviction on 19 June 2008 for  attempted  theft  for  which  the
    claimant received a three-month term of imprisonment.

 7. This deportation  order  was  declared  'invalid'  by  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal in a decision of 23 March 2009  and  withdrawn  by
    the Secretary of State on 2 June 2009. On the same date the SSHD took a
    further decision to make a deportation order. This was followed by  the
    claimant being convicted, on 3 June 2009, of  causing  grievous  bodily
    harm, for which he was handed a sentence of 30 months' imprisonment.

 8. The claimant brought an appeal to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
    against the decision to make a  deportation  order.   That  appeal  was
    allowed on 13 November 2009 and, although reconsideration  was  ordered
    by  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Storey,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Latter
    subsequently allowed the claimant's appeal on Article 3  grounds  in  a
    decision dated 25 March 2011.

 9. The next relevant event occurred on 27 April 2013,  when  the  claimant
    was sentenced to eight weeks'  imprisonment  for  common  assault  and,
    concurrently, to eight weeks' imprisonment for failing to surrender  to
    custody at an appointed time.  Thereafter,  on  31  October  2014,  the
    claimant was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment for affray and to
    a concurrent term of three months' imprisonment for theft.

10. On 4 February 2015, the SSHD wrote the claimant notifying  him  of  his
    liability to deportation  pursuant  to  "...section  32(5)  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007". This notice invited submissions  from  the  claimant
    within 20 days as to why  he  should  not  be  deported.  The  claimant
    responded in undated representations to  the  effect  that  deportation
    would lead to a breach of his human rights.

11. A deportation order was subsequently signed in the claimant's  name  on
    25 March 2015 and, on the following day, the SSHD made a  "Decision  to
    Refuse a Human Rights Claim".

12. The claimant appealed to the FtT by way of  a  notice  dated  27  March
    2015. The section of  the  appeal  notice  requiring  the  claimant  to
    identify the decision under appeal, was left blank.

Legal background

Appeal Rights

13. Rights of appeal against immigration decisions are governed by  Part  5
    of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  types  of
    decision which can be the subject of appeal are, and  have  been  since
    the coming into force of that Act, set out in section 82 thereof.

14. Prior to its amendment by section  15  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,
    section 82 read:

         "82. Rights of appeal: general


               1) Where an immigration decision is  made  in  respect  of  a
                  person he may appeal to the Tribunal.


               2) In this part 'immigration decision' means -


                  ...


                  (j) a decision to make a deportation order  under  section
                  5(1) of that Act [Immigration Act 1971]


                  ...


             (3A)  Subsection (2)(j) does not apply to a decision to make a
                  deportation  order  which  states  that  it  is  made   in
                  accordance with section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007;
                  but -


                  (a)   a  decision  that  section  32(5)  applies   is   an
                  immigration decision for the purposes of this Part, ..."


    I shall refer to these as the "old appeal provisions".

15. After the amendment section 82 brought  about  by  the  2014  Act,  the
    decisions against which applicants have a right of appeal  to  the  FtT
    are  identified  exhaustively  in  the  following  terms  ("new  appeal
    provisions"):



         "82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal

             (1)  A person ('P') may appeal to the Tribunal where -
                  (a)  the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                      protection claim made by P,
                  (b)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a  human
                      rights claim made by P, or
                  (c)  the Secretary of State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                      protection status.
             (2)  For the purposes of this Part -
                  (a)  a 'protection claim' is a  claim  made  by  a  person
                      ('P') that removal of P from the United Kingdom -
                      (i)  would breach the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
                           under the Refugee Convention, or
                      (ii) would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in
                           relation to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                           humanitarian protection;
                  (b)  P's protection claim is refused if the  Secretary  of
                      State makes one or more of the following decisions -
                      (i)  that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would
                           not breach the United Kingdom's obligations under
                           the Refugee Convention;
                      (ii) that removal of P from the United Kingdom  would
                           not breach the United  Kingdom's  obligations  in
                           relation to  persons  eligible  for  a  grant  of
                           humanitarian protection;
                  (c)  a person has 'protection status' if  the  person  has
                      been granted leave to enter or remain in  the  United
                      Kingdom as a refugee or as a person  eligible  for  a
                      grant of humanitarian protection;
                  (d)  'humanitarian  protection'  is  to  be  construed  in
                      accordance with the Immigration Rules;
                  (e)  'refugee' has the same  meaning  as  in  the  Refugee
                      Convention..."

Commencement of the 2014 Act

16. Section 19 of the 2014 Act inserted, inter alia, section 117D into  the
    2002 Act as of 28 July 2014 (see: Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement
    No. 1, Transitory and Saving Provisions)  Order  2014  (SI  2014/1820))
    ("Commencement Order 1"). Section 117D(2) defines a 'foreign  criminal'
    as being a person who is not a British citizen, who has been  convicted
    in the United Kingdom of an offence and who has either  been  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of at least  12  months,  convicted  of  an
    offence that caused serious harm or is a persistent offender.

17. On 20 October 2014, article 2 of the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement
    No. 3, Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order  2014  (SI  2014/2771)
    ("Commencement Order 3") brought into  force  the  new  appeal  regime,
    subject to the saving provisions in articles  9,  10  and  11  thereof.
    Article 11 is not relevant for the purposes of this decision.  Articles
    9 and 10 read:

         "9. Notwithstanding the commencement  of  the  relevant  provisions
            [the new appeal provisions],  the  saved  provisions  [the  old
            appeal provisions] continue to have effect,  and  the  relevant
            provisions do not have effect, other than so far as they relate
            to the persons set out respectively  in  articles  10  and  11,
            unless article 11(2) or (3) applies."

         "10. The persons referred to in article 9 are -


            (a) a person ("P1") who becomes a foreign criminal  within  the
            definition in section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act on  or  after  20
            October 2014; and


            (b) a person who is  liable  to  deportation  from  the  United
            Kingdom under section 3(5)(b) of  the  1971  Act  because  they
            belong to the family of P1."

18. Commencement Order 3 was  followed  just  a  few  weeks  later  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 (Transitional and Saving  Provisions)  Order  2014
    (SI 2014/2928), ("TSP  Order  2014"),  which  came  into  force  on  10
    November 2014.  Article 2 to that Order reads as follows:

        "2(1). The saved provisions [the old appeals provisions] continue to
            have effect, and  the  relevant  provisions  [the  new  appeals
            provisions] do not have effect, other than -

                 (a)  in  accordance  with  articles  9  -  10  and  11   of
                   [Commencement Order 3];

                 (b) in relation to  a  deportation  decision  made  by  the
                   Secretary of State  on  or  after  10  November  2014  in
                   respect of -

                  (i)  a person ("P") who is a foreign criminal  within  the
                     definition in section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act;

                  (ii) a person who is liable to deportation from the United
                     Kingdom under section 3(5)(b) of the 1971 Act  because
                     they belong to the family of P.

              (2)  In  this  article,  "a  deportation  decision"  means  a
                  decision to make a deportation order, a decision to refuse
                  to revoke a deportation order, or a  decision  made  under
                  section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007"

19. The Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No. 4, (Transitional and  Saving
    Provisions and Amendment)  Order  2015  (SI  2015/371),  ("Commencement
    Order 4") had the effect of applying the new appeals provisions to  all
    decisions made on or after 6 April 2015.



Discussion and Decision on issue of jurisdiction

20. As already identified, the parties jointly submitted that the  FtT  had
    jurisdiction to hear the claimant's appeal.

21. In summary, it was asserted by both parties that the  decision  of  the
    SSHD of 26 March 2015 to  refuse  the  claimant's  human  rights  claim
    attracted a right of appeal to the  FtT  pursuant  to  the  new  appeal
    provisions.

22. The parties acknowledge that in making such submission it is inherently
    submitted that the reported decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nkomo
    (Deportation: 2014 rights of appeal: Zimbabwe) [2016] UKUT 285 (IAC) is
    wrong. In this regard, it was also observed that the Tribunal in  Nkomo
    did not take into account the  Upper  Tribunal's  earlier  decision  in
    Waqar v SSHD (Statutory appeals/paragraph 353) IJR [2015] UKUT 169 (UTJ
    Coker and UTJ Kebede) which, it is said, is inconsistent with the ratio
    in Nkomo, but consistent with the parties' submissions in  the  instant
    case.

23. I begin by identifying those matters which are uncontroversial:

          i) The claimant did not become  a  foreign  criminal  within  the
             meaning of section 117D(2) of the 2002  Act  on  or  after  20
             October 2014.  This  is  because  he  was  already  a  foreign
             criminal within the meaning  of  s117D(2)  on  that  date.  He
             became a foreign criminal on the coming into force of s117D(2)
             i.e. the 28 July 2014, because, inter alia, of his  conviction
             on 3 June 2009 and  the  consequent  sentence  of  30  months'
             imprisonment;

         ii) Commencement Order 3 only brought the  new  appeal  provisions
             into force in respect of  those  persons  who  became  foreign
             criminals on or after 20 October 2014;

        iii) Had there been no further relevant legislation,  the  claimant
             would have been entitled to bring an appeal to the FtT,  under
             the old appeal provisions, against  both  the  decision  of  4
             February 2015 that section 32(5) of the 2007  Act  applied  to
             him, and that of 25 March 2015 to make  a  deportation  order.
             That is so, because the claimant  did  not  become  a  foreign
             criminal on or after 20 October 2014. He  would,  though,  not
             have been entitled to appeal against the  decision  to  refuse
             his human rights claim because he was not a 'person'  to  whom
             the new appeal provisions applied, and  'refusal  of  a  human
             rights claim' was not a category of  decision  that  could  be
             appealed under the old appeal provisions.

24. However, on 10 November 2014 the TSP Order 2014  came  into  force.  By
    article 2 thereof the new appeal provisions applied (i) "in relation to
    a deportation decision" (ii) made on or after 10 November 2014 and made
    (iii) in respect of any foreign criminal falling within the  definition
    in section 117D(2) of the 2002 Act.

25. A deportation decision is defined in article 2(2) of the TSP Order 2014
    as being "a decision to make a deportation order, a decision to  refuse
    to revoke a deportation order, or a decision made under  section  32(5)
    of the 2007 Act."

26. In so far as the decisions made by the SSHD in  the  instant  case  are
    concerned, it is clear that those made on 4 February 2015  (a  decision
    made under section 32(5)) and 25 March  2015  (a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order), display the three necessary  features  required  by
    article 2(1)(b) of the TSP Order 2014 so as  to  make  the  new  appeal
    provisions applicable in relation to them. The new  appeals  provisions
    do not provide for a  right  of  appeal  against  such  a  category  of
    decisions and, consequently, the claimant  did  not  have  a  right  of
    appeal against them.

27. This then leaves consideration of the SSHD's decision of 26 March  2015
    to "refuse a human rights claim". It is in relation  to  this  decision
    that the parties submit that I should  depart  from  the  rationale  in
    Nkomo and deploy the reasoning that underpinned the decision in Waqar.

28. In short, it is submitted that although the decision to refuse a  human
    rights claim is not of itself a deportation  decision  (as  defined  in
    article 2(2) of the TSP Order 2014), it is a decision made "in relation
    to a deportation decision", thus meeting the  requirements  of  article
    2(1)(b) of the TSP Order 2014.

29. I now turn to the two reported decisions referred to  by  the  parties.
    The first, Waqar, is a decision on an application for judicial  review.
    The applicant (Mr Waqar) was convicted of five counts of rape  in  2008
    and sentenced to four years' detention in a Young Offenders  Institute.
    A deportation order was signed in his name on  25  June  2014,  but  he
    subsequently made an application to revoke that order  in  reliance  on
    human rights grounds. That application was  rejected  by  the  SSHD  in
    decisions of 14 November 2014 and  28  November  2014,  the  SSHD  also
    concluding that the human  rights  representations  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules  and  thus  were
    not to be treated as a 'fresh [human rights] claim'.

30. The  applicant  challenged  the  aforementioned  decisions  by  way  of
    judicial review, contending that paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules
    had been subsumed within the new appeal provisions  and,  consequently,
    that the rejection of the human rights claim by the SSHD was a decision
    which could be appealed to the FtT under  the  new  appeal  provisions.
    That contention was rejected by the Upper Tribunal; it being  concluded
    that the applicant had not made a  human  rights  claim.  -  the  human
    rights representations were not to be treated as a claim  because  they
    did not meet the requirements set out in paragraph  353  of  the  Rules
    and, therefore, did not acquire the status of  a  claim.  Consequently,
    the SSHD's decision did not amount to a refusal of a human rights claim
    and did not attract a right  of  appeal  pursuant  to  the  new  appeal
    provisions.

31. The transcript of Judge Coker's decision on the  oral  application  for
    permission to apply for judicial review is attached at Annex A  of  the
    panel's decision on the substantive judicial review. It  is  here  that
    consideration is given to Commencement Order 3 and the TSP Order  2014,
    in the context of a submission that the old appeal  provisions  applied
    and that, as a consequence, the applicant  was  entitled  to  bring  an
    appeal against the SSHD's decision to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation
    order (which was a category of decision that could  be  appealed  under
    the old appeal provisions).  Judge Coker rejected  this  submission  as
    unarguable, observing that (i) the fact of the  applicant's  conviction
    and sentence in 2008 meant that he did not become a foreign criminal as
    defined in section 117D of the 2002 Act on or  after  20  October  2014
    because he was already a foreign offender by that  date  and  (ii)  the
    effect of article 2 of the TSP Order 2014 was to bring the  new  appeal
    provisions into force in relation to the decision  refusing  to  revoke
    the deportation order.

32. As to whether the decision to refuse a  human  rights  claim  could  be
    appealed pursuant to the new appeal provisions, Judge Coker concluded:

         "23. I am satisfied that it is arguable that the  2014  Act  as  it
         amends the 2002 Act may mean that if a human rights claim is raised
         it must, unless certified, attract  a  right  of  appeal  and  that
         paragraph 353 does not operate as a gateway to an appeal right.  It
         is arguable that the applicant has a  right  of  appeal  against  a
         decision to refuse his human rights claim."

33. At the substantive judicial review hearing consideration was limited to
    the issue of the relevance of paragraph 353 in the context of  the  new
    appeal provisions.

34. Returning to the instant case, both parties submitted that in order for
    the consideration of the applicability of paragraph 353 to be  relevant
    to the outcome in Waqar, the  Tribunal  must  have  accepted  that  the
    decision to refuse the human rights claim was made  in  relation  to  a
    deportation decision, otherwise the new  appeal  provisions  would  not
    have operated on the decision  under  challenge,  irrespective  of  the
    correct application of paragraph 353.

35. Whilst I see force in this submission I draw little assistance from the
    decision in Waqar. Neither the terms of the substantive  decision,  nor
    judge Coker's decision granting permission, provide any indication that
    the judges minds were exercised by the interpretation  and  application
    of article 2 of the TSP Order 2014. Whilst I accept  that  the  hearing
    proceeded on the basis that a right of appeal would be available if  it
    could be established that the applicant had made a human rights  claim,
    there is no reasoned analysis identifying why this should be  so.  With
    the greatest respect to the Tribunal, it was only asked  to  adjudicate
    on the application and relevance of paragraph  353,  which  is  exactly
    what it did.

36. Moving on to the decision  in  Nkomo.  The  appellant  therein,  having
    previously been recognised as a refugee and granted indefinite leave to
    remain, was sentenced to a term of 10 years' imprisonment on 4 December
    2009. On 8 May 2012, the SSHD wrote to him, inter alia, disclosing  her
    intention to remove him from the United  Kingdom.  The  appellant  made
    extensive human rights submissions in response.

37. Thereafter the SSHD: (i) made a decision headed "Cessation  of  Refugee
    Status" issued on 30 October 2014; (ii) signed a deportation  order  in
    the appellant's name on 21 November 2014 and (iii) made a "Decision  to
    refuse a protection claim and/or  a  human  rights  claim",  which  was
    served on the appellant on 24 November 2014.

38. The appellant appealed to the FtT, but that appeal was dismissed  after
    substantive consideration. The appellant thereafter obtained permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. At  the  hearing  which  followed  the
    Upper Tribunal raised, of its own volition, the issue  of  jurisdiction
    i.e. whether the appellant had a right of appeal to the FtT against any
    of the aforementioned decisions. There hearing was not  to  enable  the
    parties to reflect  on  this  issue,  with  the  consequence  that  the
    Tribunal thereafter "received little help from the parties" [1].

39. The headnote to Nkomo reads as follows:

         "The No 3 Commencement Order of the 2014 Act, SI 2014/2771, extends
         the new appeals provisions to identified persons, but the amendment
         of  it  in  SI  2014/2928  further  extends  those  provisions   to
         identified decisions.


         In consequence, a person against whom a  deportation  decision  was
         made in the period 10 November 2014 - 5  April  2015  may  have  no
         right of appeal if the decisions  actually  made  carry  rights  of
         appeal only under the new appeals  provisions.   (Note:  A  further
         change was made to the commencement provision with  effect  from  2
         March 2015, which did not fall for consideration on  the  facts  of
         this case.)"

40. As a statement of law this  headnote  is  uncontroversial.  It  is  the
    application of legal principle to the facts in Nkomo which discloses  a
    reasoning process that the instant parties assert to be in error,  with
    particular  focus  laid  on  the  rationale  deployed  to  justify  the
    conclusion that the SSHD's decision of 24 November 2014 - to  refuse  a
    protection claim and a human rights claim - was not to be treated as  a
    decision which attracts the benefit of the new appeal provisions.  Such
    reasoning is to be found in paragraphs 18 and 22 of Nkomo:

         "18. Thus the new appeal  provisions  from  10  November  2014  now
         applied not only to foreign criminals, but also  'in  relation  to'
         deportation  decisions  made  against  both  old  and  new  foreign
         criminals. There is no doubt about the purpose  of  that  addition.
         Under the old provisions, a decision to make  a  deportation  order
         does not carry a right of appeal. The effect of [Commencement Order
         3] was that deportation decisions made in respect of  those  within
         section 117D(2) definition carried, for the  future,  no  right  of
         appeal. What that order clearly did not do, however, was to add old
         foreign criminals to the  category  of  persons  to  whom  the  new
         appeals  provisions  applied.  Articles  9  to  11  of  the  No.  3
         Commencement Order extend the new provisions to two  categories  of
         person; the subsequent order extends the appeals provisions only to
         a category of decision.

         ...

         22. As we have explained,  the  appellant,  being  an  old  foreign
         criminal, is not a  person  to  whom  the  new  appeals  provisions
         applied in the period before 6 April 2015, save insofar as  related
         to a deportation decision.  The letter makes and notifies decisions
         of  a  sort  that  would  be  appealable  under  the  new   appeals
         provisions, and sets out in respect of two of them  the  rights  of
         appeal which would exist under the new appeals provisions;  but  it
         fails to observe that the new appeals provisions do  not  apply  to
         the appellant in respect of  decisions  in  those  categories.   We
         cannot of course say that the Secretary of State was  not  entitled
         to make the decisions that she did.  None of them was,  however,  a
         decision  carrying  a  right  of  appeal  under  the  old   appeals
         provisions; and the new  appeals  provisions  did  not  apply.   It
         follows that the appellant had  no  right  of  appeal  against  the
         decisions communicated in the letter of 24  November  2014.   There
         was no right of appeal against the deportation order,  because,  by
         virtue of SI 2014/2928, the new appeals provisions applied  to  it;
         there was no right of appeal against the other  decisions,  because
         the new appeals provisions did not apply to them.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear his appeals."

41. It is apparent from the terms of paragraph 22 that  the  Tribunal  must
    have concluded that the SSHD's decisions to refuse a  protection  claim
    and refuse a human rights claim were not decisions made 'in relation to
    a deportation decision'.

42. When considering the ambit of the phrase "in relation to a  deportation
    decision" in article 2(1)(b) of the TSP Order 2014 it is  important  to
    view the Order in its proper context. The Introductory Text to the  TSP
    Order 2014 identifies why it was brought in to force:

         "This Statutory Instrument has been made in consequence of  defects
         in [Commencement Order 3]..."

43. The Explanatory Note to the TSP Order 2014 further identifies that:

         "...This Order expands the  circumstances  in  which  the  relevant
         provisions [the new appeal provisions] have effect..."

44. The defect in Commencement Order 3 referred to in the Introductory Text
    to the TSP Order 2014 is plain, it is the failure of article  10(a)  to
    bite on decisions made by SSHD in so far as they relate to persons  who
    became foreign criminals prior to 20 October  2014  (i.e.  old  foreign
    criminals) - thus leaving a different scheme of appeal rights  for  old
    foreign criminals to that which applied to new foreign  criminals.  The
    intention of the TSP Order 2014 was to remedy this defect by  expanding
    the circumstances to which the new appeals provisions applied.

45. This aim could easily have been achieved by amending article  10(a)  of
    Commencement Order 3 so as to leave it reading as  follows:  "a  person
    (P1) who is a foreign criminal within the definition in section 117D(2)
    of the 2002 Act." This would have had the  effect  of  bringing  parity
    between the appeal provisions for new foreign criminals and  those  for
    old foreign criminals.

46. For reasons, which are not at all obvious Parliament chose not to bring
    parity between  the  two  categories  of  foreign  criminals,  instead,
    restricting the effect of the new  appeal  provisions  to  old  foreign
    criminals so that  had  effect  only  "in  relation  to  a  deportation
    decision".

47. Given the known intention behind the introduction of the TSP Order 2014
    there is substantial force in the parties' submission that  the  phrase
    "in  relation  to  a  deportation  decision"   should   not   be   read
    restrictively. I also accept the submission that the words "in relation
    to" in article 2(1)(b) of the TSP Order  2014  support  the  conclusion
    that the draftsperson intended the category of decision upon which  the
    new appeal provisions bite, for old foreign criminals,  is  wider  than
    simply "deportation decisions" - as defined in article 2(2) of the  TSP
    Order 2014.

48. In the instant case the claimant's human  rights'  claim  was  made  in
    direct  response  to  the  SSHD  notifying  him  of  his  liability  to
    deportation.  Any doubts about that are dispelled by the terms of first
    2 paragraphs of the decision of 26 March 2015, which read:


         "We wrote to you on 4 February 2015 and notified you  that  section
         32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 requires that a deportation  order
         be made against you unless you can demonstrate that you fall within
         any of the specified exceptions set out in section 33 of that  Act.
         Your deportation is required by section 32(5) unless  an  exception
         applies because you are a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months and as such  your
         deportation is conducive to the public good.


         In   response   to   that   decision,   your   undated    submitted
         representations setting out why you should not  be  deported.  Your
         representations have been considered below. ..."

49. The decision of 26 March  2015  then  considers  the  claimant's  human
    rights representations, inter alia, through the lens of the immigration
    rules relating to deportation decisions and then concludes as follows:

         "As explained above, your human  rights  claim  has  been  refused.
         Therefore, the decision to deport you pursuant to section  5(1)  of
         the Immigration Act 1971 is maintained.

         As explained above, your human rights claim has  been  refused.  As
         such it is not accepted that you fall within any of the  exceptions
         to deportation at section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007. Therefore,
         section 32(5) of the same Act requires the Secretary  of  State  to
         make a deportation order against you. A deportation order has  been
         made against you and it is enclosed with this decision."

50. In other words, the claimant's human rights  claim  was  considered  as
    part of the SSHD's determination of  issue  of  whether  he  should  be
    deported, and its refusal clearly informed  the  SSHD's  assessment  of
    whether a deportation order should be made. In such circumstances,  and
    given what I have said above, in my view the  decision  to  refuse  the
    claimant's human rights claim was made in relation to the  "deportation
    decision" made by the SSHD. This reading of article 2(2)(b) of the  TSP
    Order 2014 does not requiring a straining of the language therein,  and
    does not sit at odds with the stated intention behind the bringing into
    force of that provision.

51. Consequently, I conclude that the claimant did have a right  of  appeal
    to the FtT against the SSHD's decision of 26 March 2015 to  refuse  his
    human rights claim.



B: Setting aside of the FtT's decision

52. Having accepted that the FtT had jurisdiction to determine the  appeal,
    I must now go on and consider whether its decision contains an error of
    law capable of affecting the outcome of such appeal.

53. It is to be recalled that the claimant has come before the  immigration
    tribunals on a previous occasion, culminating in a decision of 25 March
    2011 by Upper Tribunal Judge Latter allowing his appeal  on  Article  3
    ECHR grounds.

54. The terms of Judge Latter's decision have assumed great significance in
    this appeal and, in particular, paragraphs 20  and  21  thereof,  which
    read as follows:

         "20. In the light of the fact that there is a reasonable degree  of
             likelihood  that  the  appellant  came  from  Mogadishu  I  am
             satisfied in light of the current country guidance in  AM  and
             AM that returning him there would expose him to a real risk of
             serious harm such as to engage Article 3.  There is  no  basis
             in the evidence for a finding that he falls within one of  the
             exceptional categories of  those  who  can  live  in  relative
             safety in Mogadishu.  I am not satisfied  that  there  is  any
             other area where he would go in  Somalia  where  he  would  be
             reasonably safe and which would  not  cause  undue  harshness.
             There was no evidence of substance that he has  any  relatives
             or contacts in any part of Somalia, having now been living  in
             the UK since he was 14.  He has never returned there  and  has
             little if any prospect of finding housing  or  employment  and
             more significantly it is unlikely, after such a long period of
             absence, that he would be able to look to other  clan  members
             for support.  In summary, I am  not  satisfied  that  internal
             relocation would be a viable option.

         21.  There can be no real doubt  that  the  appellant's  record  of
             offending merited deportation but in the light of the evidence
             before me I find to the lower standard of  proof  that  he  is
             from Mogadishu and the current country guidance shows  a  real
             risk that returning him  there  would  lead  to  a  breach  of
             Article 3.  For this reason, the appeal must be allowed."

55. Moving on to consider the decision of the FtT under  appeal,  the  core
    findings therein are to be found in paragraph 53 onwards.  Having first
    referred to the starred determination of Devaseelan, the FtT identified
    the following seven features of Judge Latter's decision:

         ".   There is a reasonable degree of likelihood the  appellant  did
             come from Mogadishu.

         .    The appellant's clan membership is Darod, Majaertin  sub-clan.
             All close family have now left Somalia.

         .    There was no evidence of substance that the appellant had  any
             relatives or contacts in any part of Somalia.

         .    The appellant had been living in the UK since he was 14.

         .    The appellant had never returned to Somalia and had little  if
             any prospect of finding housing or employment.

         .    It was unlikely, after such a long period of absence, that the
             appellant would be able to look  to  other  clan  members  for
             support.

         .    The country guidance of AM &  AM  showed  that  returning  the
             appellant to Mogadishu would expose him  to  a  real  risk  of
             serious harm such as to engage Article 3."

56. At paragraph 54 of its decision the FtT say:

         "The above comprise the key findings made by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Latter and neither representative has sought to persuade me that it
         would be proper to revisit any  of  these  findings  save  for  the
         assessment to the change of circumstances in Mogadishu as  set  out
         in the MOJ country guidance case."

57. The FtT's subsequent conclusions can be distilled as follows:

      i) The situation in Mogadishu appears,  from  MOJ  &  Ors  (Return  to
         Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC), to now be almost the
         exact opposite of that identified  in  AM  &  AM.   The  change  of
         circumstances in Mogadishu merits the revisiting of the question of
         risk on return for this claimant [55];

     ii) Although the claimant has not lived in Mogadishu since the  age  of
         14, there is no reason to suspect that he  would  not  be  able  to
         acquire the knowledge of the  areas  and  establishments  that  are
         likely to be targeted by Al Shabaab attacks reasonably  soon  after
         his return [56];

    iii) The claimant is from the majority  Darod  clan.  He  would  not  be
         assisted by his clan members upon return [57 & 59]

     iv) It has been accepted that there  is  no  nuclear  family  for  this
         claimant in Mogadishu [57];

      v) The claimant has no family to call upon in Mogadishu [59];

     vi) It is extremely unlikely that the claimant would have available  to
         him any remittances from any family member living abroad [60];

    vii) There is no real  prospect  of  the  claimant  securing  access  to
         employment or housing in Mogadishu [61];

   viii) There is a real risk that the claimant will face  the  prospect  of
         living in circumstances falling below that which is  acceptable  in
         humanitarian  protection  terms.  Notwithstanding  the  change   of
         circumstances, as set out in MOJ, the claimant makes out  his  case
         on Article 3 ECHR grounds.

58. I begin my consideration by reminding myself of the Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal's guidance in Devaseelan:

           "37.    ...  the  first   Adjudicator's   determination   stands
                 (unchallenged  or  not  successfully  challenged)  as   an
                 assessment of claim the appellant was then making  at  the
                 time of that determination.  It  is  not  binding  on  the
                 second Adjudicator; but on  the  other  hand,  the  second
                 Adjudicator is not hearing an appeal  against  it.  As  an
                 assessment of the  matters  that  were  before  the  first
                 Adjudicator it should simply be regarded as  unquestioned.
                 It may be built upon and as a result the  outcome  of  the
                 hearing  before  the  second  Adjudicator  may  be   quite
                 different from  what  might  have  been  expected  from  a
                 reading of the first determination only but it is not  the
                 second Adjudicator's role to consider  arguments  intended
                 to undermine the first Adjudicator's determination...


         40.  We now pass to matters that could have been before the  first
           Adjudicator but were not.  ...

           iv)    Facts personal to the appellant that were not brought  to
                 the attention of the first Adjudicator, although they were
                 relevant to the issues before him, should  be  treated  by
                 the second Adjudicator with the  greatest  circumspection.
                 An appellant who seeks, in a later appeal, to add  to  the
                 available facts in an effort to obtain a  more  favourable
                 outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point
                 of  view  of  credibility.  (Although  considerations   of
                 credibility will  not  be  relevant  in  cases  where  the
                 existence of the additional factors beyond  dispute).   It
                 must   be borne  in  mind  that  the  first  Adjudicator's
                 determination was made at a  time  closer  to  the  events
                 alleged and in terms of both the fact finding and  general
                 credibility assessment would tend to have  the  advantage.
                 For this reason, the adduction of such  facts  should  not
                 usually lead to any  reconsideration  of  the  conclusions
                 reached by the first Adjudicator.


           v) Evidence of other facts - country evidence - may  not  suffer
                 from the same concerns as to credibility,  but  should  be
                 treated with caution.  The reason is different  from  that
                 in (iv), evidence dating from before the determination  of
                 the first Adjudicator might well have been relevant if  it
                  been tendered to him: but it was not,  and  he  made  his
                 determination  without   it.    The   situation   in   the
                 appellant's own country at the time of that  determination
                 is very unlikely to be relevant in  deciding  whether  the
                 appellant's  removal   at   the   time   of   the   second
                 Adjudicator's determination would breach his human rights.
                  Those representing the appellant would be better  advised
                 to assemble up-to-date evidence than to rely  on  evidence
                 which is (ex-hypothesi) now rather dated." (my emphasis)

59. It is the application of these principles, in the context of the change
    in circumstances in Somalia since Judge Latter's decision,  that  forms
    the foundation of the SSHD's grounds - with the focus being trained  on
    two particular aspects of the FtT's conclusions: (i) the ability of the
    claimant to obtain support from the Darod clan upon  return,  and  (ii)
    the ability of the claimant to secure employment upon return.

60. Taking these in turn, in relation to the  former  (i.e.  clan  support)
    Judge Latter concluded, in light of the background  situation  at  that
    time as identified through the country guidance decision  in  AM  &  AM
    (armed conflict: risk categories) Somalia CG [2008] UKAIT 00091, that:

         "It is unlikely, after such a long period of absence, that he would
         be able to look to other clan members for support"

61. AM & AM identified the potential  for  clan  protection  for  returning
    Somali nationals but cautioned, inter alia, as follows:

         "[155] ...the effect of displacement appears to reduce the  ability
         of  IDPs  to  count  on  protection  from  their  own  clan.   Clan
         protection depends normally on living inside the  traditional  area
         of the clan (Danish Report,  329).   Thus,  for  example,  although
         (according to the first BIA Report) most IDPs  from  Mogadishu  are
         from the majority Hawiye clan (and at January 2008 around 82%  were
         said to have migrated to areas of southern Somalia that are in dire
         need (COIS,  28.13)),  displacement  means  that  a  person  cannot
         automatically be protected by his or her clan.  In the  process  of
         moving, it appears that IDPs can  face  violence  and  intimidation
         even from fellow-clan members.  And once they  have  arrived  at  a
         location, even when it is one inside a traditional  area  for  that
         person's clan, the pressure of numbers  and  scarce  resources  can
         mean that newcomers may not be supported or absorbed by  the  local
         community...

         [160] ...those who lack recent  experience  of  living  in  Somalia
         appear more likely to have  difficulty  dealing  with  the  changed
         environment in which clan loyalties have to some  extent  fractured
         (Nairobi evidence); persons returning to their home area  from  the
         UK  may  be  perceived  as  having  relative  wealth  and  be  more
         susceptible to extortion, abduction and the like as a result..."

62. The country guidance decision in MOJ is  distinctly  more  positive  on
    this issue - the eighth point of its head note stating:

         "The significance of clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has  changed.
         Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support  mechanisms  and
         assist with access to livelihoods, performing less of a  protection
         function than previously.  There are no clan militias in Mogadishu,
         no clan violence, and no clan-based discriminatory treatment,  even
         for minority clan members."

63. The relevance of clan membership was dealt with in more  detail  within
    paragraphs 337 to 343 of MOJ, the following  being  said  at  paragraph
    343:

         "We understand that to mean that while there was no guarantee  that
         help would be available from clan members outside the close  family
         network of returnee, at least there is more likelihood  of  such  a
         request being accommodated than if made to those unconnected by the
         bond of clan membership.  That is,  perhaps,  wholly  unsurprising.
         However, it should be noted that in the UNHCR January  2014  Report
         the view  is  expressed  that  a  returnee  might  be  rather  more
         confident to receiving help from his clan, if not a  minority  clan
         member."

64. Faced with this change of circumstances, the FtT concluded as follows:

         "...There  has  been  nothing  on  the  evidence  before  me  which
         indicates that the [claimant's] clan, the Darod, would now seek  to
         assist him on  return  to  Mogadishu,  even  though  they  have  no
         knowledge of him, where there was a clear finding from Judge Latter
         that they would not have done so in 2011. ..." [57]

         "...Judge Latter also particularly found that it was unlikely after
         such a long period of absence that the [claimant] would be able  to
         look to other clan members for support.  Once again, I can find  no
         reason to go behind this finding.  I therefore accept that  he  has
         no clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu. ..." [59]

65. In my conclusion, the FtT's rationale does  not  lawfully  address  the
    issue of the potential for the claimant to obtain assistance  from  his
    fellow clan members upon return. The FtT's error is it failure  to  put
    Judge Latter's conclusions in their proper context  by  undertaking  an
    analysis of the circumstances in Mogadishu that prevailed at  the  time
    his decision was reached. Absent such an analysis, the consequences  of
    any change in the circumstances cannot be properly identified.

66. As to second limb of the SSHD's challenge, again  I  conclude  the  FtT
    erred as asserted.

67. At paragraph 61 of its decision the FtT said as follows:

         "This [claimant's] particular circumstances are such  that  he  has
         taken little  advantage  of  all  of  the  many  opportunities  and
         privileges he  has  been  provided  with  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         Further, he has not been  in  Somalia  since  he  was  14  and  the
         findings of Upper Tribunal Judge Latter are that the appellant  has
         no family or clan support.  I can find no reason as to  why  anyone
         would remit any money to this appellant and there  is,  already,  a
         finding of fact that he has no real prospect of securing access  to
         employment or housing in Mogadishu."

68. UTJ Latter had concluded:

         "...[The claimant] has never returned there and has little  if  any
         prospect of finding housing or employment..."

69. That conclusion was reached in the context of the following findings in
    AM & AM:

         "...On the present evidence we consider that Mogadishu is no longer
         safe as a place to live for the great majority of its citizens.  We
         do not rule out that notwithstanding the above there may be certain
         individuals who on the facts may be considered to be able  to  live
         safely in the city, for example if they are likely  to  have  close
         connections with powerful actors in Mogadishu,  such  as  prominent
         businessmen or senior figures in  the  insurgency  or  in  powerful
         criminal gangs. However, barring cases of this  kind,  we  consider
         that in the case of persons found to come from  Mogadishu  who  are
         returnees from the UK, they would face on return to  live  there  a
         real risk of persecution or  serious  harm  and  it  is  reasonably
         likely, if they tried staying there, that they would soon be forced
         to leave or that they would decide not to try and live there in the
         first place. ..."

70. The change in economic circumstances in Mogadishu since the decision in
    AM & AM has been significant - highlighted in  the  following  passages
    from MOJ [paragraph 344 onwards]:

        "...the economic revival of  Mogadishu  can  be  described  only  as
         remarkable...

         ...it is beyond doubt that there has been huge  inward  investment,
         large-scale construction projects and  vibrant  business  activity.
         ...

         There is evidence before the Tribunal, identified by Dr Mullen,  to
         the effect that returnees from the West may have  an  advantage  in
         seeking employment in Mogadishu over citizens who have remained  in
         the city throughout.  This is said to be because such returnees are
         likely to be better educated and considered  more  resourceful  and
         therefore more attractive as potential employees, especially  where
         the employer himself or herself has returned  to  the  diaspora  to
         invest in a new business. ..."

71. It was incumbent on the FtT, pursuant to the guidance in Devaseelan, to
    take  Judge  Latter's  conclusions  as  the  starting  point  for   its
    consideration of the Article 3  ECHR  claim.  Having  done  so  it  was
    required to go on and  determine  for  itself  whether  the  claimant's
    deportation  would  lead  to  a  breach  of  Article   3,   given   the
    circumstances that currently prevail in Somalia and, in particular,  in
    light of the significant change to the circumstances in Mogadishu  that
    has occurred since Judge Latter's decision.

72. In light of the circumstances prevailing in Mogadishu  in  March  2011,
    Judge Latter's  conclusions  as  to  the  likelihood  of  the  claimant
    obtaining  employment  and/or  housing  were  unsurprising.  Time  has,
    however, moved on and in  the  intervening  period  there  has  been  a
    dramatic change to the economic and security situation in Mogadishu.

73. The issue that the FtT was required to address was whether the positive
    changes  in  the  economic  and   security   situation   in   Mogadishu
    nevertheless left the claimant in a  position  in  which  he  would  be
    living in circumstances, if returned there, that would breach Article 3
    ECHR. An integral part of that consideration  ought  to  have  been  an
    assessment, as against both the circumstances currently  prevailing  in
    Mogadishu (as identified in MOJ)  and  the  claimant's  known  personal
    circumstances,  of  whether  the  claimant  would  be  able  to  secure
    employment.

74. It was incumbent on the FtT  to  provide  sufficient  reasons  for  its
    conclusions in this regard such that the losing party (in this case the
    SSHD) could understand why she had lost.  Given  the  circumstances  in
    Mogadishu, as highlighted in MOJ  (and  set  out  above)  I  accept  Mr
    Jarvis' submission that those reasons  cannot  be  readily  ascertained
    from the FtT's decision. Whilst  the  FtT  was  not  required  to  give
    reasons for reasons, it was required to engage with the evidence  to  a
    sufficient extent  that  its  rationale  could  be  understood.  In  my
    conclusion, it did not do so.

75. For these reasons, I set aside the FtT's decision to allow  the  appeal
    on the  Article  3  ECHR  ground.   The  parties  agreed  that  it  was
    appropriate for the re-making of the decision to be undertaken  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

C: Remaking of Decision

Introduction

76. For the  purposes  of  the  re-making  of  the  decision  the  parties,
    combined, produced 91 pages of written submissions, over 2200 pages  of
    background documentation relating to the circumstances Somalia and made
    nearly one day of oral submissions - all of which I have considered.

Grounds

77. Mr Toal indicated that the claimant now pursues only the claim that his
    deportation would lead to a breach of Article 3 ECHR. He confirmed,  in
    particular, that the claimant did not seek to pursue his appeal on  the
    alternative basis that his deportation would breach Article 8 ECHR.

Preliminary Issue

78. At the outset of the hearing of 20 June Mr Toal sought  an  adjournment
    of the proceedings for the reasons, which were not expanded upon by  Mr
    Toal, identified in the following  terms  in  an  e-mail  sent  to  the
    Tribunal on 19 June by the claimant's solicitor:

         "The appellant has indicated in a telephone call last week that  he
         is a member of the Madhiban clan,  rather  than  a  member  of  the
         Majeerteen.  The appellant is currently detained at HMP  Wandsworth
         and can only make outgoing calls.  We are yet to have  the  contact
         details from the appellant as to who informed him  that  he  was  a
         member of the Madhiban clan, and we would  therefore  request  more
         time to take instructions on this issue, as it is the issue of clan
         support that is crucial to the appeal before the Tribunal.

         In light of the client's indication of a change of clan to what was
         recorded previously, we now feel  that  due  process  requires  the
         appellant should be produced in order to allow him  to  explain  to
         the Tribunal regarding this change of information."

79. Mr Jarvis objected to the application on the basis of the late hour  of
    the change by the claimant of his asserted clan membership.

80. Having carefully considered the circumstances of the case as  a  whole,
    and taken full account of the terms of rule 2  of  the  2008  Procedure
    Rules, I concluded that it was not  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    adjourn the hearing of the appeal, nor does fairness  dictate  that  it
    should be so adjourned.

81. The claimant notified the UK authorities  as  long  ago  as  2009  (see
    paragraph 38 of the decision of Immigration Judge Pullan  of  23 March
    2009) that he was from the Majeerteen clan.  This evidence was said  to
    have been provided to the claimant by his mother. I  observe  that  the
    claimant's mother gave evidence later in 2009 before Immigration  Judge
    Hodgkinson and there was nothing in that evidence which indicated  that
    she believed the claimant was not of the clan that  he  had  previously
    identified.  The claimant has subsequently  maintained  that  he  is  a
    member to the Majeerteen on numerous occasions, both to the SSHD and to
    the Tribunal. There  have  been  numerous  hearings  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and the appeal is now of considerable  vintage.  It  was  not
    until a week prior to the date listed for  hearing  that  the  claimant
    contacted his solicitors to assert that he had now been  informed  that
    he is from Madhiban clan.  There  is  no  information  as  to  why  the
    solicitors waited until the  day  before  the  hearing  to  inform  the
    Tribunal of this development, nor is there  an  indication  as  to  who
    provided the claimant with this  information,  but  I  infer  from  the
    material before me that it was not the claimant's  mother.  As  I  have
    already stated, looking at all the circumstances before me,  including,
    but not limited to, those circumstances identified immediately above, I
    concluded at the hearing that it was not in the interests of justice to
    grant an adjournment and to prolong the determination  of  this  appeal
    any further.

Country Guidance

82. The most recent Country Guidance decision  relating  to  the  risks  to
    returnees in Mogadishu is MOJ & Others, the headnote to which reads:
             "(i)      The  country  guidance  issues  addressed  in  this
                 determination are not identical to those  engaged  with  by
                 the Tribunal in  AMM  and  others  (conflict;  humanitarian
                 crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT  445  (IAC).
                 Therefore, where country guidance has  been  given  by  the
                 Tribunal in AMM in respect of issues not addressed in  this
                 determination then  the  guidance  provided  by  AMM  shall
                 continue to have effect.
           (ii)        Generally, a person who is "an  ordinary  civilian"
                 (i.e. not associated with the security forces;  any  aspect
                 of government or official  administration  or  any  NGO  or
                 international organisation) on returning to Mogadishu after
                 a period of absence will face no real risk  of  persecution
                 or risk of harm such as to require protection under Article
                 3 of  the  ECHR  or  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
                 Directive. In particular, he  will  not  be  at  real  risk
                 simply on account of having lived in  a  European  location
                 for a period of time of being viewed with suspicion  either
                 by the authorities as a possible supporter of Al Shabaab or
                 by Al Shabaab as  an  apostate  or  someone  whose  Islamic
                 integrity has been  compromised  by  living  in  a  Western
                 country.
           (iii)       There has been durable change in the sense that the
                 Al Shabaab withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and  there
                 is no real prospect of a re-established presence within the
                 city. That was not the case at  the  time  of  the  country
                 guidance given by the Tribunal in AMM.
           (iv)       The level of  civilian  casualties,  excluding  non-
                 military casualties that clearly  fall  within  Al  Shabaab
                 target  groups  such  as  politicians,   police   officers,
                 government officials and those  associated  with  NGOs  and
                 international   organisations,    cannot    be    precisely
                 established by the statistical evidence which is incomplete
                 and unreliable. However, it is established by the  evidence
                 considered as a whole that there has been  a  reduction  in
                 the level of civilian casualties since 2011, largely due to
                 the cessation of confrontational warfare  within  the  city
                 and  Al  Shabaab's  resort  to  asymmetrical   warfare   on
                 carefully  selected  targets.    The   present   level   of
                 casualties does not amount to a sufficient risk to ordinary
                 civilians such as to represent an Article 15(c) risk.
           (v)        It is open to an ordinary citizen  of  Mogadishu  to
                 reduce further still his personal exposure to the  risk  of
                 "collateral damage" in being caught up  in  an  Al  Shabaab
                 attack that was not targeted at him by avoiding  areas  and
                 establishments that are clearly identifiable as  likely  Al
                 Shabaab targets, and it is not unreasonable for him  to  do
                 so.
           (vi)        There is no real risk of forced recruitment  to  Al
                 Shabaab for civilian citizens of Mogadishu,  including  for
                 recent returnees from the West.
           (vii)      A person returning to Mogadishu after  a  period  of
                 absence will look to his nuclear  family,  if  he  has  one
                 living in  the  city,  for  assistance  in  re-establishing
                 himself and securing a livelihood. Although a returnee  may
                 also seek assistance from his  clan  members  who  are  not
                 close relatives, such help is only likely to be forthcoming
                 for majority clan  members,  as  minority  clans  may  have
                 little to offer.
           (viii)     The significance of clan membership in Mogadishu has
                 changed. Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support
                 mechanisms  and  assist   with   access   to   livelihoods,
                 performing less of a protection function  than  previously.
                 There are no clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan  violence,
                 and  no  clan  based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for
                 minority clan members.
           (ix)        If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to
                 Mogadishu after a period of absence has no  nuclear  family
                 or close relatives  in  the  city  to  assist  him  in  re-
                 establishing himself on return, there will  need  to  be  a
                 careful assessment  of  all  of  the  circumstances.  These
                 considerations will include, but are not limited to:
                        circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
                        length of absence from Mogadishu;
                         family  or  clan  associations  to  call  upon  in
                    Mogadishu;
                        access to financial resources;
                        prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be
                    employment or self  employment;
                        availability of remittances from abroad;
                        means of support  during  the  time  spent  in  the
                    United Kingdom;
                        why his ability to fund the journey to the West  no
                    longer enables an appellant to secure financial  support
                    on return.
           (x)        Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing
                 return to explain why he would not be able  to  access  the
                 economic opportunities  that  have  been  produced  by  the
                 economic boom, especially  as  there  is  evidence  to  the
                 effect that returnees are taking jobs  at  the  expense  of
                 those who have never been away.
           (xi)       It will, therefore, only be those with  no  clan  or
                 family support who will not be in  receipt  of  remittances
                 from abroad and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing
                 access to a livelihood on return who will face the prospect
                 of living in circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is
                 acceptable in humanitarian protection terms.

           (xii)      The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply
                 those who originate from Mogadishu that may  now  generally
                 return to live in the city without being  subjected  to  an
                 Article 15(c) risk or facing a real risk of destitution. On
                 the other hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a person  of  a
                 minority clan  with no former links to the city, no  access
                 to funds and no  other  form  of  clan,  family  or  social
                 support is unlikely to be realistic as, in the  absence  of
                 means  to  establish  a  home  and  some  form  of  ongoing
                 financial support there will be a real risk  of  having  no
                 alternative but to live in makeshift  accommodation  within
                 an IDP camp where there is a real possibility of having  to
                 live  in  conditions   that  will  fall  below   acceptable
                 humanitarian standards."

Claimant's history in the United Kingdom

83. I next turn to claimant's history in the United Kingdom.  This  is  set
    out in broad terms in paragraphs 3 to 12 above. At this stage I need do
    no more than re-iterate that the claimant arrived in the United Kingdom
    in October 1995, aged just 15.

84. The one further feature of the claimant's history in the UK that it  is
    necessary to identify at this stage is the sentence  of  twelve  weeks'
    imprisonment he received on 25 February 2017, having been convicted  of
    theft.  On the expiry of the  claimant's  criminal  sentence  (8  April
    2017) he was detained under immigration powers  and  he  was  still  in
    immigration detention as of the date of the hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Matters not in dispute

85. The following matters of fact are no longer in dispute:

      a) the claimant is from  Mogadishu  in  Somalia,  born  17  May  1980;



      b) he has no family (which is not used in this context to include clan
         members) in Mogadishu, all of his close family members having  left
         Somalia;

      c) he left Somalia, and moved to Kenya, in 1993 or 1994;

      d) he arrived in the United Kingdom in October 1995

      e) were he to return to Somalia it would be "extremely  unlikely  that
         [he] would have available to him any remittances  from  any  family
         member living abroad" (FtT Nightingale's decision at [60]);

      f) he has had no more than a  few  weeks'  employment  in  the  United
         Kingdom.

Matters in dispute

86. The issues in dispute, other than the key issue of whether the claimant
    will be subjected to Article 3 ill-treatment if returned to  Mogadishu,
    can be categorised into the following, each of which I will consider in
    more detail below:

          i)  The  legal  threshold  to  be  applied  to  the   Article   3
             consideration;

         ii) The claimant's clan membership;

        iii) What, if any, funds will the claimant have available to him at
             the point of return to Mogadishu?

         iv) Will the claimant be required to live in an IDP camp?

The threshold for the Article 3 consideration

   87. The 26 pages of written submissions Mr Toal provided on  this  issue
       have  as  their  target  the   Tribunal's   consideration   of   the
       circumstances in IDP camps in Somalia.


   88. The submissions are captured in summary in  the  following  passage,
       found at paragraph 3(f) of the claimant's "Further Submissions";


   "at the previous hearing the [claimant's] case was put entirely  on  the
         basis that his circumstances in an IDP camp  would  be  extreme  or
         exceptional in the N v UK sense. However, he now also  contends  as
         well or in the alternative that  his  case  falls  within  the  MSS
         paradigm. That is because the dire humanitarian conditions in which
         he would have to live result from failure by the Somali  government
         to discharge its obligations under international and  domestic  law
         to IDPs who are recognised as a particularly vulnerable group."


   89. Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention provides:


   "No one shall  be  subjected  to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
        treatment or punishment"


   90. The prohibition under Article 3 is absolute and there can never be a
       justification for acts that breach that provision [Chahal  v  United
       Kingdom (1996) 23 EHRR 413].


   91. Ill-treatment must attain a minimum level of severity if  it  is  to
       engage  Article  3.  'Inhuman'  treatment  is  conduct  that  causes
       sufficient mental and/or physical suffering to  attain  the  minimum
       standard  of  severity.  Its  infliction  need  not  be  deliberate.
       'Degrading' treatment can be  described  as  conduct  which  arouses
       feelings of fear, anguish and inferiority such as  to  humiliate  or
       debase the individual and must, once again, reach a minimum level of
       severity.  The  assessment  is  relative,  depending  on   all   the
       circumstances of the case, including the duration of the  treatment,
       its physical and mental effects, and the age, sex, vulnerability and
       the state of health  of  the  individual  [Hilal  v  United  Kingdom
       (Application No. 45276/99) and Ireland v  United  Kingdom  (1978)  2
       EHRR 25].


   92. Contracting States to the Human Rights Convention have the right  to
       control the entry,  residence  and  removal  of  'aliens'.  However,
       Article 3 applies so as to impose an  obligation  on  a  Contracting
       State not to remove an individual  where  substantial  grounds  have
       been shown for believing that the person concerned faces a real risk
       in the country to which  he  or  she  is  to  be  removed  of  being
       subjected to treatment prohibited by Article  3  [Soering  v  United
       Kingdom [1989] 11 EHRR 439].


   93. In N v United Kingdom  (2008)  47  EHRR  423  the  Strasbourg  court
       observed, under the heading "General principles regarding Article  3
       and expulsion":


    "Article 3 principally applies to prevent expulsion where the  risk  of
         ill treatment in the receiving country emanates from  intentionally
         inflicted acts of the public authorities or from  non-state  bodies
         when the  authorities  are  unable  to  afford  the  applicant  the
         appropriate protection" [30].


   94. This principle of law is also embedded into domestic  jurisprudence.
       For example, in his decision in Bagdanavicius [2005] UKHL 38; [2005]
       2 AC 668, Lord Brown said, at paragraph 24:

         "The plain fact is that the argument throughout has been bedevilled
         by a failure to grasp the  distinction  in  non-state  agent  cases
         between on the one hand the risk of serious harm and on  the  other
         hand the risk of treatment contrary to article 3.  In  cases  where
         the risk "emanates from intentionally inflicted acts of the  public
         authorities in the receiving country" (the language of para 49 of D
         v United Kingdom  24  EHRR  423,  447)  one  can  use  those  terms
         interchangeably: the intentionally  inflicted  acts  would  without
         more constitute the proscribed treatment. Where, however, the  risk
         emanates from non-state bodies, that is not so: any harm  inflicted
         by non-state agents will not  constitute  article  3  ill-treatment
         unless in addition the  state  has  failed  to  provide  reasonable
         protection."

   95. The application of Article  3  is  not,  however,  limited  to  such
       circumstances.  There   is   sufficient   flexibility   to   address
       applications in contexts where:


   "...the source of the risk of the proscribed treatment in the  receiving
         country stemmed from factors which could not engage either directly
         or indirectly the responsibility of the public authorities of  that
         country" [N v United Kingdom at paragraph 31].


96. The nature of the circumstances that attract the protection of  Article
    3, but do not engage either directly or indirectly  the  responsibility
    of the public authorities of the receiving state, has been the  subject
    of  extensive,  although  not  exhaustive,  domestic   and   Strasbourg
    authority.

   97. In D v United Kingdom (1997) 24 EHRR 42  the  Strasbourg  court  was
       concerned with an individual who had been arrested after arriving in
       the United Kingdom without leave to enter and with a large  quantity
       of cocaine  in  his  possession.   D  was  charged,  prosecuted  and
       convicted.  Whilst  in  prison  he  was  diagnosed  with   HIV/AIDS.
       Immediately  before  his  release  the  Secretary  of   State   gave
       directions for his removal to his home country, St Kitts.


   98. The court noted that the principle that Article 3 could be  violated
       in expulsion cases had been applied only in cases where the risk  to
       the individual of being subjected to any of the proscribed forms  of
       treatment emanated from "intentionally inflicted acts of the  public
       authorities in the receiving country  or  from  those  of  non-State
       bodies in that country when the  authorities  there  are  unable  to
       afford him appropriate protection." It went on to say, at  paragraph
       49:


   "... Aside from these situations and given the fundamental importance of
         Article 3 in the convention  system,  the  Court  must  reserve  to
         itself sufficient flexibility to address the  application  of  that
         Article in other contexts which might arise. It  is  not  therefore
         prevented from scrutinising an applicant's claim  under  Article  3
         where the source  of  the  risk  of  proscribed  treatment  in  the
         receiving country stems from factors  which  cannot  engage  either
         directly or indirectly the responsibility of the public authorities
         of that country, or  which,  taken  alone,  do  not  in  themselves
         infringe the standards of that Article. To limit the application of
         Article 3 in  this  manner  would  be  to  undermine  the  absolute
         character of its protection. In any  such  contexts,  however,  the
         Court must subject all the circumstances surrounding the case to  a
         rigorous scrutiny, especially the applicant's personal situation in
         the expelling State.


   99. The court held that D's removal to St Kitts would be a violation  of
       Article 3 because he was "in the advanced stages of a  terminal  and
       incurable illness" [51]; and the abrupt withdrawal of the healthcare
       and support he was receiving in this country would entail "the  most
       dramatic consequences for him" in  that  "removal  will  hasten  his
       death" (at paragraph 52).  In so doing it stated:

          "[53] In view of these exceptional circumstances  and  bearing  in
         mind the critical  stage  now  reached  in  the  applicant's  fatal
         illness, the implementation of the decision to  remove  him  to  St
         Kitts would amount to inhuman treatment ... in violation of Article
         3 ... his removal would expose him to a real risk  of  dying  under
         the most distressing circumstances and would thus amount to inhuman
         treatment...

         [54]...in the very exceptional circumstances of this case and given
         the  compelling  humanitarian  considerations   at   stake...   the
         implementation of the decision to remove the applicant would  be  a
         violation of Article 3." (my emphasis)


  100. The House of Lords considered the application of the decision  in  D
       in its decision in N v Secretary  of  State  [2005]  UKHL  31.  This
       concerned an illegal entrant from Uganda who was diagnosed  as  HIV-
       positive shortly after her arrival in the UK. Although her Article 3
       claim was initially successful before an adjudicator, it  ultimately
       failed before the House of Lords, even though she had been receiving
       treatment in the United Kingdom, which had  resulted  in  a  drastic
       improvement in her medical condition  and  the  withdrawal  of  such
       treatment would shorten her life expectancy because it would not  be
       replicated in Uganda.


  101. Their Lordships reminded themselves that there was no suggestion  of
       N:


   "being subjected to any  of  the  forms  of  treatment  that  article  3
         proscribes  from  intentionally  inflicted  acts  of   the   public
         authorities in Uganda  or  from  those  non-state  agents  in  that
         country against which the authorities there are  unable  to  afford
         her appropriate protection. We are dealing here with a decision  of
         the Strasbourg court which created what the Court of Appeal rightly
         accepted was an "extension  of  an  extension"  to  the  article  3
         obligation." - [Lord Hope of  Craighead  at  [23]:  see  also  Lord
         Nicholls of Birkenhead at [8], Baroness Hale of Richmond [70], Lord
         Brown  of   Eaton-under-Heywood   [86],   with   Lord   Walker   of
         Gestingthorpe expressing agreement with the speeches of all of  the
         other Law Lords [55]].


  102. Having considered the 'pressing humanitarian considerations' of  the
       case, Lord Nicholls concluded that N did not fall within  the  class
       of "exceptional" case recognised in D v UK


  103. Lord Hope opined, with the express agreement of Lord Walker:


   "[48]... Strasbourg has adhered throughout to two basic  principles.  On
         the one hand, the fundamental nature of the  article  3  guarantees
         applies  irrespective  of  the   reprehensible   conduct   of   the
         applicant...On the other hand, aliens who are subject to  expulsion
         cannot claim any entitlement  to  remain  in  the  territory  of  a
         contracting  state  in  order   to   continue   to   benefit   from
         medical...assistance  provided  by  the  expelling  state.  For  an
         exception to be made where expulsion is resisted on medical grounds
         the circumstances must be exceptional...The question on  which  the
         court has to concentrate  is  whether  the  present  state  of  the
         applicant's health is such that, on humanitarian grounds, he  ought
         not to be expelled unless it can be  shown  that  the  medical  and
         social facilities he so obviously needs are actually  available  to
         him in the receiving state... [t]he Strasbourg court  has  been  at
         pains in its decisions  to  avoid  any  further  extension  of  the
         exceptional category of case which D v United Kingdom represents...


   [50] ...What the court is in effect saying is that  the  fact  that  the
         treatment may be beyond the reach of the applicant in the receiving
         state is not to be treated as an exceptional circumstance. It might
         be different if it could be said that it was not available there at
         all and that the applicant was exposed to an inevitable risk due to
         its   complete   absence...   For   circumstances   to   be..."very
         exceptional" it would need to be shown that there  were  compelling
         humanitarian grounds for not removing him to a place  which  lacked
         the medical and social services which  he  would  need  to  prevent
         acute suffering while he is dying..."


  104. Baroness Hale founded her conclusions on the following understanding
       of Strasbourg authority:

         "[69] In my view, therefore, the test, in this  sort  of  case,  is
         whether the applicant's illness has reached such a  critical  stage
         (i.e. he is dying) that it would be inhuman  treatment  to  deprive
         him of the care which he is currently receiving and send  him  home
         to an early death unless there is care available  there  to  enable
         him to meet that fate with dignity. This is to the same  effect  as
         the text prepared by my noble and  learned  friend,  Lord  Hope  of
         Craighead. It sums up the facts in D. It is not met on the facts of
         this case.
         [70] There may, of course, be other exceptional cases,  with  other
         extreme facts, where the humanitarian  considerations  are  equally
         compelling. The law must be sufficiently  flexible  to  accommodate
         them..."
105. Having given careful  and  detailed  consideration  to  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence, Lord Brown opined:

         "[86] The unmistakable conclusion to be drawn from this  series  of
         recent decisions is that the Court has  adopted  the  clear  stance
         that article 3 is not breached by the return of an AIDS sufferer to
         his or her home country save in circumstances closely comparable to
         those in D itself.


         [87] This is not perhaps surprising.  D  represented,  as  Laws LJ
         below observed, "an extension of an  extension  to  the  article 3
         obligation".  The Court in Bensaid (para 40) spoke  of  "the  high
         threshold set by article 3, particularly where the case  does  not
         concern the direct responsibility of the Contracting State for  the
         infliction of harm".

106. His Lordship went on to say:

         "[90]  As  already  indicated,  my  clear  understanding   of   the
         subsequent Strasbourg case law is that the Court has now adopted 'a
         restrictive line'.  It has not been prepared to grant 'an  absolute
         right for seriously ill persons to remain in the  host  country  to
         get treatment, provided they had managed to set foot  there.'   The
         'very far-reaching' consequences of such a right would give rise to
         positive obligations which the Court has not thought  it  right  to
         impose upon the Contracting States."

     And then:

         "[93] The  logical  distinction  between  the  two  very  different
         scenarios presented respectively by D and the later cases is surely
         this.  D appeared to be close to death; paragraph 21 of the Court's
         judgment there records that at the hearing  on  20 February 1997:
         "according to his counsel, it would  appear  that  the  applicant's
         life was drawing to a close much as the experts had  predicted"  (a
         medical report of June 1996 having stated that D's  prognosis  was
         limited  to  8-12  months).   The  critical  question   there   was
         accordingly where and in what circumstances  D  should  die  rather
         than where he should live and be treated.   D  really  did  concern
         what was principally a negative obligation, not to deport D  to  an
         imminent, lonely and distressing end.  Not so the more recent cases
         including  the  present  one.   Given  the  enormous  advances   in
         medicine, the focus now is rather on the length and quality of  the
         applicant's life than the particular circumstances of  his  or  her
         death.  In these cases, therefore, the real question is whether the
         State is under a positive obligation to  continue  treatment  on  a
         long-term basis.  It is precisely in this type  of  case  that  the
         Court's statement in D (para 54), that those  subject  to  removal
         "cannot in  principle  claim  any  entitlement  to  remain  on  the
         territory of a Contracting State in order to  continue  to  benefit
         from medical, social or other forms of assistance provided  by  the
         expelling state", has particular application.


         [94] ...It must be shown that the applicant's medical condition has
         reached  such  a  critical  stage   that   there   are   compelling
         humanitarian grounds for not removing him or her to a  place  which
         lacks the medical and social services when he or she would need  to
         prevent acute suffering while he or she is dying"

107. When N  came  to  be  considered  by  the  Strasbourg  court,  it  also
    concluded that the Article 3 claim must fail, the majority  summarising
    the applicable principles in the following terms:

    "[42] Aliens who are subject to expulsion  cannot  in  principle  claim
         entitlement to remain in the territory of a  contracting  state  in
         order to continue to benefit from medical, social or other forms of
         assistance and services provided by the expelling state.  The  fact
         that the applicant's circumstances, including his life  expectancy,
         would be significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the
         contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself  to  give  rise  to
         breach of art 3.  The decision to remove an alien who is  suffering
         from a serious mental or physical illness to a  country  where  the
         facilities for the treatment of that illness are inferior to  those
         available in the contracting state may raise an issue under art  3,
         but only in a very exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds
         against the removal are  compelling.   In  D  v  UK  ...  the  very
         exceptional circumstances were that the  applicant  was  critically
         ill and appeared to be close to death, could not be guaranteed  any
         nursing or medical care in his country of origin and had no  family
         there willing or able to care for him or provide him  with  even  a
         basic level of food, shelter or social support.


   [43] The court does not exclude that there may be other very exceptional
         cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally compelling.
         However, it considers that it should maintain  the  high  threshold
         set in D v UK... and applied in its subsequent case law,  which  it
         regards as correct in principle,  given  that  in  such  cases  the
         alleged future harm would emanate not form the intentional acts  or
         omissions of public authorities or non-state  bodies,  but  instead
         form a naturally occurring  illness  and  the  lack  of  sufficient
         resources to deal with it in the receiving country.


   [44]...Advances in medical science, together with  social  and  economic
         differences between countries, entail that the level  of  treatment
         available in the Contracting State and the country  of  origin  may
         vary considerably. While it is  necessary,  given  the  fundamental
         importance of Article 3 in the Convention system, for the Court to
         retain a  degree  of  flexibility  to  prevent  expulsion  in  very
         exceptional cases, Article 3 does not place an obligation  on  the
         Contracting  State  to  alleviate  such  disparities  through   the
         provision of free and unlimited health care to all aliens without a
         right to stay within its jurisdiction. A finding  to  the  contrary
         would place too great a burden on the Contracting States."


  108. Turning to the Strasbourg court's decision in M.S.S. v  Belgium  and
       Greece (Application 30696/09) in  which  the  applicant,  an  asylum
       seeker and as such "a member of a particularly  underprivileged  and
       vulnerable population group in need of special protection" had spent
       months in Greece living in a state of  extreme  poverty,  unable  to
       cater for his most basic needs: food, hygiene and a place  to  live,
       and with an ever-present fear of being attacked  and  robbed.  There
       was no likelihood of his situation improving.


  109. The Court found:

         "[366] In  the  instant  case  the  Court  has  already  found  the
         applicant's conditions of detention and living conditions in Greece
         degrading... It notes that these facts were well known  before  the
         transfer of the applicant and were freely ascertainable from a wide
         number of sources...  It also wishes to emphasise that it cannot be
         held against the applicant that  he  did  not  inform  the  Belgian
         administrative authorities of the reasons why he did not wish to be
         transferred to Greece.  It is established that the procedure before
         the Aliens Office made no provision for such explanations and  that
         the   Belgian   authorities   applied   the    Dublin    Regulation
         systematically...


         [367] Based on these conclusions and the obligations  incumbent  on
         the States under Article 3 of the Convention in terms of expulsion,
         the Court considers that by transferring the  applicant  to  Greece
         the Belgian authorities knowingly  exposed  him  to  conditions  of
         detention  and  living  conditions  that  amounted   to   degrading
         treatment."

  110. Underpinning these conclusions was an earlier conclusion,  drawn  in
       relation to the treatment received by the applicant in Greece, that:


   "[264]...It follows that, through the fault of the [Greek]  authorities,
         the applicant has found himself in a  situation  incompatible  with
         art. 3 of the Convention. Accordingly there has been a violation of
         that provision." [264] (our emphasis)


  111. It is plain that the Strasbourg court was here identifying  that  in
       its conclusion the Article 3 proscribed treatment meted out  to  the
       applicant in  Greece,  a  Contracting  State  to  the  Human  Rights
       Convention, emanated from the intentional acts or omissions  of  the
       Greek authorities. This being so, no question arose  as  to  whether
       there were 'exceptional circumstances'. This is no doubt why it made
       no reference to its earlier decision in N v United Kingdom.


  112. The 'fault' of the Greek  authorities  had  been  established  as  a
       consequence of a combination of a number of features  of  the  case,
       most particularly that the obligation to provide  accommodation  and
       decent living conditions to asylum seekers had entered into positive
       law in Greece,  through  transposition  of  the  European  Reception
       Directive. It failed to adhere to the obligations imposed by its own
       domestic legislation  or  those  imposed  on  it  by  the  Reception
       Directive. Had it done so, the applicant's suffering would have been
       substantially alleviated.


  113. In  Sufi  and  Elmi  v  United  Kingdom  (Applications  8319/07  and
       11449/07) (2012) 54 EHRR 9, the Court stated, when  considering  the
       issue of  internal  relocation  within  Somalia  and  in  particular
       whether the applicants would be at risk of Article  3  ill-treatment
       on account of the dire humanitarian conditions in refugee  camps  in
       southern and central Somalia:

        "[281] The Court recalls that N. v. the United  Kingdom  concerned
        the removal of an  HIV-positive  applicant  to  Uganda,  where  her
        lifespan was likely to be reduced on account of the fact  that  the
        treatment facilities there were inferior to those available in  the
        United Kingdom. In reaching its conclusions, the Court  noted  that
        the alleged future harm would emanate not from the intentional acts
        or omission of public authorities or non-State bodies  but  from  a
        naturally occurring illness and the lack of sufficient resources to
        deal with it in the receiving country. The Court  therefore  relied
        on the fact that neither the applicant's illness nor  the  inferior
        medical facilities were caused  by  any  act  or  omission  of  the
        receiving State or of any non-State  actors  within  the  receiving
        State.
        [282] If the dire humanitarian conditions in Somalia were solely or
        even predominantly attributable to poverty or to the  State's  lack
        of resources to deal with a naturally occurring phenomenon, such as
        a drought, the test in N. v. the United Kingdom may well have  been
        considered to be the appropriate one. However,  it  is  clear  that
        while drought has contributed  to  the  humanitarian  crisis,  that
        crisis is predominantly due to the direct and indirect  actions  of
        the parties to the conflict. The reports indicate that all  parties
        to the conflict have employed indiscriminate methods of warfare  in
        densely populated urban areas with no regard to the safety  of  the
        civilian population (see paragraphs 82, 123, 127, 132, 137, 139-140
        and 160,  above).  This  fact  alone  has  resulted  in  widespread
        displacement and the breakdown of social,  political  and  economic
        infrastructures.  Moreover,  the   situation   has   been   greatly
        exacerbated by al-Shabaab's refusal  to  permit  international  aid
        agencies to operate in the areas under  its  control,  despite  the
        fact that between a third and a half of all Somalis are living in a
        situation of serious deprivation.
     [283] Consequently, the Court does not consider  the  approach  adopted
        in N. v. the United Kingdom to be appropriate in the  circumstances
        of the present case. Rather, it prefers  the  approach  adopted  in
        M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, which requires it to have  regard  to
        an applicant's ability to cater for his most basic needs,  such  as
        food, hygiene and shelter, his vulnerability to  ill-treatment  and
        the prospect of his situation improving within a  reasonable  time-
        frame (see M.S.S. v. Belgium and Greece, cited above,  254)."  (my
        emphasis)


114. The Court in Sufi and Elmi identified that it was a relevant  component
    of the decision in N v United Kingdom that it could not  be  said  that
    the harm N was at risk of suffering emanated from an intentional act or
    omission of public authorities or a non-State body [281]. In  Sufi  and
    Elmi the Court were faced with a different situation,  where  the  harm
    likely to be faced by the applicants upon return to Somalia  was  found
    to derive, predominantly, from the direct and indirect actions  of  the
    parties to the conflict in  that  country  [282];  this  being  in  the
    context of there having been no functioning state in Somalia. It was on
    this basis that the Court  distinguished  the  case  from  N  v  United
    Kingdom.


115. There is now, of  course  a  functioning  state  in  Somalia  which  is
    presumably why Mr Toal done not pin the claimant's colours directly  to
    the mast held aloft in Sufi and  Elmi,  despite  that  decision  giving
    specific consideration to the circumstances in IDP camps in Somalia.


116. The rationale underlying the decisions in M.S.S. and Sufi and Elmi  for
    not applying the N threshold is, also, clearly  identifiable  from  the
    Strasbourg court's more decision in S.H.H v UK (2013) 57 EHRR  531.  In
    S.H.H. an Afghan national from Nangarhar province,  whose  lower  right
    leg had been amputated, left leg and  right  hand  had  been  seriously
    injured and who was suffering  from  depression,  had  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2010  and  claimed  asylum  shortly  thereafter.  His
    application was refused by the Secretary  of  State,  who  (i)  broadly
    disbelieved  the  evidence  given  by  the  applicant  because  of  the
    inconsistencies in his claim and the vagueness  of  his  account,  (ii)
    concluded that the applicant would not be at  risk  from  Hezb-i-Islami
    upon return and (iii) in relation to his medical  problems  found  that
    the applicant's case was not 'very exceptional'  so  that  it  did  not
    cross the high threshold of severity such as to engage Article  3.  The
    First-tier Tribunal dismissed the applicant's appeal and permission  to
    appeal was refused.


117. Before the Strasbourg court the applicant, inter alia, complained  that
    he would be at risk in Afghanistan on the basis that (i)  he  would  be
    particularly vulnerable to violence because  of  his  disabilities  and
    (ii) due to his lack of familial support. He  asserted  that  he  would
    face living conditions and discrimination in Afghanistan of a type that
    reaches the Article 3 threshold. In so submitting it  was  argued  that
    his case could be distinguished from N  v  United  Kingdom  because  it
    neither involved a naturally occurring illness, nor the consequences of
    a serious medical condition and the lack of treatment available to it.


118. Of significance to the instant case, is the further submission made  in
    S.H.H. to the effect that the United Nations Convention on  the  Rights
    of Persons with Disabilities should inform the scope of Article 3  and,
    as such, there would be a real risk that  he  would  face  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment  upon  return  to  Afghanistan  due  to  government
    inaction.


119. In its conclusions, the court referred at some length  to  its  earlier
    decisions in N v United Kingdom, Sufi  and  Elmi  and  M.S.S.  [75-77].
    Having found there to have been no evidence that disabled  persons  per
    se were at greater risk of violence than the general Afghan  population
    [85-87], the court turned its mind to the nature and relevance  of  the
    living conditions that awaited  the  applicant  in  Afghanistan,  which
    involved a consideration of the appropriate  principles  against  which
    such assessment ought to take place.


120. Having undertaken such  as  assessment  it  found,  for  the  following
    reasons, that the principles of  N  v  the  United  Kingdom  should  be
    applied. First:


   "[89] The Court recalls that N. concerned the removal of an HIV-positive
         applicant to Uganda, where her lifespan was likely to be reduced on
         account of the  fact  that  the  treatment  facilities  there  were
         inferior to those available in the United Kingdom. In reaching  its
         conclusions, the Court noted that the  alleged  future  harm  would
         emanate not  from  the  intentional  acts  or  omission  of  public
         authorities or non-State bodies  but  from  a  naturally  occurring
         illness and the lack of sufficient resources to deal with it in the
         receiving country. The Court also stated that  Article  3  did  not
         place  an  obligation  on  the  Contracting  State   to   alleviate
         disparities in the availability of medical  treatment  between  the
         Contracting State and the country of origin through  the  provision
         of free and unlimited health care to all aliens without a right  to
         stay within its jurisdiction (ibid,  44). The Court  acknowledges
         that, in the present case, the  applicant's  disability  cannot  be
         considered to be a  "naturally"  occurring  illness  and  does  not
         require medical treatment. Nevertheless, it  is  considered  to  be
         significant that in both scenarios the future  harm  would  emanate
         from a lack of  sufficient  resources  to  provide  either  medical
         treatment or welfare provision rather than the intentional acts  or
         omissions of the authorities  of  the  receiving  State"  [89]  (my
         emphasis)


    Second:


   "[90] The Court considers that the present  case  can  be  distinguished
         from M.S.S. In that case, a fellow Contracting State,  Greece,  was
         found to be in violation of Article 3 of the Convention through its
         own  inaction  and  its  failure  to  comply  with   its   positive
         obligations under both European and domestic legislation to provide
         reception facilities to asylum  seekers.  Central  to  the  Court's
         conclusion was its  finding  that  the  destitution  of  which  the
         applicant in that case complained was linked to his  status  as  an
         asylum seeker and to the fact that his asylum application  had  not
         yet been examined by the Greek authorities. The Court was  also  of
         the opinion that, had they examined the applicant's asylum  request
         promptly, the Greek authorities could have substantially alleviated
         his suffering (see paragraph 262 of the judgment). By contrast, the
         present application concerns the living conditions and humanitarian
         situation in Afghanistan, a non-Contracting  State,  which  has  no
         such similar positive obligations under  European  legislation  and
         cannot be held accountable under the  Convention  for  failures  to
         provide adequate welfare assistance to persons  with  disabilities.
         In that regard, it is recalled that the Convention does not purport
         to be a means of requiring Contracting States to impose  Convention
         standards on other States (see, as a  recent  authority,  Al-Skeini
         and Others v. the United Kingdom [GC], no. 55721/07,  141, 7 July
         2011)"; (my emphasis)


    Third:


   "[91] Although in Sufi and Elmi v. the United Kingdom, cited above,  the
         Court followed the approach set out in M.S.S., this was because  of
         the exceptional and extreme  conditions  prevailing  in  south  and
         central Somalia. In  particular,  there  was  clear  and  extensive
         evidence before the Court that the humanitarian crisis  in  Somalia
         was predominately due to the direct and  indirect  actions  of  all
         parties to the conflict who had employed indiscriminate methods  of
         warfare and had refused to permit  international  aid  agencies  to
         operate (paragraph 282 of the  Sufi  and  Elmi  judgment).  On  the
         current evidence available, the Court is not able to conclude  that
         the situation in Afghanistan, albeit very serious as  a  result  of
         ongoing conflict, is  comparable  to  that  of  south  and  central
         Somalia [91]." (my emphasis)


      Fourth:


   "[e]ven though the difficulties and inadequacies in  the  provision  for
         persons with disabilities in Afghanistan cannot be understated,  it
         cannot be said  that  such  problems  are  as  the  result  of  the
         deliberate actions or omissions of the  Afghan  authorities  rather
         than attributable to a  lack  of  resources.  Indeed  the  evidence
         suggests that the Afghan  authorities  are  taking,  albeit  small,
         steps to improve provision for disabled persons  by,  for  example,
         the National Disability Action Plan..." (my emphasis)


121. The Court dismissed the application, determining the  applicant's  case
    not to be a "very exceptional one, where the  grounds  against  removal
    are compelling."


122. As I have identified above, Article 3  principally  applies  so  as  to
    prevent expulsion where the risk of 'ill treatment'  in  the  receiving
    country emanates  from  intentionally  inflicted  acts  of  the  public
    authorities or from non-state bodies when the authorities are unable to
    afford the applicant the appropriate protection. It  is  only  if  "the
    source of the risk of the proscribed treatment in the receiving country
    stems from factors which cannot engage either  directly  or  indirectly
    the responsibility of the public authorities of  that  country"  (D  at
    [49]), that consideration  turns  to  whether  there  are  "exceptional
    circumstances" of the type identified in D and N.


123. Turning back to domestic jurisprudence, on closer analysis  it  appears
    as though analogies can be drawn between the legal  principle  Mr  Toal
    now seeks to establish, in  reliance  on  the  failure  of  the  Somali
    authorities to abide by their obligations as set out  in  the  numerous
    identified international agreements, and that which the Court of Appeal
    rejected in its decision in ZT  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1421.


124. In ZT the Court of Appeal (Buxton,  Sedley  and  Jonathan  Parker  LJJ)
    considered a case involving a Zimbabwean national  with  HIV.  She  was
    receiving treatment in the United Kingdom,  which  had  stabilised  her
    condition. It was not in dispute that if returned to Zimbabwe she would
    not survive past one or two years. ZT's appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision to remove her to  Zimbabwe  had  been  allowed  by  an
    adjudicator on Article 3 ECHR grounds, a decision that was subsequently
    overturned by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT). In  the  Court  of
    Appeal the appellant, by then represented by Nicholas Blake QC,  sought
    to submit, on the basis of  arguments  that  had  not  previously  been
    deployed, that the IAT were wrong to find error  in  the  adjudicator's
    determination or, alternatively, that it  had  erred  itself  when  re-
    making the decision on Article 3 and 8 grounds. In his judgment, Buxton
    LJ (with the agreement of Jonathan Parker LJ), said as follows:


   [12] Mr Blake recognised that he was constrained, as is this  court,  by
         the decision of the House of Lords in N [2005] 2 AC 296,  analysing
         the Strasbourg jurisprudence and in particular D v  United  Kingdom
         24 EHRR 423. Their Lordships addressed  the  question  in  somewhat
         differing language, but to  the  same  general  effect,  which  can
         perhaps be best represented by the guidance given by Baroness  Hale
         of Richmond in her paragraphs 69-70:


     "the test, in this sort of case, is whether  the  applicant's  illness
           has reached such a critical stage (ie he is dying) that it would
           be inhuman treatment to deprive him of  the  care  which  he  is
           currently receiving and to send  him  home  to  an  early  death
           unless there is care available there to enable him to meet  that
           fate with dignity. This is  to  the  same  effect  as  the  test
           proposed by my noble and learned friend, Lord Hope of Craighead.
           It sums up the facts in D. It is not met on the  facts  of  this
           case. [70] There may, of course,  be  other  exceptional  cases,
           with other extreme facts, where the humanitarian  considerations
           are equally compelling. The law must be sufficiently flexible to
           accommodate them"


   [13] Mr Blake said that there were two respects in which  Ms  ZT's  case
         fell outside the very restrictive regime laid down by  N;  and  one
         respect in which the IAT had in any event wrongly applied N. Before
         addressing the ways in which N is sought to be distinguished  I  am
         bound to make two observations... .


   [14] Mr Blake's first ground of distinction between this  case  and  the
         previous jurisprudence was that whereas in N it was  accepted  that
         the receiving country, Uganda, was making proper efforts to counter
         an  impossibly  difficult  situation,  in  the  present  case   the
         difficulties in Zimbabwe had been significantly contributed  to  by
         the  policy  of  the  government  itself,  in  particular  in   its
         malevolent attitude, discriminatory practices in the application of
         health care, and systematic violations of  humanitarian  and  human
         rights laws. It was argued, by analogy with  the  decision  of  the
         European Court of Human Rights in  Soering  11  EHRR  439,  that  a
         separate category of liability under article 3 arose where the lack
         of health care of which the applicant complained was  directly  the
         fault of the receiving state...


    [16] The argument, as a point of law,  is  misconceived.  Soering  came
         nowhere near to laying down any special rule about the behaviour of
         the receiving state, within the ambit of the single rule of article
         3  in  terms  of  inhuman  and  degrading  treatment...  [i]n   the
         particular factual category of health cases, N lays down the  rules
         as to how article 3  should  be  applied.  Those  rules  include  a
         specific requirement of  exceptional  circumstances.  They  do  not
         include a special sub-category, turning on  the  behaviour  of  the
         receiving state, that takes the case outside the normal  article  3
         regime.


   [17] If, as I consider plain, there is no special rule of  law  relating
         to the behaviour of the receiving state, then the weight  that  the
         tribunal gives to that behaviour must be a matter for the  judgment
         of the tribunal applying the guidance in N. Nothing was put  before
         the IAT that suggested that a detailed examination of the behaviour
         of the Zimbabwe government was required of it.


   [18] That said, I can envisage a case in which the particular  treatment
         afforded to an AIDS sufferer on  return,  in  terms  of  ostracism,
         humiliation, or deprivation of basic rights that was added  to  her
         existing medical difficulties, could create an exceptional case..."


125. There is nothing in the evidence before me which leads me  to  conclude
    that the circumstances that presently  pertain  in  the  IDP  camps  in
    Mogadishu are the result of the deliberate actions or omissions of  the
    Somali authorities,  rather  than  being  attributable  to  a  lack  of
    resources. No attempt was made by Mr Toal to  identify  evidence  which
    supports a contention that the Somali authorities the failure to  abide
    by international agreements was an intentionally inflicted act  of  the
    public authority in Somalia or from those of non-State bodies  in  that
    country when the authorities there are unable to afford him appropriate
    protection.


126. I conclude, therefore,  that  this  is  not  a  case  which  is  to  be
    considered  on  the  basis  of  the  "MSS  paradigm"  -  as   Mr   Toal
    characterises it  -  but  rather,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  recently
    concluded in its decision in  another  case  in  which  deportation  to
    Somalia was proposed: SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442:


   "[18]...to succeed in resisting removal on  article  3  grounds  on  the
         basis of suggested poverty or deprivation on return which  are  not
         the responsibility of the receiving country or others in the  sense
         described in para 282 of Sufi and Elmi, whether or not  the  feared
         deprivation is contributed to by a medical  condition,  the  person
         liable to deportation must show circumstances which bring him  with
         the approach of the Strasbourg Court in the D and N cases."


What clan does the claimant belong to?

127. As identified above the claimant has at all times up  until  last  week
    maintained that he is from the  Majeerteen  sub-clan  of  the  majority
    Darod clan.  The First-tier Tribunal made a finding  of  fact  to  that
    effect.

128. Prior to the 19 June  this  was  a  fact  which  was  not  in  dispute.
    However, in the abovementioned e-mail sent to the Upper Tribunal on  19
    June by the claimant's  solicitor,  indication  is  provided  that  the
    claimant now believes that he belongs to the  minority  Madhiban  clan.
    Insofar as this issue is concerned I conclude the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is to be maintained and I proceed on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that the claimant has consistently given since 2009 and  which
    has been confirmed by the claimant's mother i.e. that  he  is  a  is  a
    member of the Majeerteen sub-clan of the Darod clan.

129. The Darod clan are  an  ethnic  majority  (noble)  clan,  with  members
    spread throughout Somalia. The Majeerteen sub clan are found mainly  in
    Puntland. The number of members of the Darod clan inhabiting  Mogadishu
    is identified in the background evidence as being between 7% and 10% of
    the population (the size of which is  of  itself  not  known  with  any
    precision, the two experts who gave evidence in MOJ  providing  figures
    of 1.5 million and 2.5 million people, respectively).

What, if any, funds will the claimant have available to him at the point  of
return to Mogadishu?

130. The Secretary of State does  not  seek  to  go  behind  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's conclusion that the claimant would not have available to him
    in Mogadishu remittances from any family member.

131. Mr Jarvis submits, however, that the claimant would have  available  to
    him:

              i. 750 obtained through the Facilitated Returns Scheme;

             ii. Alternatively, $100 paid by UK authorities to the  claimant
                 upon the claimant's departure;

            iii. Funds (or the promise  thereof)  the  Home  Office  to  the
                 claimant to meet  his  short-term  accommodation  needs  in
                 Mogadishu;

             iv.  Funds  (or  the  promise  thereof)  from  members  of  the
                 claimant's clan (Darod) resident  in  the  UK  (other  than
                 members of his 'family')

132. I will consider these in turn,  starting  first  with  the  monies  (or
    promise of monies) that Mr Jarvis asserts will  be  accessible  to  the
    claimant upon application under the Facilitated Returns Scheme.

133. The Tribunal in MOJ did not consider this issue in any  detail,  merely
    observing at [423] that:

         "Financial assistance from the Home  Office  may  be  available  to
         voluntary returnees, in the form of a grant of up  to  1,500,  and
         may of significant assistance to a returnee."

134. Judge Southern (one  of  the  authors  of  MOJ)  gave  further  limited
    consideration to the relevance of the Facilitated  Returns  Scheme,  in
    the reported decision of AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia  [2015]
    UKUT 00673 (IAC), stating:


       "[57]  He  would,  though,  be  entitled  to  claim  750  under  the
       respondent's Facilitated Return Scheme, should he chose to apply  for
       it...


       [64(f)] The appellant has no family  accommodation  in  Mogadishu  to
       return to but, as is evidenced by the experience of his own  parents,
       resort to less formal accommodation does not necessarily mean  living
       in conditions that fall below the Article 3 threshold. This appellant
       can apply for a resettlement grant and is well placed to secure  work
       in the vibrant construction industry in  Mogadishu  today"  (emphasis
       added)"

135. Neither the Tribunal in MOJ nor that in AAW  considered  the  operation
    of the Facilitated Returns Scheme, a  task  that  I  am  now  asked  to
    undertake.

136. The relevant guidance explaining the  Facilitated  Returns  Scheme  for
    foreign national offenders is found in a 35-page document headed:  "The
    Facilitated Returns Scheme (FRS), version 8: published for Home  Office
    staff on 3 October 2016"

137. The introduction to  this  document  identifies  that  the  Facilitated
    Returns Scheme (FRS) was established on 12 October  2006  to  make  the
    early removal for foreign national offenders (FNOs) easier. The primary
    aim of the scheme is to encourage FNOs to leave the UK at the  earliest
    possible  opportunity.  It  is  open,  inter  alia,   to   "time-served
    prisoners".

138. An application under the FRS can be made by telephone or  by  informing
    an immigration Officer or member of prison  staff.  The  making  of  an
    application is not, however, treated as being compatible with  pursuing
    an appeal against deportation  and  if  the  appeal  process  is  still
    ongoing  an  applicant  is  required  to  sign  a   "disclaimer   form"
    withdrawing such appeal. This, in my view does not, of itself,  prevent
    an appeal being determined on the basis of monies being available  from
    the FRS upon return for any given applicant, and Mr Toal did  not  seek
    to argue that such an approach should be taken.

139. An applicant will usually  receive  a  reply  within  72  hours  of  an
    application being made. If accepted the current values  of  the  grants
    are 1500 if an applicant is still serving a  custodial  sentence,  and
    750 if  the  application  made  after  the  expiry  of  the  custodial
    sentence. In the instant case the relevant sum is 750.

140. If an applicant does not have either a  valid  travel  document  or  an
    acceptance that such a document will be issued,  any  acceptance  under
    the FRS is provisional until  the  aforementioned  issue  is  resolved.
    Successful applicants will (if detained) be provided  with  a  pre-paid
    cash card in the sum of 500 the day before removal.  In  circumstances
    where it is not possible to provide a cash card, cash will be  provided
    instead. The remaining sum is 'uploaded' to  the  cash  card  once  the
    International Organisation for Migration have, within the  first  month
    of departure, confirmed contact with the applicant.

141. Page 12 of the FRS guidance  identifies  a  number  of  "categories  of
    foreign national offender" that fall outwith the scope of the  FRS.  It
    is uncontroversial that the claimant falls within one of the identified
    categories: i.e. he "has pursued an immigration  appeal  beyond  first-
    tier tribunal  or  its  earlier  equivalents  in  the  past."  In  such
    circumstances the guidance provides that an application  made  by  such
    person under the FRS "will be rejected".

142. One would have thought at this stage  that  terminal  damage  had  been
    done to Mr Jarvis' submission that the claimant would  be  entitled  to
    assistance under the FRS upon his return.   However, the  FRS  guidance
    document provides, at page 14, for exceptions  for  those  who  do  not
    otherwise meet the criteria under  the  scheme.  This  section  of  the
    guidance reads:

         "Cases not otherwise meeting the criteria for departure  under  the
         Scheme

         Cases liable to deportation or removal action that do not meet  the
         other criteria for departure under FRS are normally not eligible.

         An FRS application can be accepted exceptionally on a case by  case
         basis with authorisation of the local deputy director.  This  might
         be where for example it is considered that enforcing departure of a
         FNO would be especially difficult to enforce without allowing  them
         financial assistance  under  FRS.   However,  such  cases  will  be
         numerically few.

         In such cases, the FRS team senior executive officer  must  contact
         their operational  counterpart  who  will  be  managing  the  FNO's
         deportation to discuss whether an application under the scheme  can
         be accepted.

         The FRS team senior manager (a senior executive officer or  higher)
         has the final decision whether to accept such an application."

143. Mr Jarvis submits that the claimant falls squarely within the  confines
    the above passage and is therefore bound to succeed in  an  application
    made under the FRS. I do not accept that this is so. The starting point
    is that the claimant is not eligible for assistance under the  FRS  for
    the reasons  already  highlighted.  It  is  only  in  exceptional  (and
    numerically few) cases that an application under the FRS will, in  such
    circumstances, be accepted. Whilst there is information on page  14  of
    the guidance as to the circumstances relevant to the  exercise  of  the
    discretion involved in considering such an application,  ultimately  it
    is a subjective decision made by a local deputy director.

144. Despite these proceedings having been adjourned to allow  for  evidence
    to be introduced as to the application of the  FRS,  nothing  has  been
    produced by the Secretary of State to support her contention  that  the
    claimant would benefit  from  it.  One  could  envisage,  for  example,
    evidence from a local deputy director giving  more  detail  as  to  how
    discretion is exercised in any given case or, even, evidence from  such
    a director that if this claimant were to apply  on  the  basis  of  the
    facts currently known, the application would be treated favourably. The
    claimant, of course, is not in a position to produce evidence  on  this
    issue because any application he makes will automatically  be  rejected
    as a consequence of the pursuance of the instant appeal.

145. On the basis of the limited evidence made available  on  this  issue  I
    conclude that there is a real  risk  that  the  claimant  will  not  be
    successful were he to make an application under the FRS.

146. I do accept, however, that the claimant will be provided with  $100  on
    departure by the Home Office. In  this  regard,  I  have  before  me  a
    witness statement dated 5 May 2017 and authored by Anne Brewer, Country
    Manager Team 1 (Africa), Country  Liaison  and  Documentation,  Returns
    Logistics in the Home Office, Immigration  Enforcement  department,  in
    which the following is said:

         "1.  I have been asked to provide information to the Upper Tribunal
             in respect of forced returns to Somalia.

         2.   I can confirm that, in respect of  a  forced  returnee,  where
             that person has not applied for  or  been  refused  assistance
             under the FRS (or VARRP) scheme, they  will  receive  $100  on
             departure to cover their immediate needs."

147. Ms Brewer also provided evidence in relation to the possibility of  the
    Home Office providing funds for the claimant's short term accommodation
    needs upon return to Somalia, in the following terms:

         "3.  In exceptional circumstances the Home Office may also  provide
             funds for short terms accommodation needs."

148. This is the only evidence before me going to  the  possibility  of  the
    claimant  being  provided  with   funds   to   cover   his   short-term
    accommodation costs in Mogadishu.  Such  evidence  falls  significantly
    short of demonstrating that  such  funds  would  be  available  to  the
    claimant, and there is clearly a  real  risk  they  would  not  be.  In
    particular, I observe that  there  is  no  indication  as  to  type  of
    circumstances which  are  likely  to  be  sufficiently  exceptional  to
    persuade the relevant Home Office official that such a  payment  should
    be made. Furthermore, even if the claimant does demonstrate that  there
    are exceptional circumstances in his case, there is still a  discretion
    not to provide the funds (as evidenced by the use of the word "may"  in
    paragraph 3 of Ms Brewer's statement). No indication is provided as  to
    what factors will be considered in the exercise of this discretion.  In
    any event, no evidence is provided as to the sum  of  any  monies  that
    would be paid in this regard, or as to  the  period  that  such  monies
    would be provided for.

149. I turn finally  to  Mr  Jarvis'  submission  that  the  claimant  could
    approach members of the Darod community in the UK in  order  to  secure
    remittances from them upon his return to Somalia.   Mr Jarvis  observes
    that the Darod clan are, in particular, resident in  large  numbers  in
    the Islington  area  of  London.   Once  again,  I  reject  Mr  Jarvis'
    contention.

150. The claimant is now in detention and there is no  indication  from  the
    Secretary of State that there is a possibility of  the  claimant  being
    released prior to his deportation (should he be  unsuccessful  in  this
    appeal).   It  is  difficult  to  conceive  in   these   circumstances,
    particularly when taken in conjunction with the  conclusions  regarding
    the claimant's connections to his family members in the  UK,  that  the
    claimant could orchestrate a situation in which he makes contact with a
    Darod clan member in the UK other than those who belong to his  family,
    and persuades that clan member to either fund him upon  his  return  to
    Somalia and/or use their contacts  within  Somalia  to  assist  him  in
    integrating there - either by way  of  providing  accommodation  and/or
    employment. Even if the claimant were not in  detention  I  would  have
    concluded that it would be entirely  speculative  to  assume  that  the
    claimant could obtain assistance from non-familial Darod  clan  members
    living in the UK, in the manner suggested by Mr  Jarvis,  and  I  would
    have proceeded on the basis that he could not.

151. In all  the  circumstances,  I  conclude  that  the  claimant  will  be
    returned to Mogadishu with US$100, but will not have  access  to  other
    monies from the Home Office to meet his short-term accommodation needs,
    any monies under the FRS or monies from Darod clan members in the UK.

152. As to what will  happen  immediately  upon  the  claimant's  return  to
    Mogadishu, Mr Jarvis points to evidence confirming that there are  taxi
    services running between the airport and other areas of Mogadishu  that
    charge approximately $5 for the journey.  Three wheel scooters are also
    a popular form of transport in Mogadishu, which charge approximately $2
    for a ten-kilometre journey. On the basis of such evidence I find  that
    there will be no difficulties in the claimant  travelling  between  the
    airport and an area of Mogadishu which  is  largely  inhabited  by  the
    Darod clan, or indeed any other area of the city.

Will the claimant have to live in an IDP camp?

153. The issue of the  availability  accommodation  must  be  considered  in
    stages.  First,  consideration  must  be  given  to  the  obtaining  of
    accommodation (other than in an IDP  camp)  in  the  immediacy  of  the
    claimant's return. The analysis of this issue is not impinged  upon  by
    the assessment of the likelihood of the claimant obtaining  employment.



154. I bear in mind that the burden of proof is on the claimant,  albeit  it
    is a low one.  As  identified  above,  the  claimant  has  no  familial
    connections in Mogadishu to support  him  in  his  attempts  to  obtain
    accommodation upon return, nor can he draw upon any connections his  UK
    based family members may have with persons in Mogadishu in light of the
    First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that his family members  have  decided
    to sever ties with him.

155. Although it may be that clan membership would be of some assistance  to
    some returnees in finding and  securing  accommodation  in  a  majority
    Darod area, I do not accept that this will  be  so  in  the  claimant's
    case. At present, he is effectively estranged from his clan membership.
    Nevertheless, the evidence does not demonstrate  that  one  needs  clan
    assistance in order to secure accommodation, either within  or  outwith
    an area populated by Darod clan members.

156. Neither party has produced satisfactory  evidence  as  to  the  current
    cost of rental accommodation in Mogadishu, and there  is  no  evidence,
    even historic, as to the cost of accommodation in those areas populated
    by the Darod clan.  The only evidence that was drawn to my attention on
    the cost of accommodation  is  found  in  the  Landinfo's  Fact-Finding
    Mission Report from February 2014, in which the following is said:

         "Regarding  housing  and  security  in  Mogadishu  a  well-informed
         journalist in Mogadishu explained that  housing  prices  and  house
         rentals may vary mainly according to the security situation in  the
         sixteen districts of the city.  As an example of  this  the  source
         compared the districts of Hurriwwa and  Waberi.   In  the  outlying
         district  of  Hurriwwa  you  may  rent  a  five  room   villa   for
         approximately US$100 per month, while the same size villa in Waberi
         district (near the international airport and the AMISOM  controlled
         area) may cost up to US$400 in rent per month."

157. The claimant would not require a five-bedroom villa. It can  reasonably
    be assumed that cost of a single room would be substantially less  than
    the amounts identified above for a five-bedroom villa. Some support for
    this, if required, is found in a UNHCR produced report from April  2016
    titled "Internal Displacement profiling in Mogadishu" in  which  it  is
    said that for the small proportion of IDP's that reported  paying  rent
    in Mogadishu, the average rent was $US10 per month - although I  accept
    that this information is of limited utility because it only  refers  to
    IDPs  and does not identify the type or location of such accommodation;
    nor does the information rule out the possibility that some or  all  of
    the respondents maybe paying rent to relatives  at  a  rate  below  the
    market rate.

158. As to the costs of living  in  Mogadishu  -  other  than  accommodation
    costs, again, I was not taken  to  any  specific  information  on  this
    issue.  I  observe,  however,  that  the  aforementioned  UNHCR  report
    identifies that on average $US 1-2 per week is said  to  be  spent  per
    person on water by those persons who were the subject  of  the  report.
    72% of employed males earn US$14 or less per week on average. A  report
    dated February 2016 and headed  "Youth,  Employment  and  Migration  in
    Mogadishu, Kismayo and Baidoa", authored by Altai  Consulting  for  IOM
    Somalia, provides information (at [3.2.3]) that the "poverty  line"  is
    US$2 per day, although this is not specific to Mogadishu  but  said  to
    represent the three cities, one of which is Mogadishu.

159. Drawing all this together,  in  my  conclusion  even  allowing  for  an
    increase in the cost of accommodation since 2013 (the year the data  in
    the report is said to relate to) the claimant has not demonstrated that
    there is a real risk that he would not be able find a room in Mogadishu
    within the scope of the financial resources he has at his  disposal  in
    the immediacy of his return, even taking into  account  that  he  would
    require sufficient funds left over to pay for the goods he requires  to
    ensure that he is living in circumstances which do not fall below  that
    which it is acceptable in article 3 terms.

160.  Turning  the  issue  of  the  likelihood  of  the  claimant  obtaining
    employment. In MOJ the Tribunal relevantly said as follows:

         "[345]  It  is  beyond  doubt  that  there  has  been  huge  inward
         investment, large-scale construction projects and vibrant  business
         activity.  Land   values   are   said   to   be   "rocketing"   and
         entrepreneurial members of the diaspora with access to funding  are
         returning in significant numbers in the  confident  expectation  of
         launching  successful  business  projects.  The  question   to   be
         addressed is what, if any, benefit does this deliver for so  called
         "ordinary returnees" who are not themselves wealthy businessmen  or
         highly skilled professionals employed by such people."


      The Tribunal then considered evidence given by Dr Hoenhe to the effect
      that a vast majority of people in Mogadishu are struggling to survive,
      concluding:

         "[349] This is a view that is not altogether easy to understand and
         we are unable to agree with it.  The  evidence  is  of  substantial
         inward investment in construction  projects  and  of  entrepreneurs
         returning  to  Mogadishu  to  invest  in  business   activity.   In
         particular we heard evidence about hotels  and  restaurants  and  a
         resurgence of the hospitality industry as well as taxi  businesses,
         bus services,  drycleaners,  electronics  stores  and  so  on.  The
         evidence speaks of construction projects and  improvements  in  the
         city's infrastructure  such  as  the  installation  of  some  solar
         powered street lighting. It does not, perhaps, need much in the way
         of direct evidence  to  conclude  that  jobs  such  as  working  as
         building labourers, waiters or  drivers  or  assistants  in  retail
         outlets are unlikely  to  be  filled  by  the  tiny  minority  that
         represents "the elite"".

161.  The  Tribunal  summarised  its  conclusions  on  the  issue   of   the
    availability of employment opportunities in Mogadishu in the  following
    terms:

         "[351] ...there is evidence before the Tribunal, identified  by  Dr
         Mullen, to the effect that returnees from  the  West  may  have  an
         advantage in seeking employment in Mogadishu over citizens who have
         remained in the city throughout. This is said to  be  because  such
         returnees are likely to be  better  educated  and  considered  more
         resourceful and therefore more attractive as  potential  employees,
         especially where the employer himself or herself has returned  from
         the diaspora to invest in a new business.


         [352] For those reasons we do not accept Dr Hoehne's evidence  that
         it is only a tiny elite that derives any benefit from the "economic
         boom".  Inevitably,  jobs  have  been  created  and  the   evidence
         discloses no  reason  why  a  returnee  would  face  discriminatory
         obstacles to competing for such employment. It may  be  that,  like
         other residents of Mogadishu, he would be more likely to succeed in
         accessing a livelihood with  the  support  of  a  clan  or  nuclear
         family.


         [407(h)] ...it will be for a person facing return to  Mogadishu  to
         explain  why  he  should  not  be  able  to  access  the   economic
         opportunities that have  been  produced  by  the  "economic  boom",
         especially as there is evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are
         taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been way."

162. Mr Toal observes that the evidence provided  to  the  Tribunal  in  MOJ
    demonstrated that 500,000 people  had  returned  to  Mogadishu  between
    November 2011 and August 2012 (MOJ at [346]) and that only 56,900  jobs
    were created between May 2011  and  autumn  2013  (MOJ  at  [211]).  He
    submits that the term 'economic boom' used in MOJ must be  viewed  with
    circumspection and within the true context of there  being  a  "massive
    over supply of labour" in Mogadishu. With respect, the focus by Mr Toal
    on the label attached to the economic situation  in  Mogadishu  by  the
    Tribunal in MOJ is  unhelpful.  The  Tribunal  plainly  considered  the
    evidence before it as a whole, and concluded - even  in  light  of  the
    evidence Mr Toal now seeks to focus upon - that there were  significant
    employment opportunities in Mogadishu at that time.

163. To bring matters more up-to-date, in its report of May 2016 the  UNHCR,
    reliant on figures obtained from a Human Rights Watch  of  April  2015,
    state that approximately 370,000 IDPs live in Mogadishu.

164. Mr Toal submits that the number of IDP's living in Mogadishu  has  seen
    a recent substantial increase as a consequence of the prolonged drought
    affecting some areas of Somalia. Attention was particularly drawn to  a
    report  from  the  Internal  Displacement  Monitoring  Centre  of   the
    Norwegian Refugee Council, showing that between 1 November 2016 and  24
    March 2017 "more than 79,000" people had moved to Mogadishu.  There  is
    no indication as to how these figures were compiled, but Mr Jarvis  did
    not seek to  challenge  their  accuracy.  He  observes,  however,  that
    according to a Somalia Drought Watch publication of 6 April  2017,  the
    rains have started to fall in the western side of Somaliland.

165. I accept that has been a recent influx of people into  Mogadishu  as  a
    consequence of the  drought  in  other  areas  of  Somalia.  This  will
    inevitably lead to there being an increase in  the  number  of  persons
    looking for employment in Mogadishu. I have  taken  this  into  account
    when coming to my conclusions below. This increased  figure  will  not,
    though, be equivalent to the figure identified above because  at  least
    some of those number will be children of  non-working  age  and  others
    will be women who are homemakers reliant on the  males  of  the  family
    unit to provide the necessary funds.

166. Moving on, both parties rely upon evidence contained the February  2016
    report authored by Altai Consulting for IOM Somalia in relation to  the
    prevalence of employment opportunities in  Mogadishu.  As  regards  the
    evidence therein relating to Mogadishu, it  is  based  upon  interviews
    with 400 people under the age of 30 (29% of  those  being  between  the
    ages of 14 and 19) with an almost equal split  in  the  gender  of  the
    interviewees. Information  was  also  received  from  employers,  youth
    organisations,  universities,  job  seeking  services  and   government
    representatives.

167. It is immediately apparent that not only is the sample size small  but,
    more significantly, that the claimant does  not  fall  within  the  age
    range of the persons covered by report. Nevertheless, the  evidence  in
    the  report  still  provides  a  useful  overview  of  the   employment
    opportunities available in Mogadishu.

168.  The  report  identifies  that  Mogadishu  "demonstrates  the   highest
    dynamism...atttacts most investment and benefits...nearly  all  of  the
    business stakeholders  interviewed  (68)  shared  there  optimism  with
    recent   economic   developments   and   noted   the   rise   of    new
    entrepreneurs...of  the  77  companies  interviewed....all  found   the
    present  environment  was  positive  for  investment...".     It   also
    concludes that there is a 6% unemployment rate amongst those living  in
    Mogadishu aged between 14 and 30 years old. Amongst those who  are  not
    students or housewives  the  unemployment  rate  is  said  to  be  30%.
    Although only a third of interviewees described  themselves  as  having
    employment, this is said to be explained not by high unemployment rates
    but by underemployment.

169. The IOM further report that a third of 26-30  year  olds  have  had  no
    education, and that in any event the quality of primary  and  secondary
    level education is poor and that youths  with  primary/secondary  level
    education are likely to be less educated that one would expect. In  the
    same vein, high levels of illiteracy (72%) amongst the  IDP  population
    is disclosed by the April 2016 IDP Profiling in  Mogadishu  report,  it
    also being identified therein that only 28% of IDPs in Mogadishu over 5
    years old have been to school. There  is  an  'increasing'  demand  for
    educated staff, even for low level jobs. Job seekers who do not have an
    education are at a disadvantage on the job market in Mogadishu.

170. Drawing all the evidence together, including the substantial amount  of
    evidence before me to which I have not referred, I conclude that  there
    has been no material change in the  level  of  the  employment/economic
    opportunities available  in  Mogadishu  from  that  identified  by  the
    Tribunal in MOJ and the later reported decision of AAW.  The economy in
    Mogadishu is still vibrant, with reconstruction and retail being at the
    forefront of the 'boom'.

171. The issue still remains, however, as to whether this claimant would  be
    in a position to take advantage of such opportunities. In this  regard,
    Mr Toal draws attention to a "Key Finding" in the IOM report  drawn  in
    the following terms:  "...many  of  the  job  offers  are  not  broadly
    advertised because employers favour the selection of relatives or  clan
    members over the most skilled candidates...This excludes candidates who
    do not have the right connections or who come from minority clans."  It
    is important, however, to consider the details  of  the  report  itself
    rather than the headlines by  which  the  IOM  choses  to  portray  its
    findings.

172. A more in depth analysis of the report identifies that the position  is
    substantially more nuanced. For  low  paid  jobs  within  construction,
    logistics or trade companies, uneducated and unskilled workers wait  in
    Bakara market between 6am and 8am each morning, to be recruited.  There
    is a "gatekeeper" who, for a share of the earnings, manages recruitment
    for positions such as porters and manual workers.

173. This is entirely consistent with the conclusions in  MOJ  and  AAW,  it
    being said in the latter decision:

         "[64(e)]...As was made plain in MOJ & Ors, whilst it may  assist  a
         person  seeking  to  find  work  to  have  the  sponsorship  of  an
         established family  network  of  majority  clan,  absence  of  that
         support was not a disqualification to access to work."

174. There is no indication that this recruitment  process  is  clan  biased
    but, in any event, as a member of one of the majority clans even if  it
    were clan biased the claimant would not be excluded from access to such
    employment. Given that the claimant will be  competing  for  employment
    against uneducated  and  unskilled  workers,  and  given  the  type  of
    employment that is on offer, the claimant's lack of work experience  is
    not likely to count against him to any significant degree, if  at  all.
    He also has the  benefit  of  two  positive  characteristics  that  his
    competition is unlikely to share i.e. his ability to speak English  and
    the fact that he has been educated. As to the latter, the OASys  report
    of 5 March 2015 indicates that the claimant was in education in the  UK
    between the ages of 14 and 18.

175. The claimant could make use of the opportunities to obtain low  skilled
    work in the immediacy of his return. The income levels  are  not  high,
    but are sufficient to ensure the claimant would be able to live outside
    of an IDP  camp  in  conditions  which,  although  far  from  being  as
    comfortable as the conditions the claimant has enjoyed in  the  UK,  do
    not fall foul of the Article 3 threshold.

176. The IOM report further indicates that it is the small companies,  which
    are most numerous, that rely  on  relatives,  close  friends  and  clan
    elders  to  identify  candidates  for  employment,  this  being  as   a
    consequence of the insecurity and general distrust  of  people  from  a
    different clan. Most employers look for staff with simple skills,  such
    as business management, English or basic IT  knowledge.   The  claimant
    has one of these sought-after skills.

177. I accept, however, that simply being a member of a majority  clan  will
    not be sufficient of itself for the claimant to obtain employment in  a
    'small company'. He would need to gain the trust  of  clan  elders.  No
    reason has been offered, however, as to  why  the  claimant  could  not
    familiarise himself with his clan and ultimately earn the trust of  the
    clan elders, albeit I accept that this could not  be  achieved  in  the
    immediacy of his return.

178. Looking at all the evidence in the round, I conclude that the  claimant
    would return to Mogadishu with sufficient funds to enable him to obtain
    simple accommodation and the necessary food  and  hygiene  products  to
    ensure that at the point in time of his return, and shortly thereafter,
    he would not be living in conditions which fall  below  the  Article  3
    threshold. He is a fit and healthy person,  able  to  complete  in  the
    market  for  low  skilled  employment  in  Mogadishu.  Such  employment
    opportunities exist outwith  the  need  for  clan  assistance  and  the
    claimant has the advantage of being educated  when  seeking  out  those
    opportunities. I do not accept that there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
    claimant will not obtain such employment in a relatively  short  period
    after his return, nor do I accept that there is a  real  risk  that  he
    would not earn sufficient monies from such employment so as  to  enable
    him to live outwith an IDP camp in conditions which  would  not  breach
    Article 3. The  claimant  also  has  the  opportunity,  over  time,  to
    ingratiate himself with members of the Darod  clan,  a  majority  clan,
    which is likely to provide  him  with  further  and  better  employment
    opportunities in the long run.

179. For all  these  reasons,  I  therefore  conclude  that  the  claimant's
    deportation would not lead to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The FtT's decision contained an  error  of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
outcome of the appeal and it is set aside.

Upon re-making, this claimant's (Mr Ahmed's) appeal is dismissed.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
24 July 2017




