
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00168/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 June 2019                      |On 15 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                mrs Ying Yang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, counsel instructed by K & G
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of China born on 26 August 1970.  She first
    arrived in the UK on 12 November 2006 unlawfully and  was  served  with
    illegal entry papers on 18 November 2006.

 2. She then made an asylum claim on the basis that she  was  a  Christian,
    but this application was refused and her appeal was  dismissed  by  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal on 6 March 2007.   The  Tribunal  found
    that her claim was a fabrication designed to gain access to the UK  and
    she became appeal rights exhausted on 22 March 2007.

 3. The Appellant subsequently met Mr Buyun Lin who was granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in April 2011.  They married on 12 July  2011  and  the
    Appellant made a number of applications for  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of the marriage.  However these seem all to have been refused  on
    the basis that she was unable to provide a valid passport  or  identity
    document, having entered the UK without such  a  document.   Ultimately
    submissions were made on her behalf on 1 September 2017 and these  were
    refused in a decision dated 23 November  2017  with  the  right  of  in
    country appeal.

 4. The Appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal came before
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing on 18 January  2019  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cary.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  30
    January 2019, the appeal was dismissed.

 5. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  there  was
    evidence that the Appellant had been  unable  to  obtain  an  emergency
    travel document or passport and this was material to the assessment  of
    whether or not there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the UK pursuant  to  paragraph  EX2  and  EX1(b)  of
    Appendix FM.

 6. The second ground of appeal asserted that, in light of Rhuppiah  [2018]
    UKSC 58, there was flexibility inherent in the little weight provisions
    of Section 117B(4) of the NIAA 2002 and it was at least arguable that a
    normative approach to this section did require a flexible  approach  in
    light of the Appellant's  lengthy  residence  and  to  the  absence  of
    identity documentation.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    in a decision dated 10 April 2019 in the following terms

         "There is some arguable merit in the grounds  because  in  a  human
         rights case whether there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
         life continuing in China has to be considered as  at  the  date  of
         hearing.  This would include whether or not the Appellant  is  able
         to return to China and with regard to ground 1, it is arguable that
         the judge failed to make  findings  of  fact  on  the  Respondent's
         assertion that the  Appellant  had  deliberately  given  inaccurate
         information to the Chinese Embassy and whether the Appellant had in
         fact applied for a passport.  If the Appellant had in fact supplied
         inaccurate information it would strengthen the public  interest  in
         removal, if she had not it would strengthen her case.  Both grounds
         are arguable and permission to appeal is granted".

 8. The Respondent subsequently served a Rule 24 response dated 8 May 2019,
    opposing the appeal on the basis that  the  claim  that  the  Appellant
    would have returned to China after her asylum appeal was  dismissed  in
    March 2007, but for her  lack  of  documentation,  does  not  withstand
    scrutiny. The Appellant remained unlawfully  before  making  her  first
    unsuccessful application to remain in 2012.  The fact that the  refusal
    mentioned several occasions when the Appellant was interviewed  with  a
    view to being redocumented and the information she gave did not lead to
    her identity being verified does not mean she would  be  unable  to  be
    documented at some point.  There is  no  evidence  the  Appellant  ever
    sought to make a voluntary return to China. It was submitted  that  the
    fact the Appellant cannot at present obtain a travel  document  is  not
    sufficient to show insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant  and  her
    husband residing in China.

    Hearing

 9. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Kannangara  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant clarified that there was no specific documentary evidence
    emanating from the Chinese Embassy of the Appellant's attempt, referred
    to in the Appellant's statement at [16]  and  page  9  of  the  refusal
    decision,  to  obtain  a  passport  or   travel   document.    In   the
    supplementary bundle at page 139 there is reference to the  fact  there
    are copies of the applications made and previous refusals, for  example
    on 1 December 2015 the Appellant's application was refused on the basis
    of invalidity due to the fact that no passport or identity document had
    been submitted, in a decision dated 2 February 2016 at page 142  and  a
    decision dated 9 August 2016 at pages 146 to 147 and dated 17 November
    2016 at page 148 were all refused on the basis of invalidity.  Page  A1
    of the Respondent's bundle which is  an  extract  from  representations
    dated 31 August 2017 also sets  out  the  history  of  the  Appellant's
    inability to obtain a passport.

10. Mr Kannangara submitted that the grounds of appeal very clearly explain
    the issue in the case.  The judge failed to take account  of  the  fact
    that the Appellant could not obtain a passport or travel document.  The
    Secretary of State first tried to obtain an emergency  travel  document
    for her in 2006  after  her  asylum  application  was  refused.   Three
    further attempts were also made in 2008, 2009 and 2017 but  these  were
    refused on the basis that the Chinese Embassy was unable to verify  her
    identity.

11. The Appellant also states in her witness statement that  she  attempted
    to get a passport  herself  in  2016  but  this  application  was  also
    rejected by the Chinese Embassy.

12. Whilst there was no evidence from the Embassy, it was very  clear  from
    the refusal that the Respondent was  attempting  to  get  an  emergency
    travel document for the Appellant and her applications were rejected on
    this basis.

13. Mr Kannangara submitted that the judge should have taken this  evidence
    into account as a material factor.  The Appellant cannot go to China in
    order to pursue family life with her husband because she is  unable  to
    travel there at all.  Consequently, she cannot be removed and this  was
    a material consideration that should  have  been  taken  into  account.
    However at [35] the judge finds that this does not assist the Appellant
    in her appeal stating as follows

         "I note there had been some difficulties in obtaining an  emergency
         travel document for the Appellant  as  identified  in  the  refusal
         letter.  That cannot assist  the  Appellant  in  relation  to  this
         appeal.  All human rights appeals are hypothetical.  They  are  all
         concerned with the removal that has not in fact  taken  place.  The
         decision facing the Tribunal is the  hypothetical  one  of  whether
         removal would be contrary  to  the  European  Convention  of  Human
         Rights at the time of the hearing.  I have to  decide  whether  the
         Appellant's Article 8 rights would be violated by a removal.  It is
         neither required nor appropriate to  speculate  about  whether  the
         Appellant can be returned.  If there is to be  no  removal,  it  is
         difficult to imagine that a  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  to  an
         illegal  entrant  could  breach  any  of  his  human  rights,   see
         Maksimovic, Crown (on the application of) [2004] EWHC 1026".

14. In her submissions, Ms Jones on behalf of the Secretary of State sought
    to rely on the Rule 24 response.  She submitted that at [35] the  judge
    was perfectly entitled to reach that conclusion.  She pointed out  that
    at A1 of the Respondent's bundle in the representations  the  Appellant
    stated she was afraid to approach the Embassy for  a  passport  however
    and there was no evidence presented to the Tribunal  that  she  has  in
    fact attended and that the Embassy had told her they would not be  able
    to issue her with a passport.

15. Ms Jones pointed out that it had not been submitted that the  Appellant
    was stateless.  In her witness statement at [18] and [21]  and  in  the
    skeleton argument at [20] the Appellant stated she has been interviewed
    four times with a view to documentation and has  been  refused  because
    her nationality could not be verified, however, there was an absence of
    evidence.  She submitted that credibility  was  in  issue  because  the
    Appellant's asylum claim had  been  rejected  and  that  there  was  no
    material error of law.  The judge has taken  the  position  that  there
    have been difficulties but has not gone on to say anything further  and
    that this was the correct approach given the absence of evidence.

16. In reply, Mr Kannangara submitted that even if one disregards what  the
    Appellant has said in her statement, that there  is  still  information
    emanating from the Secretary of State in  a  refusal  letter  plus  the
    subjective fear of going to the Chinese authorities.

17. I sought clarification as to whether the interviews that the Appellant
    had undertaken were with the Home Office or with the  Chinese  Embassy.
    Mr Kannangara sought to  seek  instructions  on  this  point  from  the
    Appellant and Ms Jones was asked to check the Home Office files and was
    able  to  confirm  that  there  was  evidence  the  Appellant  had  had
    documentation interviews with the Home Office,  copies  of  which  were
    then provided  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  to  Mr  Kannangara.   She
    submitted that the reason for the refusal of the travel  documents  was
    due to insufficient information and  a  failure  by  the  Appellant  to
    attend one interview on 15 December 2008.

    Findings and Reasons

18.  I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

19. The primary issue to be determined is whether the First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred materially in law in finding that the apparent inability of
    the Appellant to travel  to  China,  because  her  identity  cannot  be
    verified and thus it  has  not  proved  possible  to  obtain  either  a
    passport or an emergency travel document is material, can constitue  an
    "insurmountable obstacle" pursuant to paragraph EX1(b)of Appendix FM of
    the Rules.

20. I have, in this respect,  taken  into  consideration  the  Home  Office
    guidance in respect of Article 8, family  and  private  life,  10  year
    routes dated 11 April 2019. The issue of  insurmountable  obstacles  is
    addressed at pages 37-39 and provides inter alia as follows at page 38:

         "Ability to lawfully enter and stay in another country


         The decision maker should consider the ability of the members of
         the family unit (both the applicant and others) to lawfully enter
         and stay in another country. The onus is on the applicant to show
         that it is not feasible for them and their family to enter and stay
         in another country for this to amount to an insurmountable
         obstacle. A mere wish, desire or preference to live in the UK is
         not sufficient.


         An example of where it might not be feasible for the family to live
         together elsewhere might be where the sponsor has gained their
         settled status in the UK through a refugee route, and the applicant
         is of the same nationality. In the absence of a realistic third
         country alternative, the settled person's inability to resume life
         in the country of origin is likely to constitute an obstacle to
         family life continuing overseas.


         The decision maker should consider relevant country information
         (but may not seek to go behind any decision to grant refugee
         status)."


21. I have concluded in light of the above, that  the  Judge's  finding  at
    [35] that the Appellant's difficulties in obtaining an emergency travel
    document cannot assist her does amount to a material error of  law,  in
    that the Appellant's ability to lawfully enter and  stay  in  China  is
    clearly a material factor in the consideration of whether or not  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  UK
    ie. in China. It will be a matter for the First tier Tribunal Judge who
    hears the remitted appeal as to  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    documents from the Home Office attesting to their efforts to obtain  an
    ETD and that to be attached to the evidence of the Appellant has to her
    efforts to obtain a passport directly from the Chinese Embassy.

22. As to the second ground of appeal, that at [32]  the  Judge  failed  to
    apply the flexible approach set out in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58 at  [49]
    with regard to the little weight provisions of Section 117B(4)  of  the
    NIAA 2002, given the Appellant's lengthy residence and to  the  absence
    of identity documentation, I find that a material error of law has been
    established. It is clear from [49] of Rhuppiah that in order to succeed
    "such generalised normative guidance may be  overridden  (only  in)  an
    exceptional case by particularly strong features of the private life in
    question." It is  at  least  arguable  that,  had  the  Judge  properly
    factored in  the  length  of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her
    husband, which is 13 years and her  apparent  inability  to  return  to
    China that this would have made a material difference to the weight  he
    attached to that relationship.





Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  for  a  hearing  de
novo before the First tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 9 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

