
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00674/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 26th July 2019                    |On 05th August 2019                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                ASIF HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Ashwood
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision  of  Judge  A  R  Hudson  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on  18th  March
    2019.

 2. The Appellant, born 8th June  1993,  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   He
    entered the UK as a child visitor on 20th June 2007.   He  remained  in
    the UK when his leave expired.  On 7th February 2017 he was served with
    a liability for removal notice and on 19th July 2017 applied for  leave
    to remain which was deemed to be a human rights claim.

 3. The application was refused on 24th December  2018  and  the  Appellant
    appealed to the FtT.

 4. The appeal was heard on 7th March 2019.  The Appellant who was 25 years
    of age at the date of hearing gave evidence as  did  his  adult  sister
    with whom he has lived since his arrival in the UK.

 5. The judge noted that the Appellant lives with his sister and brother-in-
    law and their five children.  The judge found that the Appellant  could
    not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules, as he had
    not proved that there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Pakistan.  The judge found that the Appellant has family
    members in Pakistan, including four older siblings and his parents.

 6. The judge considered Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  outside
    the Immigration Rules, concluding that Article 8 was engaged,  but  the
    Appellant's removal from the UK would be proportionate.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Application for Permission to Appeal

 8. The grounds seeking permission are lengthy, running  to  30  paragraphs
    set out over  eight  pages,  and  exceed  the  length  of  the  judge's
    decision.

 9. In brief summary it was submitted that the judge had erred  in  law  by
    failing to  consider  material  matters/material  evidence,  failed  to
    properly consider the Article 8 claim  and  case  law,  and  failed  to
    properly apply case law regarding  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  concerning
    significant obstacles and integration.  The judge found at paragraph 13
    that the Appellant has lived with his  sister  and  brother-in-law  and
    their five children, and has  effectively  been  raised  as  the  older
    brother to the children since he was 14.   The  judge  found  that  the
    children (who at the time were aged between 20 and 12)

         "love him dearly and would miss him if  he  returned  to  Pakistan,
         however, on the evidence before me  there  is  nothing  exceptional
         about the relationship between them and their adult brother.   They
         are not dependent upon him financially or emotionally and he is not
         dependent upon them".

    It was submitted that the judge had erred in law by making reference to
    exceptionality rather than assessing proportionality.

10. It was contended that the judge  had  failed  to  conduct  a  balancing
    exercise when considering the Appellant's case under  Article  8.   The
    Appellant had resided with his family  members  in  the  UK  since  his
    arrival in the UK which was a significant period of time  and  had  not
    lived independently from them.

11. It was submitted that the judge had erred at paragraph  16  in  relying
    upon the Court of Appeal decision in Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ  803,  as
    that case had been replaced by the Supreme Court decision  in  Rhuppiah
    [2018] UKSC 58.  The Supreme Court found  that  financial  independence
    with reference to section 117B(3) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 meant an  absence  of  financial  dependence  upon  the
    state.  The judge was therefore wrong to find that  the  Appellant  was
    not financially independent.

12. It was submitted that the judge erred when considering very significant
    obstacles with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) by failing to apply
    case law, Parveen [2018] EWCA Civ 932 and Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. Initially permission to appeal was refused by Judge Scott-Baker of  the
    FtT, but subsequently granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer  in
    the following terms;

         "1.  The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 8th June 1993.
              He seeks permission to appeal the decision of the  First-tier
             Tribunal  Judge  who  dismissed   his   appeal   against   the
             Respondent's decision to refuse to grant him leave  to  remain
             on human rights grounds.  He arrived in the UK as  a  14  year
             old on a family visit.  When his mother and  brother  returned
             to Pakistan, he was left with his  sister's  family.   He  has
             lived in the UK for close to twelve years.  He has effectively
             been  raised  as  the  elder  brother  of  his  sister's  five
             children, ranging in age from 20 to 12 years.  He continues to
             live with them.

         2.   Although the grounds are not always coherent, it  is  arguable
             that the Appellant had established family life with his sister
             and her family, the significance of  which  was  not  properly
             assessed by the judge.  It is also arguable  that  she  should
             have applied the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  Rhuppiah
             [2018] UKSC 58 which was in existence at the time, rather than
             the test adopted by the Court of Appeal [2016] EWCA Civ 803.

         3.   Permission to appeal is granted".

14. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT decision contained an error
    of law such that it must be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

15. At the oral hearing Mr Bates conceded  that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    considering Rhuppiah, but contended this was not a material error.

16. Miss Patel relied and expanded upon the grounds  contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal.

17. I find no material error of law for the following reasons.

18. The judge adopted the correct approach in  law  when  considering  this
    appeal.  This is demonstrated  at  paragraph  16  in  which  the  judge
    explains that the human rights claim must  be  considered  through  the
    prism of the Immigration Rules.

19. It was not suggested that the Appellant could satisfy  Appendix  FM  in
    relation to family life.  The judge considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).
     The judge refers to Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 13 and it is contended  was
    wrong to do so.

20. In my view that is not the case.  The grounds refer to Parveen in which
    Underhill LJ commented  upon  the  finding  in  Treebhawon  that  "mere
    hardship,  mere  difficulty,  mere  hurdles,  mere  upheaval  and  mere
    inconvenience, even where multiplied are unlikely to satisfy  the  test
    of very significant  obstacles  in  paragraph  276ADE".   Underhill  LJ
    stated

         "I have to say that I do not find that a very useful gloss  on  the
         words of the rule.  It is fair enough to  observe  that  the  words
         "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold, and I  have  no
         difficulty with the observation that the test will not  be  met  by
         mere inconvenience or upheaval.  But I am not sure that saying that
         mere hardship or difficulty or hurdles, even  if  multiplied,  will
         not generally suffice adds anything of substance".

21. It is  clear  from  the  guidance  given  by  Underhill  LJ  that  very
    significant obstacles connotes an elevated threshold.  It is not a case
    of whether it would be reasonable for the  Appellant  to  integrate  in
    Pakistan.

22. The judge did not  refer  to  Kamara,  but  in  my  view  followed  the
    principles set out in that decision.  At paragraph 14 of Kamara  it  is
    explained that there must be a broad evaluative judgment.  It  must  be
    considered whether an individual is enough of an insider  in  terms  of
    understanding how life in the society  in  the  country  of  return  is
    carried on.  The individual must have the capacity  to  participate  in
    life in that country and have a reasonable opportunity to  be  accepted
    there and operate on a day-to-day basis.  The individual must  be  able
    to build up with a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to
    give substance to their private or family life.

23. The judge took into account at paragraph 17 that the Appellant lived in
    Pakistan for his formative years prior to arrival in the UK.  He has  a
    full understanding  of  the  infrastructure.   The  Appellant  is  well
    educated and in good health and has the support of a wealth of  friends
    and relatives in Pakistan.  He speaks both Urdu and  English  and  will
    have considerable advantages in the labour market having the benefit of
    a full education from the UK including a BTEC diploma in IT.

24. The judge took into account that an inability to read or write in  Urdu
    may make some occupations unavailable to the Appellant but  an  ability
    to read, write and speak English would place him at an  advantage  over
    many peers.

25. The judge found that the Appellant would be able to work  in  Pakistan.
    There is no error of law disclosed in the consideration by the judge of
    the test of very significant obstacles.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that the Appellant had not satisfied the burden of proof.

26. Having found that the Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules
    the  judge  correctly  went  on  to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The  test  to  be  applied  is  whether  there  are
    exceptional  circumstances  that  would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences.  I do not find that the  judge  failed  to  consider  any
    material evidence.  The judge took into account the best  interests  of
    the two minor children with whom the Appellant lived.  At paragraph  18
    the judge finds that the best interests of a child must  be  a  primary
    consideration.  The judge found that the best interests of the children
    would be to remain in the care of their parents.  There is no error  of
    law disclosed on this issue.

27. The judge found that the Appellant had lived with family members  since
    arriving in the UK.  The judge was entitled to take into  account  when
    considering the public interest, that the Appellant had overstayed  his
    visa although the judge did not blame him  for  that  while  he  was  a
    minor.

28. The judge erred in considering section 117B(3) which confirms  that  it
    is  in  the  public  interest  that  a  person  seeking  to  remain  is
    financially independent.  The judge should  have  applied  the  Supreme
    Court decision in Rhuppiah which was in force at the date  of  the  FtT
    decision.  The Appellant was not financially dependent upon  the  state
    and therefore should have been regarded as financially independent, but
    the judge was quite correct to point out that he is  reliant  upon  his
    family members in the UK for accommodation and all  basic  necessities.
    Financial independence is not a positive consideration in section 117B,
    but is a neutral factor to be  taken  into  account  in  the  balancing
    exercise.  The judge's error was therefore not  material  and  did  not
    infect other findings.

29. The judge at paragraph 16 found that the Appellant had established  his
    private and family life while his immigration  status  was  precarious.
    The Appellant's immigration status  was  not  in  fact  precarious,  as
    precarious means that he would have had limited leave.   The  Appellant
    has established his family and private life while he  has  remained  in
    the UK without any leave.  The judge has taken into account family  and
    private life established by the Appellant, but also taken into  account
    the public interest as she was bound to do.  The only error relates  to
    the application of Rhuppiah, and as previously stated  I  do  not  find
    that to be a material error.  Had  the  judge  considered  the  Supreme
    Court decision in Rhuppiah, it would not have altered the decision that
    was made.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a  material  error  of  law.   The
appeal is dismissed.

There has been no application for anonymity and I see no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date         27th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         27th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall












