
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00466/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (Via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 July 2021                            |On 23 July 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                KALSOON BEGUM
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs U Sood (Public Access).
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1.     The appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Mensah ('the Judge') promulgated on 21st December 2020,
      in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
   2.     The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  6  May  1941  who
      entered the United Kingdom lawfully as a visitor  but  who  thereafter
      made an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the
      basis of family and private life, which was refused by  the  Secretary
      of State on 19 December 2019. It is the appeal against  that  decision
      which came before the Judge.
   3.     Permission to appeal was refused by another judge  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal but granted by  a  judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
      operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

           "2.    Despite a number of adverse findings, it is arguable that
              the judge erred in law by failed  properly  to  consider  the
              medical evidence of the appellant's health  need  in  the  UK
              (such as the GP evidence) and, as  a  result,  whether  those
              needs will be met in Pakistan applying AM (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD
              [2020] UKSC 17 - in addition, the judge  arguably  discounted
              the appellant's evidence  unduly  because  of  her  excusable
              absence, even if he was entitled - as counsel accepted  -  to
              take her absence into account.


           3.     The  remaining  grounds  are  less  meritorious,  but  I,
              nevertheless, grant permission on all grounds. It will be for
              the appellant  to  show  any  established  error  of  law  is
              material to the ultimate decision."

   4. The Secretary of State, in her Rule 24 reply dated  24th  March  2021,
      opposes the appeal.

Error of law

   5. In relation to the scope of the hearing, Mrs  Sood  argued  that  both
      articles 3 and article 8 ECHR were large and that the Judge had failed
      to deal with the article  3  issue.  Reference  was  made  to  a  Case
      Management Review hearing (CMR) where it was submitted that the  issue
      of the need to consider the appellant's case in light of AM (Zimbabwe)
      was raised, that  this  matter  had  been  included  in  the  skeleton
      argument and had been taken on the appellant's behalf.
   6. The Secretary of State's position in her Rule 24 response is that  the
      appellant made an application based upon her private life in  the  UK,
      which was addressed in the refusal letter. The appellant had  provided
      no evidence to demonstrate that  article  3  was  pleaded  before  the
      Tribunal, no consent had been obtained from the Secretary of State  to
      a new ground being pleaded, and that it will be for the  appellant  to
      show that article 3 was a live issue.
   7. The outcome of the  CMR  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox  was
      confirmed in a Notice and Directions dated 27 October 2020, noting the
      five issues identified as being relevant as:


           i. Whether family life exists  between  the  Appellant  and  her
              adult children in the UK.
          ii. If yes, has the appellant established that she and her family
              would suffer unjustifiably harsh consequences if the  refusal
              decision were to stand (GEN.3.2. of Appendix FM).
         iii. Whether the appellant has established a limited private  life
              in the UK that engages article 8.
          iv. If yes, whether there would be very significant obstacles  to
              her integration into Pakistan, if she were required to  leave
              the UK.
           v.  If  the  appellant's  application  does  not   satisfy   the
              requirements of the Immigration Rules  are  there  compelling
              and compassionate grounds to justify her being granted  leave
              to remain outside the rules.


   8. A copy of the Visa application form is included in  the  Secretary  of
      State's bundle confirming the statement that the appellant applied for
      leave to remain on the family/private life route.  A  covering  letter
      dated 9 August 2019 referred to the extent of her family in the UK and
      at [16] that articles 3 and 8 are involved in maintaining the  dignity
      of the authors mother (the appellant) in the latter part of her  life.
      The refusal letter also refers to article 3 ECHR, where it is written:

           "Your application has been reviewed to determine whether Article
           3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (prohibition
           against inhumane and degrading treatment) is engaged as a result
           of the medical condition raised. Article 3  on  medical  grounds
           has a very high threshold and is applicable in exceptional cases
           only."

   9. Having set out a quote by reference to N v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department [2005] UKHL 31, and having examined  the  availability
      of healthcare in Pakistan, it was concluded by the author:

           "On the basis of the above information  it  has  been  concluded
           that suitable  medical  treatment  is  available  in  your  home
           country. You have not provided any evidence that  you  would  be
           denied medical treatment, nor that you would be unable to travel
           to obtain such treatment.


           Consequently, it is not accepted that your removal from  the  UK
           reaches the high threshold of severity to breach  Article  3  of
           the ECHR on the basis of your medical claim and condition."

  10. The grounds of appeal  against  the  decision  specifically  refer  to
      article 3 ECHR.
  11. Before the Upper Tribunal Mrs Sood  made  reference  to  the  skeleton
      argument filed before the First-tier Tribunal,  which  refers  to  the
      notice by Judge Cox, but also to the medical evidence, the  appellants
      relationship within the family, article  8  ECHR,  and  other  issues,
      before concluding at [9]:

           "9.    Ultimately, as the GOA contender, the Respondent has  not
              substantiated  the  existence  of  accessible  good   quality
              medical  care  in  Pakistan,  nor  dealt  with  the  lack  of
              accreditation or regulated care that the Appellant  might  be
              able to access. These  submissions  (and  the  Grounds)  also
              raise both Articles 3 and 8 being breached, including risking
              the life of the Appellant, and the effect on the dignity  and
              loving needs of this mother in the final stages of her life."

  12. The Judge at [4 - 7] of the decision under challenge sets out what are
      described as the agreed issues in the following terms:

           "4.    Whether the appellant can  meet  the  dependent  relative
              rule or Appendix FM, given she entered the United Kingdom  as
              a visitor and  applied  for  leave  outside  the  Immigration
              Rules?


           5.     Whether the Appellant can meet any of the criteria  under
              Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In  other  words,
              whether she faces very significant obstacles  to  integration
              in Pakistan if she was to be returned.


           6.         Whether the Appellant meets  any  of  the  conditions
              under GEN (unjustifiably  harsh  consequences)  unjustifiably
              harsh consequences.


           7.     If none of the above is met,  whether  there  will  be  a
              breach of Article 8. In other words, whether removal will  be
              disproportionate. Whether the public interest in the form  of
              immigration control and protecting the public purse outweighs
              any family and private life considerations."

  13. I have had the benefit of reading the Judge's  Record  of  Proceedings
      ('ROP'), which is legible as it was typed contemporaneously  with  the
      evidence and submissions.  This shows Mrs Sood in her submissions  did
      rely upon the content of her skeleton argument but what this  document
      also shows is that the thrust of the evidence  given  and  submissions
      made focused upon the issues identified by the Judge between [4-7] set
      out above, with no specific submissions being made in relation to  the
      article 3 test as it stood at the date of  the  hearing,  25  November
      2020. In particular, despite AM (Zimbabwe) having been handed down  on
      29 April 2020 there was no specific reference to this judgement in the
      advocate's submissions or any specific submission  to  how  the  Judge
      should assess the merits of the article  3  appeal  in  light  of  the
      correct test.
  14. Whilst there was nothing before the Judge to show that the  article  3
      case was abandoned it does not appear it was pursued with  any  vigour
      through appropriate questioning, submissions, or by reference  to  the
      relevant case law. Although the grant of permission to  appeal  refers
      to AM (Zimbabwe) being the guiding authority and that the  Judge  does
      not refer to, it is clear that the Judge was not referred to this case
      or the principles that arise therefrom, or their  application  on  the
      facts, by the advocates.
  15. The Judge sets out  her  findings  from  [9]  of  the  decision  under
      challenge starting with specific reference to an earlier  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal, heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Caswell,
      in accordance with the Devaseelan principles.
  16. The Judge refers to the findings of Judge Caswell between  [14  -  15]
      including it being found at the date of the earlier hearings that  the
      appellant had not shown that the respondent's decision to  refuse  her
      application made outside the Immigration Rules breached her  right  to
      respect for her family and/or private life pursuant to article 8. This
      too related to an application for leave to remain on a  similar  basis
      to that under consideration by the Judge in this appeal.
  17. The Judge correctly directed herself at [16] to the  fact  that  Judge
      Caswell had a very limited evidence as to the family circumstances  in
      the United Kingdom and in  Pakistan  and  there  was  no  evidence  to
      support any mental health conditions. It  was  clear  there  was  more
      evidence before the Judge in this appeal than  was  available  to  the
      earlier tribunal.
  18. Having assessed that evidence, the Judge sets out her own findings  of
      fact on the relevant issues which can be summarised in  the  following
      terms:


           i. The appellant has lived with her son,  her  Sponsor  and  his
              family since she arrived in the UK in April 2018 [17].
          ii. As a starting point the fact the appellant is living with her
              adult son, his wife and the grandchildren does not of  itself
              demonstrate the relationship is beyond the  normal  emotional
              ties between a  mother  and  adult  son,  a  grandmother  and
              grandchildren, or the Sponsor's wife and the appellant [17].
         iii. The  appellant's  GP  gives  no  information  to  demonstrate
              knowledge  of  the  availability  of  medical  treatment   in
              Pakistan and his  letter  was  read  simply  as  stating  the
              information he had  been  given  by  the  appellant  and  her
              family. There is also no reference in the GPs letter  to  the
              appellant's mental health. [17].
          iv. The GP letter  does  not  set  out  whether  the  appellant's
              medical condition has any impact or functional limitation  on
              her ability to care for herself [18]. The GP letter  does  no
              more than  confirm  the  appellant's  medical  conditions.  A
              second letter from the GP asking for a  postponement  as  the
              appellant was "a little  bit  too  frail  to  attend  at  the
              moment" suggests the GP thought the appellant's  frailty  was
              not a permanent limitation [18].
           v. The letter from the Consultant Respiratory Physician dated 15
              May 2020 indicates the  author  could  not  say  whether  the
              appellant's chest x-ray showed  signs  of  cancer  or  damage
              caused by an earlier infection of TB but did say it  appeared
              stable for the past two years. The letter  does  not  address
              any functional impact and the reference to breathlessness and
              poor appetite is what the Physician had been told during  the
              course of a  telephone  assessment  through  the  Sponsor.  A
              follow-up report of 8 July 2020 shows no sign of  progression
              in the right lung, indicates the damage  to  the  right  lung
              could represent scarring after TB or  cancer,  but  that  the
              only realistic treatment will be supportive care [19].
          vi. In relation to the reports from Ms  Vicky  Lyn  Davison,  the
              author took her entire account from the appellant's son,  the
              Sponsor. Concern is expressed by the Judge that evidence from
              the  appellant  had  not  been  taken  with  an   independent
              interpreter and concerns regarding the  reliability  of  what
              Mrs Davison had been told [21].
         vii. That the appellant's claim in her witness statement that  she
              did not have anybody in Pakistan who would take care  of  her
              is noted [22].
        viii. It came clear from the  evidence  of  the  Sponsor  that  the
              appellant had not been living alone in  Pakistan  before  she
              came to the United Kingdom but with her son and his wife  and
              three children in the family home since 2004,  when  her  own
              husband passed away, a period of 14 years [23].
          ix. The property in Pakistan includes a room  for  the  appellant
              and a room for her son and his family which the  Judge  found
              to be in direct contrast to the appellant's witness statement
              in which she stated her son does not live nearby,  which  was
              found to damage the reliability of the  appellant's  evidence
              further [23].
           x. The Judge noted the Sponsor in his witness  statement  failed
              to make mention of the fact the appellant was living with his
              brother  and  his  brother's  family  in  Pakistan  and   the
              Sponsor's claim that the appellant fell out  with  her  son's
              wife in Pakistan  was  found  to  be  inconsistent  with  the
              evidence given  before  Judge  Caswell  warranting  "negative
              weight" being given to this claim [23 - 24].
          xi.  The  appellant's  claim  that  culturally  her  daughter  in
              Pakistan would not be able to provide any assistance with her
              care was noted by the Judge, as was the fact the  appellant's
              daughter in the United Kingdom stated in her evidence she had
              good relations with her sister in Pakistan and that when  the
              appellant was living in Pakistan her sister did assist in her
              care but could only do so when she visited. The  Judge  noted
              the appellant's daughter in Pakistan was  a  retired  teacher
              with no children of her own. The Judge  finds  the  appellant
              and sponsor gave inconsistent evidence about the  appellant's
              daughter in Pakistan and it  was  not  found  there  was  any
              genuine cultural  barrier  to  the  appellant's  daughter  in
              Pakistan assisting in the care of  her  mother,  a  situation
              which  reflects  that  in  the  United  Kingdom   where   the
              appellant's UK-based daughter say she provides care  for  her
              mother even though her mother lives  with  her  brother,  the
              Sponsor. The Judge finds there was no credible reason why the
              daughter in Pakistan could not assist in meeting her mother's
              needs and that both the appellant, the Sponsor  and  the  UK-
              based daughter have been  untruthful  and  selective  in  the
              evidence they have given. The Judge did not find it  credible
              in light of all the conflicting evidence that the  appellants
              son and his family and the appellants  daughter  in  Pakistan
              would not continue to  provide  care  for  the  appellant  in
              Pakistan [25].
         xii. The Judge finds the starting point for Ms Davison's report is
              not reliable as it is  premised  upon  the  appellant  living
              alone and having to live alone in Pakistan  which  the  Judge
              does not find to be a credible claim. The Judge also finds Ms
              Davison  relied  upon  what  she  had  been  told  about  the
              appellant's needs  by  the  Sponsor  which  the  Judge  finds
              undermines the weight that can be given to the report, as the
              Sponsor is not a reliable witness and is clearly motivated by
              the strong desire to have his mother remained with him in the
              United Kingdom [26].
        xiii.  The Judge finds there is little medical evidence  about  the
              appellant suffering, osteoporosis and deformity of  the  left
              foot which it is claimed inhibits her walking,  although  the
              existence of osteoporosis is accepted as being  likely  in  a
              person aged 79. The Judge notes concern  expressed  by  Judge
              Caswell  about  inconsistent  evidence  about  the  appellant
              claiming to be bedridden on the one hand but  mobilising  for
              appointments on the other, which the Judge did not  find  was
              resolved by the evidence before her [27].
         xiv. Some of the conclusions made by Ms Davidson were said  to  be
              "surprising" as there  was  no  evidence  the  appellant  has
              active TB and there was no evidence of relevant expertise and
              the  availability  of  paid  care  in  Pakistan,  no   source
              materials referring to the availability of paid care  or  the
              quality of  such  provisions  in  Pakistan,  and  nothing  to
              substantiate the claim that taking a flight could shorten the
              appellant's  life  expectancy  when  there  was  no   medical
              evidence dealing with this issue [29].
          xv. The Judge finds comments made  in  the  supplementary  report
              from  Ms  Davison  "unhelpful"  as  it   contains   "sweeping
              statements wholly unsupported by any independent evidence  or
              reference to source materials" limiting the finding the Judge
              could make from the same to that the older an individual  and
              those with underlying health conditions is they are generally
              at greater risk from Covid, which is the position both in the
              UK and in Pakistan [30].
         xvi. The independent  evidence  failed  to  provide  any  reliable
              evidence as to the appellant's care needs [31].
        xvii. The weight the Judge gave to the evidence from the family  in
              the UK is  limited  as  they  were  found  to  be  unreliable
              witnesses [31].
       xviii. The submission of emotional dependency sufficient  to  create
              family life lacked reliable evidence regarding the  formation
              of the emotional dependency beyond normal emotional ties,  as
              those giving evidence had failed to establish their  evidence
              is reliable with regard to the appellant's history and needs,
              making it difficult to see how they could establish emotional
              dependency beyond normal ties [32].
         xix. The appellant had failed to establish she has anything  other
              than the normal emotional ties between herself and her  adult
              children. The  appellant  had  failed  to  establish  she  is
              dependent upon her family for her basic care needs. The Judge
              did not accept she was unable to cook, wash, dress  and  care
              for herself in her  daily  living  activities.  The  evidence
              failed to establish  the  appellant  is  suffering  from  any
              recognised mental health condition or anything  that  impacts
              upon  her  functioning.  The  evidence  fails  to  justify  a
              departure from Judge Caswell's findings [33].
          xx. The evidence of the Sponsor and UK-based daughter  undermines
              the case further. There was no further  evidence  that  would
              show  the  relationship  between  the   appellant   and   her
              grandchildren is any different than that of normal  emotional
              ties [34].
         xxi. The appellant and adult children prefer for the appellant  to
              stay in the United Kingdom and her adult children  are  doing
              all they can to achieve that result  for  her,  but  personal
              preference is not a factor relevant  to  the  issues  in  the
              appeal [36].
        xxii. The appellant failed to show she  would  meet  the  dependent
              relative criteria under the rules. The Judge did  not  accept
              the appellant is dependent. The evidence failed to  establish
              there  will  be  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  if   the
              appellant were to return to Pakistan where she had lived with
              her son for the previous 14  years,  and  daughter,  who  had
              previously cared  for  her.  There  will  be  no  significant
              obstacles to her return to Pakistan where she had  lived  her
              entire life until  2018.  The  appellant's  previous  medical
              treatment was provided in Pakistan and paid for by her  adult
              children. The Judge  found  no  reason  why  that  could  not
              continue if  the  appellant  is  returned  to  Pakistan.  The
              respondent had set out evidence of adequate medical treatment
              in Pakistan  which  the  appellant  failed  to  counter.  The
              sponsor's evidence was that he had been paying for  treatment
              for the appellant when she was in Pakistan [37].
       xxiii. In relation to section 55 and the grandchildren, there was  a
              paucity of evidence showing the impact on the  grandchildren.
              There was no evidence the best interests of the grandchildren
              in the United Kingdom require the appellant to remain in  the
              United Kingdom or that they could not visit their grandmother
              at the family home in Pakistan [38].
        xxiv. The GP evidence shows the appellant accessing NHS services in
              relation to which a limited one-off payment of �1200 had been
              made, giving rise to strong  public  interest  considerations
              [39].
         xxv. The appellant has not demonstrated that she can speak English
              and a private life formed in  the  United  Kingdom  has  been
              precarious. The appellant has  not  established  family  life
              sufficient  to  cross  the  article  8   threshold.   It   is
              proportionate for the appellant to be  returned  to  Pakistan
              [39].


  19. At [40] the Judge writes:

           "40.   I dismiss the human rights appeal under article 8. I find
              the Appellant has not demonstrated her care needs are not met
              in Pakistan. The Appellant has failed to demonstrate she  has
              an Article 8 family life in the United Kingdom or that she is
              dependent  upon  her  family  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
              Appellant has failed to demonstrate she has no family to whom
              she can turn to in Pakistan and in fact I find  she  has  her
              son and his family, as well as her daughter in Pakistan, with
              whom she can live and access care and support."

  20. The challenge in the grounds of appeal to the article  8  findings  do
      not establish material legal error. The Judge clearly  considered  the
      evidence provided with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and has
      given adequate reasons in  support  of  her  findings  concerning  the
      weight that can be given to the evidence relied upon by the appellant,
      family members, medical professionals and Ms Davison. It has not  been
      shown those findings are irrational, unfair, or outside the  range  of
      those available to the Judge on the evidence.
  21. The Judge clearly factored into her assessment both  the  evidence  in
      relation to the  situation  that  prevailed  in  Pakistan  before  the
      appellant entered the United Kingdom as a  visitor,  the  medical  and
      other family assistance that was received in the United  Kingdom,  and
      the availability of care that the appellant will be able to access  on
      return to Pakistan.
  22. The appellant has failed to establish that the Judge's  findings  that
      the respondent's decision is proportionate pursuant to article 8  ECHR
      is a finding outside the range of those available to the Judge.
  23. What [40] shows, however, is that the Judge makes no specific  finding
      in relation to article 3 concerning the health issues. This is clearly
      because the Judge believed, as reflected in  the  decision  at  [4-7],
      that article 3 was not a live issue. Even if it was a live  issue  and
      the Judge should have made of a specific finding, I find  the  failure
      to do so, even if legal error, is not  material  to  the  decision  to
      dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.
  24. In AM (Zimbabwe) the Supreme Court applied  the  ECtHR's  decision  in
      Paposhvili v. Belgium as to the effect of article 3 and set aside  the
      judgment of the House of Lords in N v. Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2005] UKHL 31.
  25. In this appeal,  it  is  relevant  that  the  Judge  found  there  are
      realistic prospects of medical and family  support  available  to  the
      appellant on return to Pakistan. That finding is well within the range
      of those available to the Judge on the evidence.
  26. It is clearly the Judge's finding, supported by the medical  evidence,
      that the appellant's medical conditions had  not  reached  a  critical
      stage sufficient to establish compelling humanitarian grounds for  not
      removing her from the United Kingdom. That is a sustainable finding in
      the evidence.
  27. It is also unarguable that the evidence upon which the Judge felt able
      to attach any weight did not establish that there is a real  risk  for
      the appellant on return, on account of  the  absence  of  appropriate
      treatment in the receiving country or  the  lack  of  access  to  such
      treatment, of being exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
      decline in her state of health resulting in intense suffering or to  a
      significant reduction in life expectancy' see: Paposhvili v. Belgium
      (Application No. 41738/10) (13 December 2016) [2017] Imm. A.R. 867
  28.  The  Supreme  Court  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  considered  the  meaning  of
      ''Significant", in the context of the new criterion identified by  the
      Court in Paposhvili which was found to mean 'substantial'.
  29. I find the evidence before the Judge did not established that if there
      was any reduction in life expectancy if the appellant was to return to
      Pakistan it would be substantial.  Accordingly, it did not attain  the
      minimum level of severity  which  art.3  required: AM  (Zimbabwe)  v.
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17;  [2020]  2
      W.L.R. 1152
  30. I therefore find that the only finding available to the Judge  on  the
      evidence in relation to article 3 was that the required minimum  level
      of severity had not been shown to exist and that a claim on this basis
      would fail in any event. Accordingly, any error is not material to the
      decision to dismiss the appeal.
  31. Whilst the appellant's family clearly want her to remain in the United
      Kingdom article 8 does not give a person the  right  to  choose  where
      they wish to live. I find no legal error material to the decision made
      out  on  the  grounds,  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper   Tribunal
      interfering any further in this matter. Disagreement with the  Judge's
      findings and desire for a more favourable outcome are not sufficient.
  32. In relation  to  Covid-19,  removals  have  continued  throughout  the
      pandemic,  where  appropriate,  and  the  Home  Office  Guidance   and
      procedures in relation to such removals have  not  been  shown  to  be
      unreasonable or unlawful in the prevailing circumstances. No  separate
      issue arises on this ground as it would only be if  it  was  safe  and
      appropriate to so that the appellant will be removed from  the  United
      Kingdom to Pakistan in an appropriate 'Covid secure' way.

Decision

  33. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's decision.
      The determination shall stand.

Anonymity.

  34. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

      I make no such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated 7 July 2021
