
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00903/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without a Hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Under Rule 34 (P)                    |On 26 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                  ELENA [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision 30  December  2019  to
    refuse a human rights claim.

2.   The subsequent decision made by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N.M.  Paul
    was found to involve the making of errors of law and was set  aside  by
    the Upper Tribunal in a  decision  promulgated  on  01  September  2020
    (annexed).

3.   At the remote video hearing held on 29 July  2020  the  parties  agreed
    that the decision could be remade without a  hearing.  Directions  were
    made  for  further  submissions  from  both  parties.  Mrs  [N]'s  son,
    Alexander [N], filed further evidence by email on 14  August  2020.  Mr
    Melvin filed further submissions on behalf of the respondent  by  email
    on 25 September 2020.

4.    The  following  documents  are   before   the   Upper   Tribunal   for
    consideration in this appeal:

      i) The respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal;

     ii)  The  appellant's  bundle  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal   and
         miscellaneous documents;

    iii) The appellant's skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal;

     iv) Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly promulgated on 13  June
         2013;

      v) The respondent's rule 24 reply;

     vi) Witness statements of Alexander and Elena [N] dated 28 July 2020;

    vii) The appellant's further documents including  extract  from  Russian
         real estate register  (04/08/20),  updated  witness  statements  of
         Alexander  and  Elena  [N]  (14/08/20),  letter  from  other  son's
         employer in Sri  Lanka  (31/07/20),  letter  from  Seaside  Medical
         Centre (04/08/20)  and  appointment  letter  for  Eastbourne  x-ray
         department (04/08/20).

   viii) The respondent's written submissions dated 25 September 2020.

5.   The appellant is an  unrepresented  vulnerable  witness.  Her  son  has
    assisted her to put forward her case. On behalf of  the  respondent  Mr
    Melvin's  written  submissions  are  clear,  concise  and   fair.   The
    respondent's submissions state:

         "The Respondent has  reviewed  the  new  statements  and  documents
         submitted by the appellant and on her behalf.

         In light of the new/ up to date evidence the Respondent is  content
         that the Upper Tribunal can remake the appeal without the need  for
         a further hearing.

         The Respondent will rely on the refusal notice and invite the Upper
         Tribunal to take full regard to the fact  that  Mrs  [N]  has  been
         without leave in the United Kingdom for a number of years (9 years)

         That fact will  need  to  be  balanced  against  her  diagnosis  of
         Alzheimer's disease/ dementia and lack  of  support  in  Russia,  a
         country where she has spent the majority of her life, and a country
         where she would receive a pension.

         The situation in  Sri  Lanka  with  her  other  son  has  now  been
         clarified and the Respondent does not see her living with that son/
         his family as a viable option.

         The Respondent takes no issue with the documents from Russia or the
         medical evidence.

         It is accepted that she has a support network in the UK,  her  son,
         her deceased husbands' family and friends in the Eastbourne area.

         It is also accepted that during her many years in  the  UK,  albeit
         without leave to remain, she has  built  a  Private  life  and  has
         dependency on her son, a British citizen.

         Balancing all of these facts together the  Respondent  invites  the
         Upper Tribunal to remake the decision on the papers."



Decision and reasons

6.   In light of the  respondent's  balanced  submissions,  and  concessions
    relating to the facts  and  evidence,  it  is  not  necessary  to  make
    detailed findings although I will  deal  with  the  essential  elements
    required for an assessment under Article 8 of the European Convention.

Article 8(1) - private life

7.   The appellant is a 75-year-old Russian national who has  lived  in  the
    UK since she entered on a visitor visa on 21 December 2011 (a period of
    nine years). She applied for leave to remain as the spouse of a British
    citizen in 2012, but  the  application  was  refused.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly without a hearing in 2013.
    The judge did not have the opportunity of hearing from the appellant or
    her husband, Mr Roger Jones. It seems that Mr Jones may have written  a
    letter to the Home Office that caused the respondent to  doubt  whether
    the relationship was subsisting, but by the time of the hearing he  had
    written  another  letter  to  confirm  that  they  were  still   in   a
    relationship. The judge concluded that there was insufficient  evidence
    to show that the relationship was subsisting. In the  alternative,  the
    judge found that it would be proportionate to expect the  appellant  to
    return to Russia to  apply  for  entry  clearance  through  the  proper
    channels.

8.   Mr Rogers died on 03 September 2019.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hall
    did not have an opportunity to hear from him although he did hear  from
    other witnesses. I have already made findings as to why the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of  errors  of  law.  Mr  Rogers'
    death certificate names the appellant as his wife. The recent death  of
    the appellant's husband is mentioned in correspondence from independent
    sources such as her GP and a local support organisation  called  Steps.
    In light of this evidence the respondent no longer appears  to  dispute
    that the appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr
    Rogers. Nor is it disputed that she has a support network  in  the  UK.
    She does not live with her son, Alex, but he  provides  support,  helps
    her with financial affairs and  oversees  her  welfare.  She  also  has
    support from her husband's son and his wife, who live close to  her  in
    Eastbourne.

9.   The appellant was diagnosed with Alzheimer's  dementia  shortly  before
    her husband died.  The  evidence  supports  the  diagnosis  and  it  is
    accepted by the respondent. The recent letter from her GP  states  that
    the appellant has a good support network in  the  UK.  In  addition  to
    dementia she is being investigated for chest pain. Her  GP  feels  that
    she would struggle with dementia if she were to  move  to  a  different
    country with no known support network. Her son was concerned about  how
    she would cope if she returned to Russia.

10.  A letter from Charlotte Dawes at Steps (a support organisation),  which
    I infer must have been written on 20 December 2019 rather than 2020  as
    stated on  the  correspondence,  says  that  she  thinks  it  would  be
    "extremely difficult and upsetting" for the appellant to leave  the  UK
    now due to her current mental health state and the  need  for  everyday
    support. Miss Dawes considered that it  would  be  detrimental  to  the
    appellant's physical and mental health if she had to leave the UK.

11.  The respondent accepts that the appellant  has  established  a  private
    life in the UK. I am satisfied that the appellant's support network  is
    sufficiently well established to engage the operation of Article  8.  I
    find that removal in consequence of the decision is likely to interfere
    with her private life in a sufficiently grave  way  as  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 8(1) of the European Convention.

Article 8(2) - proportionality

12.  Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to private  and
    family life. However, it is not an absolute right and can be interfered
    with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law  that  the
    state has a right to control immigration and that rules  governing  the
    entry and residence of people into the country are "in accordance  with
    the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference with the  right
    to private or family life must be for a legitimate reason and should be
    reasonable and proportionate.

13.  Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  applies
    where a court or tribunal is required to determine whether  a  decision
    made under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to private or
    family life and as a result is unlawful  under  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998. In considering the 'public interest question' a court or tribunal
    must have regard to  the  issues  outlined  in  section  117B  in  non-
    deportation cases. The 'public interest question' means the question of
    whether interference with a person's right to respect for their private
    or family  life  is  justified  under  Article  8(2)  of  the  European
    Convention.

14.  It is in the  public  interest  to  maintain  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control. Even if it is accepted that the appellant was in a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr Rogers she did not meet the
    requirements of the immigration rules for leave to remain as  a  spouse
    because she applied for leave to remain at a time when she was  in  the
    UK as a visitor. She remained in the UK in the full knowledge that  she
    did not have permission to do so. She did not leave the UK to apply for
    entry clearance through the proper channels. However,  I  am  satisfied
    that she continued  to  live  with  her  husband  until  his  death  in
    September 2019.

15.  I bear in mind that the appellant is unrepresented. I  have  considered
    whether she might meet the requirements for leave to remain on  grounds
    of private life in the UK. The appellant falls far short of the 20 year
    long residence requirement contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the
    immigration rules. However, in light  of  the  respondent's  concession
    that the appellant has been diagnosed  with  Alzheimer's  dementia  and
    does not have a support network in Russia I find that the position  she
    would face comes within the meaning of  the  phrase  'very  significant
    obstacles to integration' for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of
    the immigration rules. The essence of the  test  was  outlined  by  the
    Court of Appeal in SSHD v Kamara [2016] 4 WLR 152 albeit in the context
    of similar wording used in relation to deportation provisions:

         "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life."

16.  The appellant has spent the majority of  her  life  in  Russia  and  is
    still likely to have linguistic and cultural ties there. It  is  likely
    that she understands how life  in  that  society  works.  However,  the
    appellant is not  a  young  woman  who  could  return,  find  work  and
    establish new connections there. She is 75 years old. I find that it is
    reasonable to  take  judicial  notice  of  the  fact  that  Alzheimer's
    dementia is a degenerative disease for  which  there  is  currently  no
    effective treatment. Unfortunately, the appellant's condition  is  only
    likely to deteriorate. When coupled with  the  fact  that  she  has  no
    support network in Russia, I find that it is unlikely that she would be
    able  to  build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a  variety  of  human
    relationships that would give substance to  her  private  life.  In  my
    assessment  these  combined  factors  would  create  very   significant
    obstacles to her integration in Russia within the meaning of Article  8
    as set out in the immigration rules.

17.  In the alternative I have conducted a broader assessment of Article  8.
    The appellant speaks English and receives a pension  from  Russia  each
    month. Little weight should be given to a private or family  life  that
    has been established at a time when the person's immigration status  is
    unlawful or precarious, but some weight can be given to the  ties  that
    she has established. The support network  she  has  in  the  UK  is  an
    important factor given her recent  bereavement  and  state  of  health.
    There is no evidence of any other factors  that  might  add  additional
    weight to the public interest in maintaining  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control e.g. criminal offences, fraud or deception.

18.  The appellant's  age,  the  extent  of  the  support  network  she  has
    established in the UK, the compassionate circumstances surrounding  her
    fairly recent bereavement,  as  well  as  the  difficult  diagnosis  of
    Alzeheimer's dementia have a compelling cumulative effect. When this is
    taken into account with the concession that she does not have a support
    network in Russia and cannot live with her other son in Sri  Lanka,  in
    my assessment, her circumstances come squarely within the  observations
    made by the House of Lords in Huang that I cited at [15] of  the  error
    of law decision.

19.  I note that the respondent only asked the Upper Tribunal to remake  the
    decision and did not even submit that the appeal should  be  dismissed.
    Having  weighed  the  public  interest   considerations   against   the
    cumulative effect of the factors on the appellant's side of the scale I
    conclude that removal of the appellant at this stage of her  life  from
    her current support network in the UK to an isolated  and  increasingly
    distressing situation in  Russia  as  her  condition  progresses  would
    amount to a disproportionate interference with her rights under Article
    8 of the European Convention.

20.  For the reasons given above, I conclude that removal in consequence  of
    the decision would not be unlawful under section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1998.



DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   M. Canavan    Date 22 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


[ANNEX]

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00903/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote hearing heard at              |Decision Promulgated                 |
|Field House 29 July 2020             |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                  ELENA [N]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     In person
                    Alexander [N] (son) acting as a Mackenzie Friend
For the respondent:    Mr T. Melvin


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  30  December
    2019 to refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge N.M. Paul ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated  on  17  April  2020.  The  judge  noted  the
    appellant's  immigration  history,  including  the  fact  that  earlier
    applications for leave to remain as  a  partner  were  refused  and  an
    appeal was dismissed in 2013  [2-4].  He  summarised  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusal, the oral evidence and the submissions made at  the
    hearing [5-23]. His findings were confined to four  paragraphs  at  the
    end of the decision:

         "24. This is a human rights appeal. It is for the appellant to show
             that her human rights are engaged, and then for  the  SSHD  to
             show that any interference is a proportionate one.

         25.  The starting point  in  this  case  has  to  be  the  previous
             decision, which challenged the nature of the marriage and  did
             not accept that it was subsisting. In my  view,  the  evidence
             now does not substantially alter that position. The son of the
             appellant's ex-husband  wrote  a  letter  which  was  in  very
             generic terms and he  did  not  attend  the  hearing  to  give
             positive evidence of the nature of the relationship.  Mr  Page
             and the appellant's son also spoke about the relationship.  In
             my view, there must still be a question mark over  whether  or
             not there was a genuine and subsisting  relationship.  In  any
             event, regrettably and tragically, the appellant's husband has
             now died, and the issue of her private life is  based  on  the
             fact that she has been in the UK for a number of years.

         26.  There is no clear medical diagnosis evidence in  relation  her
             (sic) Alzheimer's, other than that it appears that she may  be
             displaying the early symptoms of it.  In  my  view,  there  is
             nothing there to demonstrate that the medical  care  that  she
             would received outside the UK would be insufficient. She has a
             private life with her son, but he is an adult and engaged with
             his own life, and she also has a private life wither (sic) her
             son who lives in Sri Lanka.

         27.  The evidence in this case tended to suggest  that  the  family
             ties to Sri Lanka are much closer than would appear  at  first
             blush. The appellant's step-daughter is married to an  English
             citizen, but it seems spends a large period  of  time  in  Sri
             Lanka, as indeed does her older son and her ex-husband. In  my
             view, the links with Sri Lanka are probably much stronger than
             have been alluded to in this case. It  follows  (in  my  view)
             that in all probability the strongest element of  her  private
             and family life could be enjoyed in Sri Lanka, where she could
             be both cared for, and be supported in respect of her  Russian
             pension which, of course, would go much further there than  it
             does in the UK.

         28.  The single biggest factor in favour of the appellant's case is
             her age. However, the appellant did not  present  as  somebody
             who would otherwise qualify as an  adult  dependant  relative,
             and she seemed very spritely in  terms  of  her  physical  and
             mental welfare, and in  my  view  there  is  nothing  here  to
             suggest that relocation would be unfair  or  disproportionate.
             She came to the UK relatively late in life, and has only  been
             here for  a  number  of  years,  and  in  my  view  subsequent
             relocation would not in itself (having regard to her  age)  be
             unduly harsh or give  rise  to  an  argument  that  there  are
             exceptional or compassionate circumstances militating  against
             it.

         29.  In my view, the decision of  the  SSHD  in  this  case  is  an
             entirely proportionate one."

3.   The appellant, acting  in  person,  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the following grounds.

      i) The judge was wrong to conclude that her marriage was  not  genuine
         and subsisting.

     ii) The judge  erred  in  finding  that  there  was  no  clear  medical
         diagnosis of Alzheimer's when  there  was  a  letter  from  her  GP
         confirming the diagnosis.

    iii) The judge erred in finding that the appellant  could  live  in  Sri
         Lanka when (i) she is not a citizen of Sri Lanka;  (ii)  had  never
         been there; (iii) has no cultural ties there and does not speak the
         language; (iv) her son only has a temporary  employment  visa;  (v)
         her ex-husband, who lives with her son, would  not  be  willing  to
         live with her; (vi) she could not get a visa due to  Covid-19,  and
         even if she could, she could only apply for a visit visa; and (vii)
         she could not afford the retirement visa that might be available.

4.   Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McClure  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal in an order dated 11 June 2020.

5.   A face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable  due
    to public health measures put in place to control the spread of  Covid-
    19. The appeal was heard by way  of  a  remote  hearing  by  Skype  for
    Business with the parties' consent. All issues could be determined in a
    remote hearing. The documents before the Upper Tribunal  include  those
    that were before the First-tier Tribunal:

      i) the respondent's bundle;

     ii) the appellant's bundle;

    iii) First-tier Tribunal decision (2013);

     iv) letter from the appellant's husband (15/12/13);

      v) skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant before the FTT;

     vi) up to date witness statements of the appellant and her son; and

    vii) the respondent's rule 24 response.

Decision and reasons

6.   I bear in mind that the appellant is acting  in  person  and  does  not
    have  legal  expertise.  Having  considered  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    decision, the grounds  of  appeal  and  the  submissions  made  at  the
    hearing, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved
    the making of an error of law and must be set aside.

7.   The fact  that  the  judge's  findings  are  brief  is  not  in  itself
    problematic, but adequate findings must be made on the relevant  issues
    and should follow a structured approach to demonstrate that  the  judge
    has  applied  the  relevant  legal   framework.   Decisions   involving
    protection and human rights claims must be given anxious scrutiny.  The
    reasoning must be adequate to enable  those  reading  the  decision  to
    understand how and why the judge came to the conclusion he did.

8.   The appellant appealed the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim. The relevant ground of appeal under section  84(1)(c)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("NIAA  2002")  was
    whether removal from the United Kingdom would be unlawful under section
    6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  ("HRA  1998").  As  a  citizen  of  the
    Russian Federation, removal would be  to  the  appellant's  country  of
    nationality.

9.   The skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal did  not  seek  to
    argue that the  appellant  met  any  of  the  family  or  private  life
    requirements contained in the immigration rules. The appellant fell far
    short of meeting the long residence requirements contained in paragraph
    276B and 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules. In view of  the  fact
    that the appellant has lived a far greater proportion of  her  life  in
    Russia, those representing her at the time did not seek to  argue  that
    there would be 'very significant obstacles' to  her  integration  there
    for the purpose of the private life requirement contained in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

10.  At [24] of the decision the judge outlined a correct statement  of  the
    law. However, he failed to make any structured findings thereafter.

11.  No findings were made as to whether the appellant's  relationship  with
    her adult son, which the judge appeared to accept had some elements  of
    dependency [12], was sufficient to amount to  family  life  within  the
    meaning of Article 8.  Although the judge stated  that  it  was  likely
    that the appellant had established a private life in the UK, there  was
    no evaluation of the strength of her family or private life ties.

12.  At [25] the judge  stated  his  "view"  that  there  must  still  be  a
    question mark over the genuine and subsisting nature of the appellant's
    marriage but failed to give any reasons to explain why he came to  that
    conclusion given that he was assessing the situation many  years  after
    the previous First-tier Tribunal and  in  light  of  further  evidence.
    There was evidence from several family members and documentary evidence
    from independent organisations such as her church, her GP and a support
    organisation,  which  all  mentioned  her  husband   and   her   recent
    bereavement. Although the judge recited some of the evidence earlier in
    the decision, none of the evidence was analysed or weighed. The  nature
    of the relationship with her husband was relevant to  the  impact  that
    her recent bereavement might have her overall circumstances although it
    was not likely to be an overriding factor if taken alone.

13.  Other aspects of the appellant's case were  not  adequately  evaluated.
    The judge's finding that there was "no clear medical diagnosis evidence
    in relation to her Alzheimer's" [26] was contrary to the evidence  from
    her GP, which he noted earlier in the decision [19].  The  letter  from
    the Seaside Medical Centre dated 30 September 2019 was  prepared  by  a
    qualified  doctor  who  confirmed  the  appellant  had  "recently  been
    diagnosed with Alzheimer's dementia". The doctor  went  on  to  confirm
    that "this condition causes problems with your memory and  day  to  day
    living as you can be forgetful". The doctor went on  to  say  that  she
    "would be very concerned about the impact on you  needing  to  leave  a
    country that you have known very well for a number  of  years  on  both
    your physical and mental health." The judge  simply  failed  to  engage
    with or evaluate this evidence.

14.  The starkest omission was  the  failure  of  the  judge  to  conduct  a
    holistic assessment  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  if  she  were
    removed to Russia. Nowhere in the brief findings does he consider  what
    conditions she might face in her country of nationality.  There  is  no
    doubt that the appellant has long standing connections to Russia, where
    she has lived for most of her life. At the date of the hearing she  was
    75 years old. She would be returned to a country where she says she has
    no close relatives and would be separated from the family  member  with
    whom she has the closest relationship (her British son). Even  if  some
    treatment and support is available for those living with Alzheimer's in
    Russia, no consideration was  given  to  the  combined  effect  of  her
    circumstances i.e. a woman her age, who  is  recently  bereaved,  being
    returned to a country where she might face social isolation at the same
    time as suffering from a degenerative disease,  which  sadly,  is  only
    likely to reduce her ability to live independently over time. The judge
    failed to consider the  opinion  of  a  qualified  doctor  and  instead
    appeared to form his own opinion about  the  appellant's  physical  and
    mental health based on her presentation and demeanour  at  the  hearing
    [28].

15.  In light of the above, I find  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    account relevant considerations and failed to evaluate the  appellant's
    circumstances as a  whole.  The  decision  fails  to  tackle  the  core
    elements of a proper Article 8 assessment, which was summarised by  the
    House of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 as follows:

         "18. ... But the main importance of the case law is in illuminating
         the core value which article 8 exists  to  protect.  This  is  not,
         perhaps, hard to recognise. Human beings are social  animals.  They
         depend on others. Their family, or extended family, is the group on
         which many people most heavily depend,  socially,  emotionally  and
         often  financially.  There  comes  a  point  at  which,  for  some,
         prolonged and unavoidable  separation  from  this  group  seriously
         inhibits their ability to live full and fulfilling  lives.  Matters
         such as the age, health and vulnerability  of  the  applicant,  the
         closeness and previous  history  of  the  family,  the  applicant's
         dependence on the financial and emotional support  of  the  family,
         the prevailing cultural tradition and conditions in the country  of
         origin and many other factors may all be relevant.  The  Strasbourg
         court has repeatedly recognised the  general  right  of  states  to
         control the entry and residence of  non-nationals,  and  repeatedly
         acknowledged that the Convention confers no right on individuals or
         families to choose where they prefer to live. In most  cases  where
         the applicants complain of a violation of their article  8  rights,
         in a case where the impugned decision is authorised by  law  for  a
         legitimate object and the interference (or lack of respect)  is  of
         sufficient seriousness to engage the operation of  article  8,  the
         crucial question is likely to be whether the interference (or  lack
         of respect) complained of is proportionate to  the  legitimate  end
         sought to  be  achieved.  Proportionality  is  a  subject  of  such
         importance as to require separate treatment."

16.  The fact that the appellant has another son who lives in Sri Lanka  was
    a relevant consideration but was  not  a  core  issue  given  that  the
    appellant would be removed to Russia. Even if the judge considered that
    she might not need to stay in Russia, he failed to consider whether the
    appellant could live with her son in Sri Lanka given that she is not  a
    Sri Lankan citizen and her son is not settled there. Nor did the  judge
    consider whether it was a reasonable option  for  the  appellant  given
    that her ex-husband lives with her son in Sri Lanka.

17.  Whatever the judge's views were about the possibility of the  appellant
    living with her son in  Sri  Lanka,  the  core  task  of  the  judicial
    decision maker in this case  was  to  assess  whether  removal  to  her
    country of nationality would be unlawful under section 6 HRA 1998.  The
    First-tier Tribunal failed to conduct that task. The decision lacks  an
    evaluative assessment of the appellant's overall circumstances. It also
    lacks an evaluative assessment of the weight to be given to the  public
    interests considerations  with  reference  to  the  relevant  statutory
    framework contained in section 117B NIAA 2002. Both  elements  must  be
    carefully considered before a balancing exercise is carried out.

18.  Mr Melvin acknowledged that the judge failed  to  evaluate  the  letter
    from the GP and failed to make any  findings  relating  to  removal  to
    Russia. However, he argued that any deficiencies in reasoning would not
    have made any material difference to the outcome. He asserted that  any
    properly directed judge would be bound to dismiss the appeal.

19.  I disagree. If the  claim  was  bound  to  fail  it  should  have  been
    certified as 'clearly unfounded'. It was not. Undoubtedly, weight would
    be given to the public interest in maintaining an effective  system  of
    immigration control when the appellant does  not  appear  to  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules and has remained in  the  UK  for
    many years in the knowledge that she did not have permission to do  so.
    However, it  could  not  be  said  that  the  combined  effect  of  the
    appellant's personal circumstances is so weak that no properly directed
    judge could allow the appeal. For these reasons  I  conclude  that  the
    errors identified in the First-tier Tribunal decision are material. The
    decision is set aside and will be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

20.  Following a discussion with the appellant and  her  son,  both  parties
    agreed that the decision could be remade based on written submissions.

Directions

21.  The appellant shall file  on  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
    respondent an electronic copy of  the  evidence  relied  upon  and  any
    written submissions relating to the remaking of the decision by  Friday
    14 August 2020.

    The appellant and her son might need  to  consider  the  guidance  note
    issued by the President of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which  outlines  the
    procedures for filing and service  of  documents  during  the  Covid-19
    pandemic. See:

    https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/2020_03_23_UTIAC-
    PRESIDENTIAL-GUIDANCE-NOTE-No-1-2020.pdf

    I bear in mind that the appellant is acting  in  person  and  has  been
    diagnosed with a degenerative  disease  that  affects  her  memory.  In
    preparing further evidence, the appellant will need  to  focus  on  the
    reasons why her circumstances might be sufficiently compelling to  show
    that they outweigh the public  interest  in  maintaining  an  effective
    system of immigration control. Where possible she will need to  produce
    evidence to support any assertions that she makes about  (i)  what  the
    impact might be on her or her family members if she is removed from the
    UK; (ii) her health; (iii) the conditions she  might  face  in  Russia;
    (iv) whether she would be able to live with her son in Sri  Lanka;  and
    (v) any other matters she wishes to rely on.

22.  The respondent shall file and serve written submissions  by  Friday  28
    August 2020.

23.  The appellant shall file and serve any response by Friday 04  September
    2020.

24.  The Upper Tribunal will consider the written submissions,  and  subject
    to any submissions made about the mode of hearing,  shall  then  decide
    the case without a hearing.

25.  If the circumstances change and it  is  thought  necessary  to  have  a
    hearing (probably a remote  hearing  given  the  current  circumstances
    surrounding  Covid-19),  or  to  amend  any  of  the  dates  in   these
    instructions because there are significant  practical  difficulties  in
    complying, then it is open to  apply  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  giving
    reasons, to amend the directions.



DECISION

The Frist-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal without a hearing


Signed   M. Canavan    Date 30 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

