

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/00334/2016

                                                     HU/00339/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 20 December 2017                      |      On 22 December 2017         |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                               NOORULLAH NOORI
                                 YUSUF NOORI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Harding, Counsel, instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants, a father and minor son of Afghan nationality, appeal
       the decision  of  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Maka  (FtJ),
       promulgated on 20 March 2017, dismissing their appeals  against  the
       respondent's refusal, dated 4 September 2015, of their human  rights
       claims for leave to remain under article 8.

Background


    2. The 1st appellant was born on 1 January 1987 (the FtJ wrongly stated
       that his date of birth was 1 January 1970, but nothing turns on this
       mistake). He entered the UK illegally in March 2007  and  an  asylum
       claim was refused on 4 April 2007.  Following  the  refusal  of  his
       asylum claim (it is not apparent from his statement whether he  ever
       appealed the decision) the 1st appellant remained in the UK  without
       lawful leave.


    3. Mariam Ahmadi, a national of Afghanistan, entered the  UK  with  her
       mother and sisters in July 2008 to join her  father,  who  had  been
       recognised as a refugee. It appears that she entered the UK pursuant
       to the provisions of the immigration rules governing Refugee  Family
       Reunion. A residence permit contained  in  the  respondent's  bundle
       indicates that it was issued on  4  October  2010,  valid  until  13
       October 2013. Ms Isherwood confirmed at the 'error of law'  hearing,
       and it was not challenged, that in 2014 Ms Ahmadi applied for  leave
       to remain  outside  the  immigration  rules,  and  she  was  granted
       Discretionary Leave (DL) valid until 29 October 2017.


    4. The appellant and Ms Ahmadi underwent a  religious  ceremony  on  16
       September 2013, and they were legally married on 20  December  2013.
       Their first child, the 2nd appellant, was born on 2  March  2015  in
       the UK. The 1st appellant has another child with Ms Ahmadi, born  on
       4 March 2016.

    5. On 12 June 2015 the appellants made human  rights  applications  for
       leave to remain in the UK based on family and private  life  rights.
       The respondent concluded that the  appellants  could  not  meet  the
       requirements of the immigration rules under Appendix FM as Ms Ahmadi
       was not British, or settled, or in the UK with  refugee  leave.  The
       respondent additionally doubted the genuineness of the  relationship
       between the 1st appellant and Ms Ahmadi. The 2nd appellant could not
       meet the requirements of the immigration rules as a  result  of  his
       mother's immigration status, and because he has not resided  in  the
       UK for at least 7 years. The  respondent  concluded  that,  applying
       paragraph 276ADE(vi), there were no 'very significant obstacles'  to
       the 1st appellant  returning  to  Afghanistan,   and  that  the  2nd
       appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) as
       he had not lived here for 7 years. The respondent concluded that the
       1st appellant could maintain his  child  in  Afghanistan  and  could
       ensure his safety and welfare, and that Ms Ahmadi would be  able  to
       travel to  Afghanistan  as  well  to  ensure  the  family  unit  was
       maintained.

Decision of the First-tier Judge

    6. The  FtJ  was  satisfied  that  the  relationship  between  the  1st
       appellant and Ms Ahmadi was genuine and subsisting,  and  that  they
       had two children. The FtJ noted that counsel for the appellants  (Mr
       Harding, who again  represented  the  appellants  before  the  Upper
       Tribunal) stated that he was only relying on article 8 8 outside the
       immigration rules as the immigration rules could not be satisfied in
       light of Ms Ahmadi's immigration status, and that it  could  not  be
       said that the 1st appellant had no ties to Afghanistan given that he
       lived  there  for  28  years.  The  FtJ  took  account  of  the  1st
       appellant's immigration history, noting that he resided illegally in
       the UK from 2007, and rejected his claim not to have worked  in  the
       period  2007  to  2013.  The  FtJ  additionally  rejected  the   1st
       appellant's claim to have no family members in Afghanistan and found
       that he remained in contact with them.


    7. In determining whether the  refusals  of  the  human  rights  claims
       constituted a disproportionate breach of article  8  the  FtJ  noted
       that the appellant's partner was not British or  settled,  and  that
       her only reason for being in the UK was "... because she claimed  to
       be part of her father's family unit and was therefore granted family
       reunion with him." The FtJ noted that the relationship was formed in
       the knowledge  that  the  1st  appellant's  immigration  status  was
       precarious,  and  that  Ms  Ahmadi  had  not  expressed  a  fear  of
       persecution in her own right. The FtJ attached 'due weight'  to  the
       fact that the immigration rules were not satisfied, and  once  again
       noted the 1st appellant's  immigration  history.  At  [51]  the  FtJ
       accepted that "things will not be easy" for the appellants, but that
       the children were of an age where they could easily adapt to life in
       Afghanistan, and, at [52], he found the  children's  best  interests
       were for the family unit to remain together and that this  would  be
       achieved if the children's parents both returned to Afghanistan. The
       FtJ did not accept that the children's best  interest  overrode  the
       competing public interest  factors  given  their  young  age,  their
       unsettled immigration status, and the fact that both  their  parents
       were Afghani nationals with no permanent or settled right to  remain
       in the UK. the FtJ specifically considered that  the  1st  appellant
       would be able to rely on his own family  in  Afghanistan  to  settle
       down and that the skills he obtained in the UK could be utilised  to
       find employment, and that Ms Ahmadi's family could help  financially
       for a limited period. Having weighed the competing factors  the  FtJ
       dismissed  the   appeals   concluding   that   it   would   not   be
       disproportionate to expect the family to relocate to Afghanistan.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of appeal and the Upper Tribunal hearing

    8. The grounds contend that the FtJ was not entitled to conclude  there
       were no 'insurmountable obstacles' to the family life being  enjoyed
       in Afghanistan, and that the FtJ failed to  consider  that  the  1st
       appellant's partner had status under 'family reunion'.  The  grounds
       note that, as of  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,
       neither Ms Ahmadi nor her  youngest  child  were  removable.  It  is
       claimed that the FtJ fundamentally erred in assessing the degree  of
       interference and likely impact,  and  that  the  assessment  of  the
       children's best interest was inadequate. It was pointed put that the
       FtJ directed himself throughout with respect to  Hesham  Ali  [2016]
       UKSC 60, which was a deportation  case  where  different  principles
       applied.


    9. In granting permission Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  noted
       that, as the child of a refugee who was admitted  to  the  UK  under
       family reunion provisions, the  1st  appellant's  wife  had  refugee
       leave  and  fell  within  E-LTRP.1.2(c)  of  Appendix-FM.   It   was
       consequently arguable that the FtJ erred in finding that the  entire
       family could return to Afghanistan and in his consideration  of  the
       best interests of the children given that  the  wife  could  not  be
       required to leave the UK.


   10. At the Upper Tribunal hearing Ms Isherwood confirmed that Ms  Ahmadi
       made an application outside the immigration rules in 2014 for  leave
       to remain, and that she was granted DL until October 2017.  She  had
       not been in receipt of refugee leave when the respondent's  appealed
       decision was  made.  Mr  Harding  helpfully  drew  my  attention  to
       paragraph 6 of the immigration rules which defined  'refugee  leave'
       by reference to a grant of leave pursuant to paragraph 334 or 335 of
       the immigration rules.


   11. Mr Harding expanded upon his grounds, submitted that the FtJ  failed
       to properly consider Ms Ahmadi's circumstances, her length of lawful
       residence, the best interests of the children, or  to  consider  the
       claim that the family would not be safe in Afghanistan. Ms Isherwood
       responded  to  these  submissions  and  submitted  there   were   no
       compelling reasons preventing the family relocating to Afghanistan.

Discussion

   12. I deal first with the assertion, in the grant of permission that the
       1st appellant's partner was, at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing, present with 'refugee leave'. The 1st  appellant's  partner
       entered the UK under the refugee family reunion provisions. Although
       the FtJ stated that Ms  Ahmadi  "...  claimed  to  be  part  of  her
       father's family unit", it does not appear from reading the  decision
       as a whole that the FtJ doubted Ms Ahmadi's claim in this regard.  I
       find that nothing turns on this admittedly peculiar phrase.  I  take
       judicial notice of the fact that, while the 1st appellant's  partner
       may have been granted refugee status when she joined her father, she
       was never recognised as a refugee in her own right,  and  was  never
       granted asylum under paragraph 334 or 335 of the immigration  rules.
       According to Ms Isherwood Ms Ahmadi applied  for  further  leave  to
       remain in 2014 outside the immigration rules.  Mr  Harding  did  not
       challenge this assertion. Ms Ahmadi was  granted  DL  until  October
       2017. She was not therefore  granted  further  leave  to  remain  in
       pursuance of the refugee family reunion provisions. In any event, as
       pointed out by Mr Harding in his oral submissions, the definition of
       'refugee leave' in paragraph 6 of the Immigration  rules  refers  to
       limited leave granted pursuant to  paragraphs  334  or  335  of  the
       immigration rules. It  was  not  in  dispute  that  the  appellant's
       partner had not been granted leave in pursuance of either  paragraph
       334 or 335. She did not therefore meet the  definition  of  'refugee
       leave' under Appendix FM.


   13. Mr Harding contended that the FtJ failed to consider, in determining
       whether the 1st appellant's partner could relocate  to  Afghanistan,
       that she entered the UK  pursuant  to  the  refugee  family  reunion
       provisions as a 15-year-old, and that she had enjoyed  status  under
       family reunion. I am not persuaded that the FtJ failed to take  into
       account Ms Ahmadi's immigration  history  or  circumstances.  It  is
       apparent from a holistic reading of the decision that  the  FtJ  was
       fully aware that the 1st appellant's partner was  granted  leave  to
       enter on the basis of family reunion,  and  that  she  has  lawfully
       resided in the UK since the age of 15  (see  [27],  [28],  [38]  and
       [39]). Although she entered the UK as a 15-year-old, at the date  of
       the First-tier Tribunal hearing she was 24 years old and was  living
       independently from her family. There was nothing in her statement or
       her oral evidence, as recorded in the decision, suggesting that  her
       relationship with her family in the UK contained anything beyond the
       normal bonds of affection (Singh v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630),  or
       that there would be any particular impediment to her  relocating  to
       Afghanistan. While it is quite true that she is not  removable,  the
       fact that she is lawfully resident in the UK,  and  the  possibility
       that she may be granted settlement in  the  near  future,  does  not
       prevent her from choosing to relocate to  Afghanistan  in  order  to
       maintain her immediate family unit, a point properly made by the FtJ
       at [52]. It is a trite proposition of law that article 8  rights  do
       not entitle a family to choose where to live.


   14. I reject the submission  that  the  FtJ's  assessment  of  the  best
       interests of the children was inadequate. At the date of the  First-
       tier Tribunal hearing the 2nd appellant was 2  years  old,  and  his
       sibling was only 8 months old. They clearly would not have developed
       any significant relationships outside their immediate  family  unit.
       There was limited independent evidence relating to the children, and
       no suggestion that they were not in good health  or  had  any  other
       particular needs. The 1st appellant's statement indicated  that  the
       children  had  a  lot  of  extended  family  in  the  UK   including
       grandparents and aunts, but there was no particularised evidence  of
       the nature  of  these  relationships.  Other  than  to  assert  that
       "Afghanistan is not a safe place for us",  there  was  no  specified
       reason advanced  as  to  why  their  safety  and  welfare  would  be
       jeopardised  if  they  went  to  Afghanistan.  The   FtJ's   overall
       assessment of the children's best interest at [51] and [52] must  be
       considered in the context of his other  factual  findings.  The  1st
       appellant's asylum claim was previously rejected and the  FtJ  found
       that  he  had  no  well-founded  fear  of   persecution.   The   FtJ
       additionally found that the 1st appellant remained in  contact  with
       his family members in Afghanistan, and  that  his  partner's  family
       would be able to help financially,  albeit  for  a  limited  period.
       These  factual  findings  were  not  challenged  and  the  FtJ   was
       unarguably entitled to make these findings for  the  reasons  given.
       While the  limited  background  country  evidence  provided  by  the
       appellants (the US State Department Report, issued on 3 March  2017,
       and  a  two-page   report   Qantara   (Germany)   'Deportations   to
       Afghanistan: No safe country of origin', also dated  3  March  2017)
       indicated   that   there   was   widespread   violence,    including
       indiscriminate attacks on  civilians,  there  was  nothing  in  that
       evidence capable of entitling the FtJ  to  conclude  that  the  mere
       presence of the children in Afghanistan would expose them to a  real
       risk of ill-treatment.


   15. Nor is it  arguable  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
       adequately consider whether the family as a whole would be  safe  in
       Afghanistan. I note again that the 1st appellant's asylum claim  was
       refused in 2007 and he did not advance any protection  claim  before
       the First-tier Tribunal, and the FtJ found as a fact that he was  in
       contact with his family and would therefore have their support in re-
       integrating. The 1st appellant and his partner only asserted in  the
       most general  of  terms  that  the  family  would  not  be  safe  in
       Afghanistan.  Although  limited  background  country  evidence   was
       provided, which I have considered supra, the  FtJ's  attention  does
       not appear to have been  drawn  to  any  specific  passage  in  that
       evidence, and the  background  evidence  does  not,  in  any  event,
       establish that the family would face a serious and individual threat
       to their lives by reason of indiscriminate violence.


   16. While the FtJ did refer at length to  Hesham  Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60,
       there is nothing on the face of the  decision  to  suggest  that  he
       applied the wrong legal principles or that he otherwise  misdirected
       himself in law.


   17. There does not appear to  have  been  any  submission  made  on  the
       appellants' behalf at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  or  indeed
       before the Upper Tribunal, that the 1st  appellant's  partner  could
       not reasonably be expected to relocate to Afghanistan as a result of
       any restrictions she may face as a woman.  Certainly,  there  is  no
       reference to this in either the skeleton argument before the  First-
       tier Tribunal or on the face of the First-tier Tribunal decision.


   18. The FtJ carefully weighted up the competing factors before him  when
       assessing proportionality,  including  the  best  interests  of  the
       children, but was rationally entitled to conclude that there were no
       compelling reasons why the family could not relocate to Afghanistan.
       The decision discloses no material legal error.


Decision:

The appeal is dismissed


[pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 21 December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
