
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/00137/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 1 February 2018                    |            On 19 February 2018       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                    mr JT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Loughran, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone.  He  was  born  on  6  June
    1994.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 11 December 2015 to
    refuse his application for leave to remain.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 16 May 2017, Judge R  Cooper  (the  judge)
    allowed the appellant's appeal under Articles 3 and 8.

 4. The grounds submit that the judge made a material misdirection  in  law
    and failed to resolve conflicts  of  fact.   As  regards  the  material
    misdirection of law, the grounds claim the same  with  regard  to  both
    Articles 3 and 8.

 5. The grounds claim that the appellant's  situation  did  not  reach  the
    severity required to engage Article 3.  See N v the  United  Kingdom  -
    26565/05 [2008] ECHR 452.

 6. As regards Article 8, the  grounds  claim  the  judge  appeared  overly
    swayed by the "highly persuasive" witnesses.  See [67] of the decision.
     The grounds claim the judge's findings with regard  to  the  witnesses
    was irrational, however, leaving that aside, the  grounds  claim  there
    were no identifiable exceptionalities arising.  See Patel  [2013]  UKSC
    72.

 7. Further, the judge failed to resolve  conflicts  of  fact  because  she
    failed to carry out a proper balancing exercise of the public  interest
    and failed to consider the cost of providing ongoing medical facilities
    to the appellant in the overall proportionality  assessment,  nor  that
    any private life had been developed during a period  of  illegality  in
    the UK.  The public interest in maintaining  an  effective  immigration
    control had not been afforded sufficient weight.  See EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

 8. Judge Boyes granted permission to appeal on 29 November 2017:

         "3.  The grounds are clearly arguable for the reasons propounded in
             the application."

    The appellant relied upon his Rule 24 response dated 16  January  2018.
    Briefly, it was  claimed  that  in  a  detailed  and  clearly  reasoned
    decision,  the  judge  directed  herself  correctly  in  allowing   the
    appellant's appeal.  The grounds did not identify an arguable error  of
    law but merely sought to reargue the respondent's case.

Submissions on Error of Law

 9. Mr Avery relied upon the grounds.  He accepted the judge's decision was
    thorough; she had gone  through  the  circumstances  in  great  detail.
    Nevertheless, he drew my attention in particular to [97].  It  appeared
    that the judge did not understand the high  threshold.   See  what  the
    judge said at [90] with regard to J [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

10. Mr Avery submitted that the judge's conclusion at [97]  was  inadequate
    in terms of how she reached her decision and did not adequately explain
    how in the appellant's particular circumstances,  the  high  Article  3
    threshold was met.

11. Ms Loughran relied upon the Rule 24 response. The judge had not erred.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. The judge carried out a  careful  and  comprehensive  analysis  of  the
    appellant's claim.

13. The grounds claim that the judge did not understand the high  threshold
    set out in all Article 3 cases but in particular in J  with  regard  to
    suicide risk, however, the judge set out the evidence  and  submissions
    at [20]-[26].  She was aware that this was not a  healthcare  case  but
    one where there was a very real risk of suicide.  See [26].

14. The judge set out her analysis at  [28]-[85]  and  her  discussion  and
    conclusion at [88]-[114].  She took into account the oral  evidence  of
    the witnesses and the  expert  reports  and  letters  of  Dr  Bell,  Dr
    Hussain, Dr Ahmad and Dr Cranitch.

15. There were additional statements which the judge considered as well  as
    letters of support and a petition.  The judge accepted the  appellant's
    evidence.  She found the expert  evidence  reliable  although  she  was
    aware that the experts' views slightly differed as  to  the  extent  of
    risk.  The judge gave cogent reasons for preferring the opinion  of  Dr
    Bell which informed his more nuanced conclusions as to the  appellant's
    presenting diagnoses. The judge found  at  [76]  that  removal  of  the
    appellant to Sierra Leone would result in a very high risk  of  suicide
    or deliberate self harm.  That was a finding the judge was entitled  to
    come to on the evidence before her.  The judge took  into  account  the
    availability of treatment in the  appellant's  own  country.   She  had
    concerns regarding some of the evidence, in particular with that of  Dr
    Ahmad, however,  after  acknowledging  that  potentially  affected  the
    reliability of the report and the weight the judge was able to put upon
    it, she found that there was extraneous  corroboration  such  that  she
    could accept Dr Ahmad's views.

16. The judge was aware of the appropriate test and considered the same  in
    her discussion and conclusion.  She exhaustively assessed the  evidence
    against the parties' respective claims.  She was entitled to reach  her
    conclusion at [97] that the evidence before  her  painted  a  different
    picture from  that  relied  upon  in  the  respondent's  refusal.   She
    confirmed that she was satisfied the evidence showed there was a causal
    link between the appellant's removal and the risk of suicide as claimed
    by the appellant and corroborated by the expert and other evidence.

17. It might be that the decision involved the judge in making findings  as
    part of the setting out of the evidence rather than the analysis  being
    wholly within her section  "Discussion and Conclusion".   Nevertheless,
    on a close reading of the decision,  it  is  apparent  that  the  judge
    considered all the relevant  issues  and  justified  her  findings  and
    conclusion.

18. In isolating [96] of the decision at ground [5] the respondent  ignored
    the  following  paragraphs  in  particular,  at  [97]-[98].   After   a
    considerable analysis and for the reasons she set out, the judge  found
    the appellant's enforced removal to Sierra Leone would  breach  Article
    3.  She gave cogent reasons for that decision  which  she  was  clearly
    entitled to come to  on  the  facts  of  the  case  and  the  case  law
    framework.

19. As regards Article 8, for the reasons the judge set out, she found that
    the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  She understood
    the standard of proof and considered that there  would  be  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration for the reasons she  set  out.
    I do accept that the judge failed to  carry  out  the  public  interest
    considerations applicable in all cases under s.117, however, bearing in
    mind she found that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules,  I
    find as Ms Loughran submitted, that there  can  be  an  inference  that
    there was no public interest  in  the  appellant's  removal.   In  such
    circumstances I find the judge did not err in that regard  but  if  she
    did so, the error was not material.

20. I conclude that the decision did not contain a material error  of  law,
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside.





Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 1 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


