
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00232/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 30 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                        MISS TEMILOLA ABIODUN FASANU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar, Counsel, instructed by AY & J
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
        Lever ('the judge'), promulgated on 26 March 2019,  dismissing  the
        appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  her
        claim for indefinite leave to remain.





     2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She  appealed  against  the
        decision of the respondent to refuse her indefinite leave to remain
        under paragraphs 322(5) of the Immigration Rules.


     3. Relevant to this onward appeal is the respondent's contention  that
        the first  appellant's  earnings,  as  declared  to  Her  Majesty's
        Revenue and  Customs  ('HMRC'),  differed  significantly  from  the
        income she had declared to the Home Office following a Tier 1 leave
        to remain application.


     4. The respondent's initial case was  that  there  had  been  a  clear
        benefit to the appellant either by  failing  to  declare  her  full
        earnings in order  to  reduce  her  tax  liability  and/or  falsely
        representing her earnings to the Home Office  to  meet  the  points
        requirement for a Tier 1 visa.

     5. This deception, it was advanced, meant it was undesirable to permit
        the appellant to remain, and thereby the appellant did not meet the
        requirements of the long residence rules.

     6. Following a hearing, the judge found that the appellant  had  acted
        dishonestly and that the Home Office's  case  in  this  regard  was
        'overwhelming'.

     7. As a result, the appeal was dismissed.


     8. In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, drafted on 4  April
        2019, Counsel representing the appellant submitted that  the  judge
        had  materially  erred  in  dismissing  this  appeal,  inter  alia,
        because:

             The appellant submits that paragraph 26 of  the  determination
             is infected with an arguably material  error  of  law  as  the
             First-tier Judge has failed to grapple with a concession  made
             by the presenting officer at the  outset  of  the  hearing  or
             submissions made by counsel for the appellant.


             As to the concession, the Secretary of State accepted  at  the
             start of the hearing that he had narrowed  his  allegation  to
             fraud on HMRC on the basis that insofar as it was alleged that
             the appellant had inflated  her  income  to  secure  leave  to
             remain - thereby defrauding UKVI - the documentary evidence by
             the appellant at the time of the previous applications stacked
             up and led to leave to remain being  granted.  The  First-tier
             Judge has given no reasons as to why this concession has  been
             departed from.


     9. The record of proceedings on the  tribunal's  file  appears  to  be
        silent on the issue, so I  am  not  assisted  either  way  in  that
        regard.


    10. Nonetheless, contrary to the concession asserted in the grounds  of
        appeal, it is clear that the judge was satisfied that the appellant
        'had produced bogus figures and documentary evidence  to  the  Home
        Office in her visa application claiming a high level of income from
        self-employment in order to  gain  points  so  that  she  would  be
        awarded a visa'.


    11. I can find  no  reference  in  the  judge's  determination  to  any
        concession made by the Home Office.

    12. The suggestion the appellant's representative  makes  is  that  the
        presenting officer conceded that the appellant had not inflated her
        income to secure leave to remain. Clearly such a  concession  would
        be contrary to what the judge found.

    13. I had certain reservations about what was said in this regard going
        into the hearing. The judge has produced an otherwise well-reasoned
        decision, explaining why he found against  the  appellant.  On  one
        view, it appeared unlikely he would have overlooked a concession of
        this type made by the Home Office.

    14. However, at the start of the hearing the presenting officer  before
        me was able to confirm that some form of concession had  been  made
        by the Home Office. He had found  on  the  Home  Office  file  what
        appeared to be a note relating to said concession:

             'Far more likely she has been manipulating the figures in
             order to avoid tax by submitting lower figures. Deception
             against HMRC therefore not the Home Office.'


    15. This note appears to corroborate to a degree what counsel  for  the
        appellant maintained. If, as Mr Jarvis was prepared to assume, this
        (or something similar) had been  said  at  the  hearing,  it  would
        appear to have been something the judge would have at least had  to
        address, if only to explain why he was departing from it.


    16. Mr Jarvis, correctly in my view, took the approach  that  the  Home
        Office was not in a position to dispute what counsel said about the
        concession; and thereby accepted the concession had been made.

    17. The question that then flows  is  whether  the  judge  should  have
        engaged with such a concession. It appears to  me  that  he  should
        have done. The appellant is at least  entitled  to  know  that  the
        judge considered  the  concession  before  going  on  to  make  the
        findings that he did, particularly as the findings that  the  judge
        made relate to the appellant's integrity and how she acted  at  the
        time, concluding with a finding that was contrary to what the  Home
        Office were by that stage advancing in relation to the fraud  being
        on  HM  Revenue  and  Customs,  not  in  relation  to  the  Tier  1
        application.

    18. As has been suggested in  more  than  one  decision  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal, it is axiomatic that the determination discloses  clearly
        the reasons for a  tribunal's  decision  (e.g.  MK  (duty  to  give
        reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC)).

    19. While I am satisfied that  one  element  of  the  reasons  for  the
        judge's decision are clear, I am not satisfied that the  judge  has
        taken into account what was a concession relating to a central part
        of the case touching upon those reasons. The failure to address the
        conceded position calls into question the decision as a whole.

    20. I have considered whether it would be appropriate to write  to  the
        judge to seek clarification, but in the light of the way  the  Home
        Office have framed the case before me today, I do  not  think  that
        that is likely to add  substantial  value.  The  Home  Office  have
        accepted what is currently advanced.

    21.  I  have  also  considered,  bearing  in  mind  the  force  of  the
        determination of the judge at first-instance, whether such an error
        is material to the overall outcome of this appeal. While I think it
        is arguable to say it  may  not  be,  on  balance  I  am  far  from
        persuaded that the decision can  now  survive  following  the  Home
        Office's acceptance that the point should have been  addressed,  if
        only to be dismissed. As a result, I am  not  able  to  remedy  the
        defect at this stage.

    22. For the above reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  has  been  a
        material error of law. The judge has failed to take into account  a
        concession made by  the  Home  Office  that  was  relevant  to  the
        determination he was being asked to make.

    23. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Lever, dated  25  March
        2019.

    24. I have considered whether I should reserve this  matter  to  myself
        and the Upper Tribunal, but it appears to me that  having  prepared
        this decision after the hearing, the correct course is to now remit
        this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to begin again.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal sitting in Newport on 5  March  2019
under reference HU/00232/2019 is set aside.

AND I DIRECT:

   1.   This matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  in
      Newport for a fresh hearing, not to be listed before Judge Lever.


   2.    The Secretary of State must  now  consider  whether  he  wishes  to
      maintain the concession made at the previous hearing. The Secretary of
      State may apply to withdraw the concession, but notice must  be  given
      to the tribunal and the parties within 28 days of the  issue  of  this
      decision.

   3.    In any event, the Secretary of State must prepare a short statement
      of case for the tribunal and the appellant, so that the  appellant  is
      aware of the case that she now has to meet.

   4.    Upon receipt by the First-tier Tribunal in Newport, this file shall
      be referred to a tribunal caseworker for further listing directions.


No application was made for anonymity in this appeal. The  general  rule  is
that hearings are held in public and judicial decisions are published  (A  v
BBC [2014] UKSC 25) and I saw no reason to depart from the general  rule  in
this case.


Signed                                                                 [pic]
                  Date 22 July 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams

