
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00778/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18th February 2020                |On 6 March 2020                      |


                                   Before

                        THE HON. MRS JUSTICE A FOSTER
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     OJ
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, of Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. He came to the UK in 2005 with
       a six month visit visa and overstayed. In  2012,  2013  and  2015  he
       sought to regularise his stay outside of the Immigration  Rules.  His
       application was refused on 22nd December 2015. His appeal against the
       decision to refuse his human rights claim was dismissed by First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Reid in a  determination  promulgated  on  21st  March
       2017. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Blum
       on 31st October 2017. The appeal  was  then  heard  by  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge JM Holmes, and his decision dismissing the appeal  and
       upholding the First-tier Tribunal was promulgated on  the  9th  March
       2018. The appellant then applied for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
       Court of Appeal, which was granted by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Singh
       on 12th April 2019. The matter was remitted to the Upper Tribunal  by
       the Court of Appeal for redetermination.  On 12th February 2020 Upper
       Tribunal Judge Lindsley admitted the new bundle of evidence submitted
       by the appellant dated 23rd January 2020.

Evidence & Submissions

    2. In summary the appellant asserts that  the  family  situation  is  as
       follows. The appellant lives with his wife (Ms O), and her child D, a
       British citizen born in June 2013 as a result of a short relationship
       with the appellant's brother, and their two children, K born in March
       2012 and C born in May 2015. His wife is a Nigerian  citizen  as  are
       the children K and C, and they all have limited leave  to  remain  on
       the basis of her  family  and  private  life  ties  to  the  UK.  The
       appellant also has a minor child, Q, who lives in Nigeria. The  child
       K is on the autistic spectrum but in mainstream school. The  child  D
       has no relationship with her natural father. Ms O has mobility issues
       and has severe mental health problems. There had  previously  been  a
       break down in the relationship between the appellant and Ms O, but he
       moved back into the family home in March 2017  and  is  the  24  hour
       carer for all  family  members  doing  all  the  childcare,  cooking,
       cleaning, laundry and shopping.

    3. The respondent accepted in his skeleton argument that the  only  live
       issue between the parties was whether the appellant has a genuine and
       subsisting relationship with his  children.  If  the  Upper  Tribunal
       finds that this is the case then  it  is  accepted  that  the  appeal
       should be allowed through the prism of s.117B(6) of the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act as it is accepted that K  and  D  are
       qualifying children with respect to whom it would be unreasonable  to
       expect them to leave the UK.

    4. The appellant submits in his skeleton argument that the  requirements
       of s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are
       met. It is argued that the appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       parental relationship with the child D, who is a British citizen  and
       qualifying child, as he treats her equally with his other  biological
       children as part of one family  and  plays  an  active  part  in  her
       upbringing which has progressed with time to mean that he is her main
       carer due to her mother's ill health and her lack of contact with her
       father. The South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust  wrote  in
       September 2018 that it was essential that the appellant  reside  with
       his wife and the three children as  they  were  all  vulnerable,  and
       without his being present the  physical  wellbeing  of  the  children
       would deteriorate as they would be at risk of neglect.

    5. Before  the  Upper  Tribunal  Mr  Bramble  conceded  the  appeal  and
       explained that this was because evidence in the bundle  admitted  for
       this hearing. At page 18 of the bundle there is a letter from  Harris
       Primary Academy  dated  16th  January  2020  which  states  that  the
       appellant is the emergency contact for all  three  children,  attends
       parents' evenings and drops and picks them up from school every  day.
       It also states that the appellant had accompanied K's class  swimming
       one a week for a term.  Mr  Bramble  noted  that  there  was  further
       additional evidence  from  a  friend  and  social  worker  which  the
       appellant had applied to admit in addition to this evidence  but  his
       view was that  this  was  not  needed.  He  was  satisfied  that  the
       appellant has shown that he has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
       relationship with his children.

Conclusions - Remaking

    6. The issue that the Court of Appeal has remitted to the Upper Tribunal
       to determine is whether it is reasonable to expect the  oldest  child
       of the family, who is not the appellant's biological child,  but  who
       is a British citizen, to go and live in Nigeria applying the test  at
       s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  and
       the guidance in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 AB (Jamaica) [2019]  EWCA
       Civ 661.

    7. It is conceded by the respondent that it would not be  reasonable  to
       expect K (or indeed his sister D) to go and live in Nigeria; that the
       appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  K
       and his other children; and that as a result that the  appeal  should
       be allowed under Article 8 ECHR.




  Decision:

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

    2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby set aside

    3. We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on  Article  8
       ECHR grounds.




       Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) we make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We  do  so  in  order  to
       avoid a  likelihood  of  serious  harm  arising  to  the  appellant's
       children and his partner who are all vulnerable people.


Signed:  Fiona Lindsley                      Date:  18th February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

