
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00364/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th September 2018                        |On 10th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Ahmed Hossen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Harrington
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 20th March 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 16th January 1990.  He
    entered the UK on 7th May 2011 with valid leave as a  Tier  4  Student.
    On 30th October 2014 he made an in-time application for  further  leave
    to remain which was refused.  Whilst he  was  pursuing  his  appeal  he
    decided to withdraw his  application  in  order  to  proceed  with  the
    current one for further leave to remain on the basis of his marriage to
    a British citizen present and settled in the UK.

 3. That application was refused by way of a decision  dated  9th  December
    2016 on the basis that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements since the Secretary of State believed that he had obtained
    an ETS test certificate fraudulently by using a proxy test taker.   The
    judge accepted the Secretary of State's case  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant's ETS test was attained by fraud. She dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal primarily on the grounds that
    the judge had acted unfairly by relying on matters which were  not  put
    to him, depriving him of an opportunity to answer her concerns.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hollingworth for the  reasons
    stated in the grounds.

 6. Mr Wilcox started his submissions by asking  permission  to  amend  the
    grounds in order to make the argument that, even if the  appellant  was
    found to have cheated on the TOEIC test, that did not bring him  within
    the suitability criteria for refusal.  I refused the application.  Such
    an amendment would require the  Presenting  Officer  to  have  time  to
    consider the arguments and would result  in  this  case  having  to  be
    adjourned.  There has been ample opportunity for the representatives to
    seek to amend their grounds prior  to  the  hearing  and  there  is  no
    justification for attempting to do so on the day in circumstances which
    would inevitably mean that this appeal could not be concluded.

 7. Mr Wilcox argued that not only that the judge had  acted  unfairly  but
    that, in holding the fact that the appellant  had  given  his  evidence
    fluently against him, had in effect  made  it  impossible  for  him  to
    succeed.  He said that the flavour of the determination suggested  that
    she had prejudged the appeal.

 8. It seems to me that there is no evidence that this judge had  done  so.
    She was perfectly entitled to consider that the  manner  in  which  the
    appellant gave his evidence suggested that it was rehearsed.

 9. However it is clear that she relied strongly, at paragraph 30, upon the
    fact that the appellant  had  not  provided  evidence  of  his  English
    language ability at the time of the refusal.  She said that she did not
    have any exam results from Bangladesh or any proof of him succeeding in
    his study in the UK and some or all of this evidence ought to have been
    available.  The fact that it had not been  produced  suggested  to  her
    that it did not support his case.

10. In fact however such evidence was available.  According to the  grounds
    the  appellant  studied  for  his  four  year  diploma  in   electronic
    engineering in Bangladesh following a course  which  was  conducted  at
    least in part in the English  medium.  It  also  contained  an  English
    language module.  Further, he had obtained a qualification in the UK on
    food safety in English in November 2011. Moreover  he   had  given  his
    evidence without an interpreter at  a  hearing  before  an  Immigration
    Judge in 2015.

11. By not putting him on notice that she required evidence of his speaking
    ability in 2013 the judge deprived the appellant of the opportunity  of
    providing evidence which was in fact available.

12. Accordingly the decision is set aside and will have to be remade.

13.  Even  if  the  appellant  ultimately  succeeds  in  relation  to   the
    suitability criteria he  still  has  to  show  that  he  can  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1.  Further  evidence  will  therefore  be
    required in relation to his wife's ability to  live  in  Bangladesh,  a
    matter not dealt with by the original judge.

14. This matter is therefore remitted to Taylor House to be heard before  a
    judge other than Judge Harrington.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 2 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



