


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00648/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : (UT)IAC Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 19 June 2017                     |On : 27 June 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 manjit kaur
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Bhachu, instructed by Kenneth Jones Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Ms Kaur's appeal
   against the respondent's decision to refuse her human rights claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the  respondent  and  Ms  Kaur  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on [ ]  1981.  She  entered  the
   United Kingdom on 23 December 2006 with entry clearance  as  a  religious
   worker valid until 30 May 2007 and was granted further leave to remain on
   the same basis until 8 November 2008. Her daughter, [R], was  born  on  8
   August 2008. On  26  October  2008  the  appellant  applied  for  an  EEA
   residence card which was refused on 29 October 2009. On 28 September 2012
   she applied for leave to remain outside the immigration  rules  and  that
   application was refused on 7 October 2013.


4. On 17 September 2015 the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
   remain on human rights grounds, on the basis of her  family  and  private
   life in the UK, with reference in particular to her relationship with  an
   Indian national, [CS], who had discretionary leave to remain  in  the  UK
   until 25 February 2018, and the child of that relationship, [R], who  had
   resided in the UK for more than seven years. Reference was  made  to  the
   fact that her partner had three sons from  his  first  marriage  and  had
   regular contact with and parental responsibility for those children.  The
   appellant claimed that her relationship with her partner began  in  early
   2008 and that they had started living together in June 2015.


5. The  appellant's  application  was  refused  on  15  December  2015.  The
   respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  met  the  definition  of
   "partner" for the purposes of GEN.1.2 of Appendix  FM,  as  she  was  not
   married to [CS] and had only resided  with  him  for  three  months,  and
   therefore did not meet the requirements of paragraph EX.1(b) of  Appendix
   FM. It was not accepted  that  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
   paragraph EX.1(a) as a parent as it was considered reasonable  to  expect
   her daughter to  leave  the  UK.   The  respondent  considered  that  the
   appellant could not meet the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis
   of her private life and that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
   justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules. The respondent
   noted that the appellant had provided  no  evidence  to  show  that  [CS]
   played an active role in [R]'s life and no evidence to show that  he  had
   contact with his three children from his previous  relationship.  It  was
   therefore not accepted that [R] had formed significant ties with her step-
   siblings.

6. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hawden-Beal  on  28  September  2016  and  was
   allowed in a decision promulgated on 13 October  2016.  The  judge  heard
   from the appellant and her partner. The evidence from the  appellant  was
   that her partner's three sons came to their home every Friday night until
   Sunday night and she would take  the  eldest  son  to  school  on  Monday
   morning. The boys called her "small mum" and had a good relationship with
   their half-sister [R]. The  boys'  mother  suffered  from  mental  health
   problems. When she was ill or in hospital the boys  would  come  to  stay
   with her and she took care of them. Her daughter  would  be  affected  by
   separation from her half-brothers. Her partner walked their  daughter  to
   school when he was on a late start at  work.  The  appellant's  partner's
   evidence was that his eldest son,  Jack,  now  lived  with  him  and  the
   appellant all the time and had come to live with them three weeks ago. He
   had been in the UK for 16 years and was intending to apply for indefinite
   leave to remain, as his leave expired in 2018. He told his estranged wife
   about his daughter two years ago which is  when  they  separated  and  he
   moved in with the appellant. Judge Hawden-Beal found that it would not be
   reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  daughter  to  go  to  India  and
   therefore concluded  that  the  requirements  in  EX.1(a)  and  paragraph
   276ADE(1) had been met  and  that  the  appellant  also  succeeded  under
   section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on
   the same basis. She allowed the appeal under the immigration rules.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge had erred in her consideration  of  whether
   it was reasonable to expect the appellant's daughter  to  leave  the  UK,
   having focussed only on the effects on the child without considering  the
   appellant's immigration history and circumstances.

8. Permission to appeal was granted on 12 January 2016.

Appeal Hearing

9. Mr Wilding submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  by  finding  that  the
   appellant could succeed under EX.1(a) as a parent, as she could not  meet
   the eligibility requirements in ECPT.2.3 as the child's  father  was  not
   her partner and was not British  or  settled  in  the  UK.  Further,  the
   judge's assessment of reasonableness was one dimensional and did not take
   any account of the public interest, as required in MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R
   (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
   & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705. The judge's  proportionality  assessment  was
   wholly inadequate.

10. Ms Bhachu submitted that any error in regard to  EX.1(a)  had  not  been
   raised in the grounds of appeal but in any event was  immaterial  as  the
   judge had properly considered the  question  of  reasonableness  and  had
   taken all relevant matters into  account.  This  case  differed  from  MA
   (Pakistan) as there was the question of a family split  and  the  outcome
   would therefore have to be the same in any event.


Consideration and Findings

11. I agree with Mr Wilding that the judge's  assessment  of  reasonableness
   was entirely one dimensional, focussing only on the circumstance  of  the
   child and taking no account of the public interest, as  required  in  MA.
   There were various  considerations  which  required  a  full  and  proper
   assessment  and  relevant  findings,  namely  the   appellant's   adverse
   immigration history,  the  strength  of  the  relationships  between  the
   appellant's partner and his children  from  both  relationships  and  the
   appellant's partner's immigration status. As Mr  Wilding  submitted,  the
   appellant's partner's status was an unusual feature in that  it  was  not
   clear what was the basis of his  leave  to  remain  and  whether  it  was
   related to his previous marriage or his relationship with  his  children.
   None of these matters appear to have  been  properly  considered  by  the
   judge and there were certainly no findings in that regard. Accordingly  I
   would agree with the respondent that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  by
   failing to undertake a full assessment of all  relevant  matters  and  by
   failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  it   would   be
   unreasonable to expect the appellant's daughter  [R]  to  leave  the  UK.
   Although I agree with Ms Bhachu that the appellant's case perhaps differs
   from that in MA in so far as the family relationships  are  more  complex
   and raise the possibility of a family split, I do  not  accept  that  the
   outcome would inevitably have to be the same even if the public  interest
   was taken into account and  I  consider  that  the  judge's  errors  were
   therefore material.

12.  Accordingly I find that the respondent's grounds have  been  made  out.
   The judge's decision contains material errors of law and cannot stand.


13. It seems to me  that,  in  the  absence  of  any  proper  assessment  or
   findings in regard to the family relationships, this is  a  matter  where
   oral evidence would need to be given and findings of fact made,  so  that
   it would be appropriate for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to be heard de novo. In so concluding I also bear  in  mind  the
   reference made by Ms Bhachu to the recent case of  MK  (A  Child  By  Her
   Litigation Friend CAE), R (On the Application  Of)  v  The  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2017]  EWHC  1365  raising  the  issue  of
   statelessness and which Mr Wilding properly submitted may require further
   evidence as to the possibility of registering [R] as an Indian  national.
   Again that would be a matter best dealt with through further evidence and
   fact-finding which was more  appropriate  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   Accordingly the case will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
   heard and considered afresh, with no findings preserved.

DECISION

14. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal  is
   allowed. The decision is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the  First-
   tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh, pursuant to  section  12(2)(b)(i)
   of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement
   7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Hawden-Beal.








Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 22 June 2017
