
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/00025/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th June 2019                         |On 25th June 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                 jawad rafiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed of Counsel, instructed by Peer & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr C Williams, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge  J  Robertson  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 6th February
    2018.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 30th  July  1988.   He
    entered the  UK  as  a  student  in  September  2008.   His  leave  was
    subsequently extended as a student, and on 19th June 2014  he  switched
    into the spouse category and had leave until 19th December  2016.   The
    Appellant married Zeinab Aslam (the Sponsor) on 26th February 2014.

 3. Prior to the expiry of his leave  the  Appellant  applied  for  further
    leave to remain as the spouse of a British  citizen.   The  application
    was refused on 19th December 2016.

 4. The application was refused with reference to S-LTR.1.6, the Respondent
    finding that the presence of the Appellant in the UK is  not  conducive
    to the public good because  his  conduct,  character,  associations  or
    other reasons make it undesirable to allow him to  remain  in  the  UK.
    This decision was made because when the Appellant had applied for leave
    to remain in an application dated 28th November 2013 he had submitted a
    TOEIC certificate issued by  Educational  Testing  Service  (ETS).   In
    order  to  obtain  that  certificate  the  Appellant  claimed  to  have
    undertaken tests on 5th December  2012  and  15th  January  2013.   The
    Respondent believed that the Appellant had used a  proxy  to  undertake
    the tests and ETS had cancelled his certificate.

 5. As the Appellant could not satisfy the  suitability  requirements,  the
    Respondent found that he could not satisfy the requirements of Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules, or paragraph  276ADE(1).   The  Respondent
    did  not  accept  that   the   application   raised   any   exceptional
    circumstances which would warrant granting leave to remain pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 6. It was conceded on behalf of the Appellant that he  could  not  satisfy
    the Immigration Rules.  The appeal was pursued relying upon  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  noted  that  the  Appellant
    accepted that he had used a proxy to  undertake  the  English  language
    test.  That admission was contained in a recent witness statement  made
    by the Appellant.

 7.  The  judge  did  not  consider  that  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances.  It was accepted that  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  are
    married.  They have no children.  It was accepted that they  wished  to
    undergo IVF treatment in the UK but the judge  found  that  the  couple
    could travel to Pakistan together and pursue IVF  treatment  there,  or
    the Sponsor could return to the UK as necessary.   The  judge  did  not
    find that  there  were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  couple
    continuing family life outside the UK.

 8. The judge considered section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 noting that the Appellant had  come  to  the  UK  as  a
    student and maintained his leave  by  deception.   He  entered  into  a
    relationship while "his status was at best precarious", and  the  judge
    attached little weight to his private life.  The appeal  was  dismissed
    as the judge found at paragraph 16 that although family life  had  been
    established,  the  public  interest   in   maintaining   an   effective
    immigration  policy  was  a  significant  countervailing  factor.   The
    Respondent's decision was found to be proportionate.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. The grounds were settled by Counsel and are summarised below.

10. It was contended that the judge had  failed  to  take  into  account  a
    material matter in not properly assessing  whether  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor could be required to move to Pakistan, and reliance was  placed
    upon Sanade (India) [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC) on the basis that it would not
    be reasonable to expect the Sponsor to leave the UK as she is a British
    citizen.

11. The judge had failed to take into account a  material  matter,  by  not
    assessing the impact of the Appellant's actions upon the Sponsor who is
    blameless.

12. The judge had failed to take into account a material matter in relation
    to IVF treatment.  Both the Appellant and Sponsor would be required for
    the IVF process, and it would be a significant hardship  if  they  were
    expected to conduct IVF treatment in the manner suggested by the judge.
     The judge failed to consider the Appellant is likely to be subject  to
    a ban under paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules if he leaves the  UK
    and makes an application for entry clearance and reference was made  to
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

13. The judge failed to take into account a material matter by  failing  to
    give  any  weight  to  the   Appellant's   current   English   language
    certificates and  degree  certificates.   The  Appellant  had  produced
    evidence that he was financially independent.

14. The judge erred by failing to take into account a  material  matter  by
    not attaching any weight to the fact that the Respondent took no action
    against the Appellant for a number of years after initially instigating
    investigations into the ETS certificate.  It was  contended  that  this
    was relevant to proportionality.

Permission to Appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Doyle
    in the following terms;

         "The judge found that Article 8 family life  exists  and  that  the
         Appellant cannot meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.
         His proportionality assessment is set out between  [10]  and  [16].
         It is arguable that the judge has  not  adequately  considered  the
         dicta  in  Chikwamba  (FC)  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  and  R  (on  the
         application of Chen) v SSHD (Appendix FM -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
         separation - proportionality) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)."

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

16. Mr Ahmed, who had not appeared before the FTT, relied upon his skeleton
    argument.  Reliance was placed upon the grounds upon  which  permission
    to appeal had been granted but Mr Ahmed's primary point  was  that  the
    Appellant wished to withdraw the concession that had been  made  before
    the FTT, in which it was conceded that he could not satisfy  S-LTR.1.6.



17. Mr Williams observed that the Appellant had not been granted permission
    to appeal on that  point,  but  nevertheless  submitted  that  even  if
    permission to appeal had been granted,  there  was  no  merit  in  that
    submission.

18. Mr Williams relied upon a response  submitted  under  rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  in  which,  in  brief
    summary, it was contended that the judge had not erred in law, and  had
    given cogent reasons for all findings made.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions, I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. I deal firstly with the new issue raised by Mr Ahmed  at  the  hearing.
    This was not an issue raised in the initial grounds seeking  permission
    to appeal, nor the renewed grounds.  Permission to appeal has therefore
    not been granted on this point.  The  concession  was  raised  for  the
    first time in Mr Ahmed's skeleton argument  produced  just  before  the
    commencement of the hearing.  It is not appropriate to attempt to raise
    a new issue in that manner.  There has been no application to amend the
    grounds.  I deal with this point as the Respondent did not  object.   I
    have to consider whether the judge erred in proceeding to consider  the
    appeal on the basis that it was put by the Appellant's Counsel.  It  is
    quite clear that the Appellant's Counsel conceded  that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules by reason of S-LTR.1.6.  I note
    that  Counsel  who  represented  the  Appellant  before  the   FTT   is
    experienced in representing in immigration,  asylum  and  human  rights
    cases.

21. It may be the case, as argued by Mr Ahmed,  that  many  representatives
    would not have made such a concession.  However, a clear concession was
    made by experienced Counsel representing the Appellant, and I find that
    the judge was fully entitled to accept that concession, and  deal  with
    the appeal on the basis suggested by the Appellant's Counsel.

22. The judge recognised that as it was accepted that the Immigration Rules
    were  not  satisfied,  the  Appellant  must   demonstrate   exceptional
    circumstances to  show  that  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  would
    follow if the Appellant was not allowed to remain in the UK.  There  is
    reference at paragraph 6 to the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that compelling and exceptional circumstance exist.

23. Guidance on considering Article 8 cases is given in TZ  (Pakistan)  and
    PG (India) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 and I set out  below  paragraph  31  of
    that decision;

         "Where Article 8 is  in  issue  within  the  Rules  there  will  of
         necessity have to be a conclusion on the question of whether  there
         are insurmountable obstacles to the relocation of the appellant and
         his or her family.  That involves an evaluation or  value  judgment
         based upon findings of fact.  When a Tribunal goes on  to  consider
         an Article 8 claim outside of  the  Rules  (as  it  will  do  where
         Article 8 is engaged, see Hesham Ali (Iraq) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60, [2016] 1 WLR 4799 at [80]),
         it will factor into its evaluation of whether there are exceptional
         circumstances both the findings of fact that have been made and the
         evaluation of whether or not there are insurmountable  obstacles  -
         that being a relevant factor both as a matter of policy and on  the
         facts of the case to the question of exceptional circumstances."

24. Although the judge did not specifically refer to TZ,  I  find  that  he
    followed the principles set out therein.  The judge considered  whether
    there would be insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    continuing family life in Pakistan, and  found  at  paragraph  12  that
    there were not.  I find that adequate reasons for that conclusion  have
    been given.

25. Dealing specifically with the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal
    was granted, I find no merit  in  the  first  ground  which  refers  to
    Sanade.  This is not a case where the judge was making a finding that a
    British citizen should be required to leave the UK.   The  test  to  be
    considered was whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
    life continuing outside the UK.

26. I do not accept that the judge erred by not assessing the impact of the
    Appellant's behaviour on the Sponsor.  The judge found at paragraph  12
    that  if  the  Appellant  returned  to  Pakistan  this   would   "cause
    difficulties for the couple, in the light of the above I do not  accept
    that they are  significant  difficulties  or  that  the  obstacles  are
    insurmountable".

27. There is no error of law in relation to  consideration  of  IVF.   Both
    representatives before me referred to Erimako [2008] EWHC 312  (admin).
    I set out below paragraph 8 of that decision;

         "8.  Given the circumstances of this case, Mr Harris accepted that,
             in effect, his submission was that a person or persons in this
             country,  otherwise  without  any  right  to  remain  in  this
             country, should be entitled to remain in this country in order
             to undertake fertility treatment.  That is a contention that I
             am unable to accept.  It cannot be  the  case  that  the  Home
             Secretary is under a duty to grant leave to remain, even for a
             limited period, in such cases, and, in particular, in  a  case
             such as the present where the prospects of Mr and Mrs  Erimako
             are regrettably uncertain."

28. In the case before the judge, the couple stated  that  they  wished  to
    remain in the UK so that they could commence IVF treatment.   They  had
    not started the treatment.  The judge was fully entitled to  find  that
    this was not exceptional, and not an insurmountable obstacle to  family
    life continuing outside the UK.

29. The judge did not err in considering the Appellant's  English  language
    certificate and financial independence.  It  is  well-established  when
    considering the factors in section 117B of the 2002  Act,  that  if  an
    individual is financially independent  and  can  speak  and  understand
    English, this is a neutral factor in the balancing exercise.

30. The judge did not err by failing to find that the Respondent's  failure
    to curtail the Appellant's leave assisted the  Appellant's  case.   The
    judge was entitled to find at paragraph 10(2);

         "The investigations into the activities of the colleges was ongoing
         and the Appellant's involvement may not have been apparent.  In any
         event the Appellant himself was aware of  his  wrongdoing  when  he
         decided to enter a relationship.  He only chose to be truthful when
         found out."

31. The principle in Chikwamba does not assist the Appellant.  The  factual
    matrix is different.  It is not the case that the  Appellant  would  be
    required to leave the UK and apply for entry clearance simply  for  the
    sake of policy.  Unlike  the  Appellant  in  Chikwamba,  it  is  not  a
    certainty that the Appellant would  be  granted  entry  clearance.   SB
    (Bangladesh) [2007] EWCA Civ 28 confirms that it is not appropriate for
    the FTT to consider and take into account whether or not  an  Appellant
    would satisfy the requirements for entry clearance if required to leave
    the UK.

32. The grounds disclose a disagreement with  conclusions  reached  by  the
    judge.  They do not disclose a material error of law.  The  judge  made
    findings open to make on the evidence, and gave  adequate  reasons  for
    those findings.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose an error of law.   I  do  not  set
aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             13th June 2019

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             13th June 2019

