
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00966/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 23 November 2020                        |On 7 December 2020              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum
                     Upper Tribunal Judge stephen smith


                                   Between

                         KYWANI ALSHON ODANE HIGGINS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     none (the appellant's father/sponsor - Mr A Higgins,
                    appeared on his behalf)
For the respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Cameron  ("the  judge")  promulgated  on  8  June   2019,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal on human rights  grounds  against
         the respondent's decision dated 13 November 2018 refusing to  grant
         him entry clearance to the UK to join  his  father,  Mr  A  Higgins
         ("the sponsor").

      2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 9 November 2000. His
         sponsor came to the UK in 2002.  In  2014  the  appellant  made  an
         application under paragraph 297 of the immigration  rules  to  join
         his father. In order to be granted entry clearance under  paragraph
         297 a child must show that he is applying to enter the UK in one of
         a number of circumstances. These  circumstances include one of  the
         child's parents being present and settled in the UK  who  has  sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing (paragraph 297(i)(e)), or
         one of the child's parents being present and settled in the UK  and
         the  existence  of  serious  and   compelling   family   or   other
         considerations which  makes  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable
         (paragraph 297(i)(f)). The  appellant's  application  in  2014  was
         based on the latter circumstance (paragraph 297(i)(f)).

      3. The appellant's application was refused and an appeal lodged by him
         was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bartlett  in  a
         decision sent on 9 August 2016. Judge Bartlett noted the  appellant
         lived with his paternal grandmother during the week  and  with  his
         biological mother and half-siblings at the  weekends.  Although  it
         was claimed that the appellant's relationship with his  mother  was
         poor, Judge Bartlett did not accept  it  was  as  bad  as  claimed,
         particularly given that the appellant lived with his mother two out
         of seven days. Nor did Judge Bartlett accept the arguments that the
         appellant's paternal grandmother was too old  and  unable  to  look
         after him. Judge  Bartlett  noted  that  the  appellant's  paternal
         grandmother  had  been  a  constant  and  stable  presence  in  the
         appellant's life for 13 years. Judge  Bartlett  was  not  satisfied
         that the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) were met and concluded
         that the decision to refuse entry clearance did not breach  Article
         8 ECHR.

      4. On 26 June 2018 the appellant made a further  application  to  join
         his father. The respondent  was  not  however  satisfied  that  the
         appellant's sponsor had sole responsibility for him, or that  there
         were serious and compelling  considerations  making  his  exclusion
         from the UK undesirable.  The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  the
         appellant's mother had no involvement in  his  upbringing  or  that
         there  was  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  sponsor  was
         responsible for  taking  all  the  important  decisions  about  the
         appellant's upbringing.  The  respondent  also  believed  that  the
         appellant could continue living with his paternal grandmother.  The
         respondent was not satisfied that the appellant could be adequately
         maintained by his father, as required by paragraph  297(v)  of  the
         immigration rules. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision
         to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The judge had before him a large bundle of documents that  included
         witness statements from the  appellant  and  his  sponsor  and  his
         spouse. The bundle also included several WhatsApp messages  between
         the appellant and his sponsor, a short letter from York Castle High
         School confirming that the appellant was a Grade 11 student, and  a
         letter from Dr  Minott,  dated  6  June  2018,  who  had  been  the
         appellant's doctor  "for  several  years".  The  judge  heard  oral
         evidence from the sponsor. The judge summarised the evidence  given
         to him, as disclosed in the statements and the oral  evidence,  and
         indicated that he had taken account of the submissions made by  the
         appellant's barrister and the Presenting Officer.

      6. In the section of  his  decision  headed  'Conclusions'  the  judge
         considered, at  [49]  to  [58],  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the
         appellant  to  support  his  claim  that  his  sponsor   had   sole
         responsibility for him. The judge noted that, although claiming  in
         his witness statement that he was not in a stable  environment  and
         that his biological mother hardly provided for him,  the  appellant
         had nevertheless spent every weekend with his mother prior to  2017
         when she relocated to the USA, and that in his statement he  stated
         that his biological mother loved him a lot. The judge  additionally
         noted the sponsor's oral evidence that the  appellant's  biological
         mother would travel back and forth between Jamaica and the USA  and
         that the appellant would visit her when she  came  to  Jamaica.  At
         [53] the judge noted that, although the appellant had  been  living
         with his paternal grandmother, he had had  regular  and  consistent
         contact with his biological mother and continued  to  have  contact
         with her even after she relocated to the USA.

      7. At [54] the judge  referred  to  inconsistencies  in  the  WhatsApp
         evidence  concerning  references  to  'Marcia'   (the   appellant's
         biological mother), 'mummy' and 'mommy'. The judge stated:

             "Although Mr Higgins attempted to explain  the  references  to
             Marcia and also mummy and mommy there  were  clear  references
             which did not seem to apply to the person Mr Higgins said that
             they were in fact applying  to  and  some  of  the  references
             appeared to apply to the biological mother."

      8. The judge then noted (at [55]) the absence of any evidence  in  the
         appellant's bundle confirming that his sponsor was the only  person
         who had contact with the school, and, at [57], the judge stated:

             "After considering all of the evidence  available  although  I
             accept that Mr Higgins and his wife  financially  support  the
             appellant and have done so for a considerable period of  time,
             I am not satisfied that the appellant's biological mother  has
             abandoned  or  abdicated  her   responsibility   towards   the
             appellant. His biological mother clearly had  regular  contact
             with him and maintains contact when she  returns  to  Jamaica.
             Although he was looked after by his paternal  grandmother  his
             biological mother has always maintained a role in his life."

      9. The judge concluded that there was insufficient evidence  that  the
         sponsor had been solely responsible for the major decisions in  the
         appellant's life, even after the appellant's mother  moved  to  the
         USA in 2017.

     10. With respect to paragraph 297(i)(f), the judge took the findings of
         Judge Bartlett as his starting point.  The  judge  noted  that  the
         evidence  before  him  confirmed  that  the  appellant's   paternal
         grandmother had looked after him for most of his life and the judge
         made specific reference to the letter from Dr Minott (at [61]).  At
         [62] the judge considered it relevant that the appellant's paternal
         grandmother had continued to care for him and, although  there  was
         an indication that she was unable to do so, the  WhatsApp  messages
         referred to his paternal grandmother looking for a job. At [63] the
         judge was not satisfied that the medical  evidence  indicated  that
         the appellant's paternal grandmother was unable to continue to look
         after him and noted, given the appellant's age, that  he  would  in
         fact be able to provide some assistance to her in relation  to  his
         great-grandmother. The judge found that  the  appellant's  paternal
         grandmother was able to continue to care for him with the financial
         assistance of his  father  and  that  there  were  no  serious  and
         compelling family or  other  considerations  making  his  exclusion
         undesirable.

     11. The judge finally  considered  whether  the  respondent's  decision
         breached Article 8 applying the five questions set  out  in  Razgar
         [2004] UKHL 27 and  the  public  interest  considerations  set  out
         section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.
         The judge noted that the appellant did not meet the requirements of
         the immigration rules, that he had lived all his  life  in  Jamaica
         and had undoubtedly formed a family life with his  grandmother  and
         presumably great-grandmother. Given that  the  appellant's  sponsor
         left Jamaica in 2002, and that the appellant and his sponsor  could
         continue to enjoy their family  life  in  the  same  way  they  had
         throughout the appellant's life, the judge was not  satisfied  that
         there would be a material interference with the  family  life.  Nor
         was the judge satisfied that the respondent's decision would  cause
         very substantial difficulties or exceptional circumstances such  as
         to warrant a grant of leave outside the immigration  rules.  Having
         found that the decision was  proportionate  under  Article  8,  the
         judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The grounds of appeal contend, on the basis of the judge's  factual
         findings (including financial support to the appellant,  visits  to
         Jamaica,  regular  contact,  the  appellant's  residence  with  his
         paternal grandmother and the evidence that the sponsor spoke to his
         school and teachers),  that  he  should  have  concluded  that  the
         sponsor  did  have  sole   responsibility   for   the   appellant's
         upbringing. The judge's finding that the appellant had contact with
         his biological mother was said to be  insufficient  to  demonstrate
         shared responsibility or that  she  was  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing. The grounds rely  on  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  'sole
         responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 to support the contention
         that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  lived  with   his   paternal
         grandmother was insufficient to demonstrate shared  responsibility.
         The grounds further contend that the judge failed to provide any or
         adequate reasons for his finding at [54].

     13. The grounds further contend that, in reaching his conclusions under
         paragraph 297(i)(f), the judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the
         letter from Dr Minott. Nor did  the  judge  make  any  or  adequate
         findings in respect of the maintenance issue. The  grounds  finally
         contend that the judge made a mistake in law in his  evaluation  of
         Article 8 outside the immigration rules by  failing  to  take  into
         account the positive obligation to facilitate family reunion  (with
         reference to Mostafa (Art 8 in entry clearance) [2015]  UKUT  00112
         (IAC) and ECO v Box [2002] UKIAT 02212, and that the  judge  failed
         to consider the Article 8 rights of the sponsor and  his  wife  and
         their children. The judge's conclusion  that  any  existing  family
         life relationships could continue in the manner in which  they  had
         previously been  maintained  was  said  to  be  contrary  with  the
         approach taken in LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe
         [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC). The judge failed  to  take  account  of  the
         statement of the sponsor's wife when assessing the  proportionality
         of the respondent's decision or the factors listed in section  117B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Permission was
         granted on all grounds.

     14. Although he made his submissions from  a  solicitor's  office,  the
         sponsor was not legally represented at the 'error of law'  hearing.
         He explained that he was a self-employed market trader and that  he
         was unable to pay a barrister to represent him. He was unsure  when
         he would be able to restart trading and hoped that  it  may  be  in
         time for  Christmas.  Given  the  considerable  uncertainty  as  to
         whether the sponsor would be able to  afford  legal  representation
         even if the  hearing  was  adjourned,  and  having  regard  to  the
         detailed grounds of appeal and overriding objective in  rule  2  of
         the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008,  we  considered
         it to be in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

     15. We explained to the sponsor  at  some  length  the  basis  for  the
         judge's conclusions and, with reference to the grounds  of  appeal,
         the reasons why it was said that the judge made a mistake on points
         of law. The sponsor claimed that there had been a  misunderstanding
         in respect of the WhatsApp evidence and that it was  the  appellant
         who  was  looking  for  work,  not  his  grandmother.  The  sponsor
         explained  that  the  appellant  referred  to  his  grandmother  as
         'mommy', and that he referred to his biological mother  as  'mummy'
         or 'Marcia'. The sponsor stated that his grandmother  had  dementia
         and not Alzheimer's. The sponsor confirmed again that he  spoke  to
         the appellant a lot on the telephone, that he paid the school  fees
         and for the bus to take him to school, and that  he  had  a  strong
         emotional attachment with the appellant. The appellant listened  to
         the sponsor and, although he talked with his mother, he depended on
         the sponsor for guidance. The sponsor explained how he worked  hard
         to ensure that the appellant had a good education.



Discussion

     16. In determining whether the judge's decision involved the making  of
         an error on a point of law we have been assisted by the decision in
         TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): 'sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT
         00049, a case relied on by the judge at [19] of his decision and by
         the appellant  in  his  grounds  of  appeal.  In  TD  the  Tribunal
         indicated  that  questions  of  "sole  responsibility"  under   the
         immigration rules should be approached as follows:

             "i.  Who has "responsibility" for  a  child's  upbringing  and
                  whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual  matter
                  to be decided upon all the evidence.

              ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules  should
                  not to be understood as a theoretical or legal  obligation
                  but rather as a practical one which, in each  case,  looks
                  to who in fact is exercising responsibility for the child.
                  That responsibility may have been for a short duration  in
                  that  the  present  arrangements  may  have  begun   quite
                  recently.

             iii.  "Responsibility"  for  a  child's   upbringing   may   be
                  undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and
                  may be shared between  different  individuals:  which  may
                  particularly arise where the  child  remains  in  its  own
                  country whilst  the  only  parent  involved  in  its  life
                  travels to and lives in the UK.

              iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved  in
                  the upbringing of the child, it will be  exceptional  that
                  one of them will have sole responsibility.

               v. If it is said that both are not involved  in  the  child's
                  upbringing, one of the indicators for that  will  be  that
                  the other has abandoned or abdicated  his  responsibility.
                  In such cases, it may well be justified to find that  that
                  parent no longer has responsibility for the child.

              vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is  not  just  a
                  matter between the parents. So even if there is  only  one
                  parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may
                  not have sole responsibility.

             vii.  In  the  circumstances  likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
                  responsibility  (or  decision-making)  for   the   child's
                  welfare may necessarily be shared  with  others  (such  as
                  relatives  or  friends)  because   of   the   geographical
                  separation between the parent and child.

            viii. That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
                  responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

              ix. The test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
                  responsibility, but  whether  the  parent  has  continuing
                  control and direction of the child's upbringing  including
                  making all the important decisions in the child's life. If
                  not, responsibility is shared and so not "sole"."

     17. (iv) and (v) are of  particular  relevance  in  this  case  as  the
         appellant argued that his mother had abdicated  responsibility  for
         him (see the skeleton argument prepared by Mr R  Solomon,  counsel,
         who represented the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing).
         When assessing the evidence relating  to  the  involvement  of  the
         appellant's mother in his life the judge took into account a number
         of relevant factors including  the  appellant's  assertion  in  his
         statement that his biological  mother  loved  him  a  lot  and  the
         WhatsApp messages referring to the appellant's  biological  mother.
         These messages, such as those on  pages  200,  204,  209  and  212,
         suggested  that  the  appellant's  mother  was  involved   in   the
         appellant's life. The judge also took into  account  the  sponsor's
         oral evidence that the appellant would see his mother whenever  she
         visited Jamaica, and  considered  the  evidence  in  light  of  the
         previous findings of Judge Bartlett that the  appellant  lived  (at
         least until 2017) with his biological mother 2 out of every 7  days
         and that his relationship with her was not "as bad as claimed by Mr
         Higgins."

     18. There was, moreover, limited independent evidence before the  judge
         that the sponsor was the only one exercising control and  direction
         of the appellant's upbringing and that it was he who made  all  the
         important decisions in the appellant's life. As noted by the  judge
         at [55] the letter from the  appellant's  school  merely  indicated
         that he was in Grade 11; it made no reference to the sponsor or any
         decisions that  the  sponsor  may  have  made  in  respect  of  the
         appellant's education, or in respect of any  involvement  (or  lack
         of) by the appellant's mother.

     19. The grounds contend that the judge failed to give any  or  adequate
         reasons for his finding,  at  [54],  that  there  was  inconsistent
         evidence in the WhatsApp evidence relating  to  contact,  but  [54]
         must be read holistically, and, in particular,  with  reference  to
         the judge's summary of the evidence  at  [38]  to  [40].  In  these
         paragraphs, which consider references to 'mummy' and 'mommy' in the
         WhatsApp messages, the sponsor first stated that  'mummy'  referred
         to  the  appellant's  paternal  grandmother,  and  'mommy'  to  his
         biological mother [38]. the sponsor then however stated  (at  [39])
         that a reference to 'mummy' at page 200 of the  appellant's  bundle
         was actually a reference to the biological mother. In our judgement
         it is clear, having read the judge's decision 'in the round',  that
         the reasons for the  judge's  conclusion  at  [54]  was  adequately
         discernible from the decision. We observe in passing  that,  during
         the 'error of law' hearing, the sponsor transposed  the  references
         to 'mummy' and 'mommy' in comparison to the explanation he gave  to
         the judge at [38].

     20. In a human rights appeal, including one concerning the requirements
         of paragraph 297 of the immigration  rules,  the  burden  of  proof
         remains on the appellant to demonstrate that the  rules  have  been
         met. This includes the requirement to demonstrate that  one  parent
         has sole responsibility. In light of the guidance offered in TD and
         the judge's assessment of the evidence made available to  him,  and
         in the absence of any  evidence  from  the  appellant's  biological
         mother (noted by the judge at [36]),  the  judge  was  entitled  to
         conclude that there was  insufficient  evidence,  contrary  to  the
         assertions in the appellant's skeleton argument  prepared  for  the
         First-tier Tribunal hearing, that the appellant's biological mother
         had 'abdicated'  her  responsibility  for  the  appellant.  It  was
         consequently open to the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  appellant
         failed to demonstrate that his sponsor was solely  responsible  for
         his upbringing.

     21. In relation to the  grounds  relating  to  serious  and  compelling
         circumstances, the judge demonstrably considered the letter from Dr
         Minott (at [61]) and considered this evidence  in  the  context  of
         Judge  Bartlett's   findings   and   the   appellant's   particular
         circumstances.  Dr  Minott's  letter  refers  to  the   appellant's
         paternal grandmother as being diabetic and having hypertension, for
         which she receives medication, and that she cares for her  87-year-
         old mother who has Alzheimer's (at the 'error of law'  hearing  the
         sponsor said that his grandmother had dementia and not Alzheimer's,
         but we take no issue with this inconsistency), but it is unclear on
         what basis the doctor was able to conclude that the grandmother "is
         no longer able to provide the time, effort and  discipline"  needed
         to keep the applicant "in check." The letter from Dr Minott was  of
         limited probative value and the judge did not err  in  law  in  his
         consideration  of  that  letter.  Although  the  judge   may   have
         mistakenly thought the paternal grandmother was looking for  a  job
         rather than one for the appellant, he noted, in any event, that the
         appellant was of an age where he would  be  able  to  provide  some
         assistance in relation to his great grandmother. Any mistake  could
         not, on any reasonable view, undermine the  judge's  assessment  of
         paragraph 297(i)(f).

     22. Although the judge did not make any  findings  in  respect  of  the
         maintenance issue, this could not have made any material difference
         given his lawful assessment of paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f).

     23. Nor are we persuaded that the judge  erred  in  his  assessment  of
         Article  8  outside  the  immigration  rules.  The  judge  properly
         directed himself  in  respect  of  the  Razgar  questions  and  the
         considerations in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002, and he was entitled to take into account, when  assessing
         whether there had been an interference with Article 8, and  whether
         the respondent's decision was proportional  under  Article  8,  the
         manner in which the appellant's relationship with  his  father  had
         been maintained. This was relevant both in respect of the Article 8
         rights of the appellant and that of his sponsor and  his  sponsor's
         family in the UK.  In  Mostafa  the  Upper  Tribunal  held  that  a
         person's ability to satisfy the immigration rules  was  capable  of
         being a weighty, though not  determinative,  factor  when  deciding
         whether  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was  proportionate  to  the
         legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control. The  appellant  in
         the instant case did not  however  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         immigration rules and this was relevant to the weight to  be  given
         to the maintenance of effective immigration controls in the  public
         interest. There was nothing in the evidence before the judge or the
         factual matrix as found by him that  could  have  entitled  him  to
         conclude that the positive obligation to facilitate family  reunion
         rendered the respondent's decision disproportionate  under  Article
         8. LD cannot assist the appellant as this was not a case concerning
         entry clearance but the deportation of someone who lived in the  UK
         with his children, and therefore related to an  entirely  different
         scenario.

     24. For the reasons set out above we find that the judge did not make a
         mistake on a point of law that requires  his  decision  to  be  set
         aside.



The making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the  making
of an error on a point of law

The appeal is dismissed


D.Blum   27 November 2020

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

