
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00249/2020 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15 December 2020                 |On: 31 December 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                         charles stanford albritton
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the USA, born on 18 May 1943. He appeals,
    with permission,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing his human rights appeal.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 29 March 2019 on  a  six-month  visitor
    visa valid until 29 September 2019, having previously travelled to  the
    UK on a regular basis as a visitor. On 13  September  2019  he  made  a
    human rights application for leave on family life grounds, to remain in
    the UK with his wife whom he had married  on  26  February  2008  in  a
    religious, Islamic marriage and on 6 August 2012 in a  civil  marriage.
    The marriage took place in the UK and followed two  previous  marriages
    and divorces, the first from 1972 to 2002 and the second from  2003  to
    2007.

 3. The information provided by the appellant in his application  was  that
    he was born in the USA and lived there until June  1971,  when  he  was
    deployed by the navy to Italy, as a Navy  Lieutenant.  He  remained  in
    Italy until 1976 and then returned to the USA for about a  year  before
    going to Saudi Arabia in 1978. He lived in  Saudi  Arabia  until  March
    2019. He worked as a manager for Saudi Arabian airlines  for  22  years
    and then as a consultant and trainer. During that time, he visited  the
    UK on occasions. He met and commenced a relationship with  his  current
    wife in Birmingham in February 2008, and from that time he would  visit
    the UK regularly for up to three months a year as well  as  meeting  up
    with his wife for holidays  in  other  countries.  Due  to  his  wife's
    deteriorating health condition he left Saudi Arabia four months  before
    his residence work visa expired, on 29 March 2019, to be with his wife,
    and realised that it was time  for  them  to  remain  together  in  one
    country, as his wife was not well enough to travel abroad  as  she  had
    done previously. He returned to Saudi Arabia for a short  period,  from
    18 to 28 June 2019 to cash a bank draft but otherwise had not left  the
    UK since then. He had not returned to the USA for 41 years, aside  from
    travelling there in 2002 to finalise his divorce, and he had  lost  all
    ties there. His family had all  passed  away  and  he  had  only  three
    cousins remaining, whom he had not seen for 35 years. His wife did  not
    want, and was not able to move to USA, because of her ill-health.  They
    could not afford to pay for the medical care she required in  the  USA.
    He would not be able to return to live in Saudi Arabia as he  would  be
    unlikely to obtain a permanent residence permit at his  age.  His  wife
    was a South African national  who  had  become  a  British  citizen  in
    February 2011. They rented a Housing  Association  property  and  their
    rent was paid by housing benefit. They had no source  of  income  other
    than public benefits.

 4. The appellant's application  was  refused  on  16  December  2019.  The
    respondent considered  that  the  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
    eligibility immigration  status  requirement  in  Appendix  FM  of  the
    immigration rules as he was in the UK as a  visitor.  It  was  accepted
    that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    British wife, but the respondent considered that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph EX.1 were  not  met  because  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family  life  continuing  in  the  USA  or  Saudi  Arabia.
    Alternatively, the appellant could return to  the  USA  and  apply  for
    entry clearance to join his wife in the UK. Furthermore, the respondent
    considered that  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant integrating in USA  or  Saudi  Arabia  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules and that his circumstances
    and those of his wife were not sufficiently  compelling  to  justify  a
    grant of leave outside the rules. The respondent  considered  that  the
    appellant's wife, as a British citizen, did not have to  leave  the  UK
    and that her medical treatment was not  reliant  upon  the  appellant's
    presence, so that she could remain in the  UK  whilst  he  applied  for
    entry clearance. The respondent did not consider that there were  legal
    impediments  or  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  to  the  appellant
    continuing his family and private life in Saudi Arabia or USA.

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hobson on 26 February 2020. The  appellant
    and his wife  gave  oral  evidence  before  the  judge.  The  appellant
    explained that he had no income since  leaving  Saudi  Arabia.  He  had
    tried to find out from the USA Federal Benefits Unit  in  London  about
    his entitlement to social security payments in USA but had received  no
    response to his many emails. He was concerned about his wife having  to
    live in USA as she  had  never  visited  there  and  the  stress  would
    exacerbate her heart condition. He had skin cancer  himself  and  would
    have no access to medical services in USA because he had lived  outside
    the country for so many years. He could  not  return  to  Saudi  Arabia
    because the cost of a residence visa was prohibitive and he  would  not
    be able to find employment there because of his age.  He  had  made  no
    financial provision for retirement because he had spent his earnings on
    living expenses and travelling to see his wife. His wife was unable  to
    travel and  they  could  not  therefore  maintain  their  long-distance
    relationship as previously.  His  wife  explained  that  she  lived  in
    sheltered accommodation in the UK. She had had three heart attacks over
    the past seven years and had been taken to hospital by  ambulance.  She
    was on medication for her heart condition. She also had  osteoarthritis
    and sometimes used a wheelchair and she  also  needed  surgery  on  her
    knees.

 6. The judge considered there to be no evidence to support a finding  that
    the appellant would not be entitled to some state support in USA  as  a
    US citizen and did not accept that he was likely to  face  destitution.
    She did not accept that the appellant's wife could not  travel  to  the
    USA and live with him there. The judge did not accept that  there  were
    very significant obstacles to  integration  in  the  USA  and  was  not
    satisfied that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  were  met.  She
    considered that neither the appellant's wife having to move to the  USA
    or remain in the UK without the appellant would be unjustifiably  harsh
    and that the respondent's decision  was  therefore  proportionate.  She
    accordingly dismissed the appeal.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Hobson's  decision  and
    permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 24 July  2020,  on
    the following basis:

    "For the reasons set out in the application, it is  arguable  that  (a)
    there was no evidential basis  for  the  Tribunal's  finding  that  the
    appellant is "likely to have  some  financial  support  and  access  to
    healthcare" on return to the USA [27],  (b)  whilst  acknowledging  the
    medical problems of the appellant's British wife and the fact that  she
    would not have access to healthcare  in  the  USA  [26],  the  Tribunal
    failed to attach any weight  to  this  factor  in  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, and (c),  it
    was perverse in all the circumstances to conclude that it would not  be
    "unjustifiably  harsh"  to  expect  family  life  to  continue  by  the
    appellant "making regular visits to see his wife in the United  Kingdom
    in the future" [33]."

 8. The matter then came before me for a remote hearing  conducted  through
    Skype for  Business.  The  appellant  appeared  in  person,  without  a
    representative. Mrs Aboni submitted that the judge had  considered  all
    the evidence and had given  adequate  reasons  for  her  findings.  The
    decision should be upheld. Mr Albritton,  in  his  response,  submitted
    that the decision was disproportionate. He was not eligible for  social
    security in USA and would return there with just  the  clothes  on  his
    back. If he returned to USA he would never be able to  get  a  visa  to
    return, in light of the current refusal, and in  any  event  could  not
    afford to do that. If he and his wife were separated,  they  would  die
    alone.

Discussion

 9. I am unable to agree with Mrs Aboni in her submission  that  the  judge
    considered all the evidence and gave adequate reasons for her findings.
    It seems to me that the judge's assessment of the evidence was  cursory
    and her findings were speculative.

10. Although the evidence submitted by the appellant was limited, the judge
    failed to give full and proper  consideration  to  the  extent  of  the
    difficulties he may face in being required to return  to  the  USA  and
    failed to accord appropriate weight to relevant  factors  such  as  the
    impact of his lengthy absence and to his wife's lack of entitlement  to
    medical care in USA. Whilst apparently accepting, at [26],  that  there
    was such a lack of entitlement, the judge simply dismissed that on  the
    basis  that  the  appellant's  wife's  condition  was  currently  under
    control, and, aside from the brief summary at [25],  the  judge  simply
    failed to engage with the evidence as  to  the  extent  of  her  health
    concerns and the necessity of ongoing care.  Likewise,  although  there
    was a brief reference to the evidence at  [27],  there  was  no  proper
    assessment by the judge of the information provided in the  two  emails
    about the level of income the appellant may be able to  access  in  the
    USA as set against the cost of living,  and  no  proper  assessment  of
    where the appellant and his wife would  live  and  how  they  would  in
    reality be able to support themselves.

11. As to the judge's consideration, at [33], of  the  alternative  to  the
    appellant's wife relocating to the USA, her  conclusions  were  equally
    dismissive. The judge concluded that the appellant and his  wife  could
    simply continue to conduct their family life through  visits,  as  they
    had previously. However, in so doing, she failed to give any weight  to
    the appellant's reasons  for  wanting  to  change  those  arrangements,
    namely the fact that he and his wife  were  older,  that  he  could  no
    longer continue to be employed owing to his age  and  that  his  wife's
    health condition had significantly deteriorated such that  she  was  no
    longer able to travel and he was worried about leaving her.  To  simply
    dismiss the  matter  as  being  'distressful'  was,  it  seems  to  me,
    bordering on perverse.

12. Accordingly, I find that the judge's decision is materially lacking  in
    its assessment of the evidence, its findings of fact and its  reasoning
    and that it cannot be upheld. It  seems  to  me  that  the  appropriate
    course would be for the matter to be heard afresh before another judge,
    in order for proper findings of fact to be made on  the  evidence.  The
    appellant, for his part, needs to provide more  comprehensive  evidence
    as to his likely circumstances if he were to  return  to  the  USA,  in
    terms of his entitlement to state support and medical care for his wife
    in that country, and as to his current financial circumstances and  his
    wife's (and his own) current state of health.



DECISION

13. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with  afresh,
    pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a),  before  any  judge
    aside from Judge Hobson.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  16 December 2020
