
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU004162015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 May 2016                           |On 15 June 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                Mutsa Cornish
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Slatter, Counsel, instructed by Richmond
Chambers LLP
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make,  any  order  restricting  publicity
    about this appeal.

 2. Here the Secretary of  State  appeals  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,  hereinafter  "the
    claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of State on 20 May  2015
    to refuse her leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 3. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom with permission as a visitor
    in May 2002.  Her leave was extended until 13 November 2002 and  on  19
    November 2002 she claimed asylum.  The application was unsuccessful,  a
    subsequent appeal was dismissed  and  she  was  refused  permission  to
    appeal further.  She became appeal rights exhausted in November 2004.

 4. In June 2005 she was served with a notice to a person liable to removal
    because she had been arrested for assisting the illegal  entry  of  her
    daughter into the United Kingdom.  That arrest led  to  her  subsequent
    conviction and sentence of fourteen months' imprisonment on 8  February
    2006.

 5. In February 2006 she made further representations for a fresh claim for
    asylum.

 6. On 6 February  2010  she  was  given  a  certificate  of  approval  for
    marriage.  On 22 June 2011 she was given  a  notice  of  liability  for
    deportation and on 8 July 2011 she made  further  submissions  both  in
    support of a claim for asylum and a contention that removing her  would
    interfere disproportionately in her private and family life.

 7. On 28 September 2011 she was issued with an asylum "Reasons For Refusal
    And Reasons For Deportation Decision" letter.  She appealed and  on  15
    November 2011 the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.  She  was
    given six months' discretionary leave to remain  until  22  July  2012.
    While that leave was extant she made a further application for leave to
    remain and her leave was extended until 17 April 2014.  On 4 April 2014
    she  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain.    On   8   March   2015
    (approximately eleven months after the application was  made)  she  was
    informed that the Secretary of State intended to deport her.  This  was
    explained by reference to Chapter 13  of  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions under the heading "Article 8 guidance", Section 7.4, which
    states:

         "Where a foreign criminal has previously been granted limited leave
         on the basis of Article 8, he will only be granted further leave if
         he qualifies under the Article 8 provisions set out  in  paragraphs
         398 to 399A, even if his first period of leave was  granted  before
         those provisions came into force, or before  the  previous  private
         and family life Rules were introduced on 9 July 2012."

 8. The letter acknowledges that the claimant was  not  given  leave  under
    Part  13  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  said  that  the  claimant's
    deportation remained conducive  to  the  public  good  under  paragraph
    398(b) of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The claimant married on 12 February 2011.

10. At paragraph 24 of the refusal letter the Secretary of State says:

         "You claim to have a family life  in  the  UK  with  your  partner,
         Richard Cornish.  The requirements of the exception to  deportation
         on the basis of family life with a partner are set out at paragraph
         399(b) of the Immigration Rules.  This exception applies where:

         (b) the foreign criminal has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
         with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
         in the UK, and

             (i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
             (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status
             was not precarious; and

             (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in  the
             country to which the person is  to  be  deported,  because  of
             compelling circumstances over and  above  those  described  in
             paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

             (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain  in
             the UK without the person who is to be deported."

11. The letter then makes it plain that it is accepted that  the  appellant
    is married to a British citizen, one Richard Cornish.  The Secretary of
    State found that their relationship was formed when the claimant was in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully and, in any event, at all material  times
    her status was precarious.

12. Further, the Secretary of State did not think it unduly  harsh  for  Mr
    Cornish to live in Zimbabwe.  English is one of the official  languages
    of Zimbabwe.  He has transferable skills as a funeral director and  the
    claimant's experience of life in  Zimbabwe  could  help  him  establish
    himself there.

13. Although Mr Cornish claimed to have family responsibilities towards his
    mother the Secretary of State decided that was a responsibility  shared
    with his brother and if he relocated to Zimbabwe his brother or  others
    including the local authority could provide the care that is necessary.

14. At paragraph 30 the Secretary of State explained that it would  not  be
    unduly harsh for Mr Cornish to remain in the United Kingdom without the
    claimant.  They could  maintain  contact  "through  modern  methods  of
    communication, such as email, telephone,  webcam  etc."  and  he  could
    visit if that is what he wanted to do.

15. The Secretary of State then explained that the  application  could  not
    succeed on private life grounds because  the  applicant  had  not  been
    lawfully resident in the United Kingdom of most of her life.

16. I do not think anything turns on this but I find it a troubling feature
    of the refusal letter that although the Secretary of State,  correctly,
    when considering "private life" recognises that the  Rules  provide  an
    exception at 399A(b)  where  "the  foreign  criminal  is  socially  and
    culturally integrated in  the  UK"  but  when  applying  that  Rule  at
    paragraph 35 the Secretary of State says: "This evidence alone  is  not
    sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  you  are  socially  and   culturally
    integrated into society to a level that your deportation would  have  a
    profound negative effect upon your local community".  There may be good
    reasons for finding that  the  case  does  not  come  within  paragraph
    399A(b).  I do wonder why the Secretary of State puts this  still  more
    demanding gloss on Rules that are already hard to satisfy.

17. The letter shows that the Secretary of  State  then  looked  for  "very
    compelling circumstances" that should lead to a decision to  allow  the
    applicant to remain.  The best point that can be taken  here  was  that
    the claimant helped look after her mother-in-law.  This was not thought
    to amount to a "very compelling  circumstance  to  add  weight  to  the
    public interest in seeing you deported".

18. The letter then told the claimant, correctly,  that  she  could  appeal
    under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    from within the United Kingdom.  It reminded her that the grounds  were
    limited by statute.  The only conceivably relevant ground would be that
    removal would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

19.  The  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  clearly   and
    appropriately show that it is the claimant's case that the decision  is
    unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998  with  specific
    reference to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

20. The first  point  of  substance  taken  in  the  grounds  is  that  the
    interference with the claimant's and her husband's private  and  family
    life is "not in accordance with the law" for the purpose of question  3
    posed by Lord Bingham in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at 17.

21. Paragraph 1 of the Notice of Decision relies unequivocally on paragraph
    399C of the Immigration Rules.  It correctly sets out the term  of  the
    Rule beginning:

    "Where a foreign criminal who has previously been granted a  period  of
    limited leave under this Part applies  for  further  limited  leave  or
    indefinite leave to remain his deportation  remains  conducive  to  the
    public good and in the public  interest  notwithstanding  the  previous
    grant of leave."

22. The grounds assert that this patently does not  apply.   This  claimant
    has never been  given  a  period  of  leave  under  that  part  of  the
    Immigration Rules and so clearly cannot be a foreign  criminal  because
    of that Rule.  The Secretary of State recognises that the leave was not
    granted under Part  13  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  maintains  at
    paragraph 16 of the Notice of Decision that the claimant's  deportation
    remains conducive to the public good  under  paragraph  398(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

23. The grounds further  contend  that  the  claimant  is  not  a  "foreign
    criminal" because that is a status derived from the UK Borders Act 2007
    and the claimant is not subject to deportation under that Act.

24. Paragraph 4.2 of the  grounds  asserts  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    applied the wrong law when considering the human rights claim.   It  is
    the claimant's contention that the  application  for  an  extension  of
    leave should have  been  considered  under  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretionary  leave  policy.   The  ground   says   that   there   are
    transitional agreements so that a person such as the claimant  who  had
    been given discretionary leave  before  9  July  2012  would  have  any
    further application determined under the  discretionary  leave  policy.
    The claimant's conviction did not and does not  exclude  her  from  the
    grant of discretionary leave for the standard period  of  three  years.
    The grounds say this was explained particularly in  the  letter  of  23
    March 2015.

25. Point 5 of the grounds maintains that in any event  deportation  cannot
    be "necessary in a democratic society for the prevention of disorder or
    crime" in the present circumstances.  This is particularly because  the
    claimant has been given two periods of leave and her circumstances have
    not changed adversely.

26. Similarly any interference was  not  proportionate  to  any  legitimate
    public end.

27. The grounds recognise that the Tribunal would have to consider  Section
    117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  but
    insisted the claimant is not a foreign criminal.

28. However, even if Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  applies  then  it  is  the
    claimant's case that the effect of deportation on her husband would  be
    unduly harsh.

29. Finally the grounds maintain that the lapse of time and grant of  leave
    on  two  occasions  created  sufficiently  compelling   and   therefore
    exceptional  circumstances  to  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.

30. The First-tier Tribunal made several favourable findings including that
    the claimant and her husband  were  honest  witnesses  and  that  their
    marriage was genuine and longstanding.

31. The First-tier Tribunal found that it would be contrary to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights  to
    deport the claimant to Zimbabwe.

32. Additionally the First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant is  not  a
    foreign criminal and therefore the case does not have to be  considered
    under Section 117 as amended of the 2002 Act.

33. The Secretary of State was given permission to appeal.

34. Paragraph 1 of the Secretary of State's grounds contends that the  case
    does not depend on the claimant being a  foreign  criminal  within  the
    2007 Act.  The Secretary of State's decision is based on the claimant's
    deportation being conducive to the public good and, in any  event,  the
    claimant is a foreign criminal within Section 117D of the 2002 Act.

35. The ground further asserts that the claimant is a foreign criminal  and
    that Part 13 of the Immigration Rules applies to her case.

36. The remaining grounds contend that Part 13  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    does  apply  and  that  there  is  still  public  interest  in  removal
    notwithstanding the finding that the conviction is "extremely stale".

37. Mr Slatter has prepared a very detailed Rule 24 response.  It sets  out
    a very helpful chronology of the case.  The arguments raised  in  reply
    are not very different from those relied upon in the grounds.

38. I heard submissions from both parties.

39. I have no hesitation in concluding that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law.  There is an unequivocal statutory obligation on  the  Tribunal
    to follow Section 117 of the 2002 Act.  The phrase  "foreign  criminal"
    is defined in Section 117D(2) and this claimant  plainly  falls  within
    that definition.  It is immaterial that  the  claimant  may  not  be  a
    foreign criminal for the purposes of  the  2007  Act.   That  does  not
    impact on the Tribunal's duty to apply the  2002  Act.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal has not directed itself properly.

40. It follows therefore that I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

41. If I can remake the decision without a further hearing then that is how
    I should dispose of this appeal.

42. There are several findings of fact by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    have not been criticised directly or at all.

43. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered  carefully  Section  117B  and
    made findings in the claimant's favour.  These include her  ability  to
    speak English, her being integrated into society and not being a burden
    on public funds.

44. The First-tier Tribunal Judge further made clear  and  strong  findings
    that the claimant is in a genuine and subsisting marriage.

45. Section 117B(4) requires that little weight be given to a  relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner that is established by a person  at  a
    time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  I note  that
    unlike the Immigration Rules there is no  requirement  to  give  little
    weight to a "family life" relationship that is acquired when the status
    of the person is precarious.

46. It is also plain that the  claimant's  deportation  is  in  the  public
    interest because Section 117C(1) says in  terms:  "The  deportation  of
    foreign criminals is in the public interest."

47. My task is to balance the clear public interest in the  deportation  of
    the claimant as a foreign criminal with the  private  and  family  life
    rights recognised in the Act of other people.

48. Clearly there is some significant private life established by her  role
    in the community where she is a regular and active member  of  a  local
    Catholic church.  This must be given some weight but  it  must  not  be
    given very much weight.  Section 117B(5) requires that  "little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person's immigration status is precarious."

49. The claimant's  immigration  status  has  always  been  precarious  and
    although I have noted the evidence, being mainly  a  supporting  letter
    and  statements  from  friends,  I  can  give  little  weight  to   it.
    Nevertheless little weight does not mean no weight and it  is  a  small
    nudge in favour of allowing the claimant's appeal.

50. There are no children to consider.

51. However, the claimant's husband clearly has rights under the  Act  that
    stem from or reflect the requirements of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

52. His relationship with the claimant started in 2008.  They married, with
    the Secretary of State's permission, in February 2011 and the  claimant
    has had leave since 25 January 2012.  There is no statutory  obligation
    to give the  relationship  "little  weight",  at  least  not  when  the
    relationship became part of the claimant's family life, which,  at  the
    very latest, was when they married in February 2011.

53. His rights must be balanced against the public  interest  in  deporting
    the claimant.  I  remind  myself  that  there  is  public  interest  in
    deporting the claimant because that is  what  Section  117C(1)  states.
    However, the interest is variable.  Section 117C(2) provides  that  the
    more serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal the  greater
    is the public interest in deporting the criminal.   Here  the  sentence
    was fourteen months imprisonment.  I do not know very  much  about  the
    circumstances leading to the conviction.  The Secretary  of  State  did
    not obtain a copy of the  sentencing  remarks.   Mr  Avery  speculated,
    based on his considerable experience, that they would not be  available
    now because the courts do not keep records beyond about four years.   I
    have to make the obvious  repost  that  the  records  would  have  been
    available if  the  Secretary  of  State  had  shown  more  interest  in
    deporting the claimant soon after she had offended.  All  I  know  with
    confidence is that it is  criminal  misconduct  that  had  attracted  a
    sentence of fourteen months' imprisonment and it involved some kind  of
    dishonesty to facilitate a relatives' entry to the United  Kingdom.  It
    clearly was not a trivial matter but it is some way off the  "at  least
    four years"  sentence  that  requires  there  to  be  "very  compelling
    circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and  2"
    before an application can succeed on human rights grounds.

54. I also direct myself that Exception 2  under  section  117C(6)  applies
    where the effect of deportation on  the  claimant's  husband  would  be
    "unduly harsh".  This necessarily implies that  the  law  assumes  that
    some degree of harshness is due.  Deportation  appeals  should  not  be
    allowed on human rights grounds just because there would  be  difficult
    consequences for the partner.  The consequences leading  to  an  appeal
    being allowed must be both harsh and unduly harsh.

55. Clearly the claimant's husband would have to choose between  continuing
    his married life with a claimant in Zimbabwe or remaining in the United
    Kingdom.

56. Although the claimant's husband has strong links in the United  Kingdom
    including his job and family commitments to his  mother  his  evidence,
    supported by a Roman Catholic priest, Father John Byrne, suggests to me
    that the claimant and her husband value their marriage  highly  and  if
    there was no alternative the  claimant's  husband  would  join  her  in
    Zimbabwe.

57. I asked Mr Avery to explain why it would not be unduly harsh for him to
    live there.  Mr Avery suggested that if it was unduly harsh  to  expect
    someone to live in a country that was poorer than  the  United  Kingdom
    then anyone who married someone from a country poorer than  the  United
    Kingdom could insist on that person remaining in the United Kingdom.

58. I take Mr Avery's point  and  remind  myself  that  some  harshness  is
    necessary before something can be  unduly  harsh.   Nevertheless  I  do
    consider the material.

59. Clearly the  claimant's  husband  has  a  genuine  fear  of  living  in
    Zimbabwe.  However, it is not suggested he has any actual knowledge  of
    life in that country and can only form his  views  from  the  jaundiced
    perspective of one who does not want to leave the United Kingdom and is
    informed by somebody who does not want to go to Zimbabwe.

60. Nevertheless the fact that he has a genuine fear is a consideration  to
    which some weight must be attached.

61. I also accept the  claimant's  concern  to  be  well-founded  that  her
    husband would be in a disliked minority  in  Zimbabwe.   I  accept  the
    claimant's evidence that she has no contacts in that  country  anymore.
    Her children live in South Africa.  She has been away  for  some  time.
    Significantly, the claimant says she has sisters in Zimbabwe  but  then
    explained that although they are still resident in Zimbabwe they  spend
    most of their time with  their  children  and  grandchildren  in  South
    Africa.

62. She then explained that neighbouring countries are  showing  increasing
    xenophobia towards Zimbabweans because they are seen as a  nuisance  as
    they escape from the untold suffering in Zimbabwe.

63. I have also considered the evidence in the Zimbabwe COI Report of  July
    2012 referring to the difficulties faced by white people.  They  are  a
    dwindling minority in Zimbabwe although several thousand  white  people
    still live there.

64. The idea that he could go to  Zimbabwe  and  establish  himself  as  an
    undertaker or funeral director really seems fanciful  in  the  extreme.
    He would be moving to a desperately poor country. It is said to be  the
    second poorest on earth.  He would have the  disadvantage  of  being  a
    white man in a country that has learned not to like  white  people  and
    his wife has little social support.  The people most likely to help her
    are there for only part of their time.  That is a clear  indication  of
    how difficult conditions are for them and if that is how it is for them
    it is going to be worse for the claimant.

65. With respect  to  Mr  Avery,  Zimbabwe  is  not  just  a  country  less
    prosperous than the United Kingdom. It  is  an  impoverished,  racially
    divided dictatorship. Life there would be harsh for Mr Cornish.

66. When I evaluate the importance of deportation  and  bear  in  mind  the
    public interest I have to consider to some extent the approach  of  the
    Secretary of State.  Under her present Rules she  has  made  the  order
    that she has but she has on two previous occasions given  the  claimant
    leave to remain and did not seem to think about deporting the  claimant
    until 2011, which was some five years after she had come out of prison.
     This is not a case where there is any  explanation  for  the  need  to
    remove having increased in time.  For example it is not suggested  that
    the claimant has misbehaved further.

67. The rather tardy attitude taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  her
    deportation does not suggest to  me  that  there  is  a  strong  public
    interest in her being deported although the interest is plainly  there.
    This is not a case of an application being delayed because  of  limited
    resources. It is a case of a person who was twice given leave to remain
    after she came out prison. Since then she has  established  herself  in
    the community and kept out of trouble.

68. I am persuaded that the claimant's deportation  would  have  an  unduly
    harsh effect on her husband and for that reason and  that  reason  only
    the appeal should be allowed.

69. I therefore allow the Secretary of State's appeal  against  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision.   I  substitute  the  decision  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    deport her.

    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of  State's  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision is allowed. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

    I have re-determined the Respondent's appeal against the  Secretary  of
    State's decision and I  allow  the  Respondent's  appeal  against  that
    decision.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated  15 June 2016                  |


