
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/00300/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 August 2016                              |On 16 September 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                               MR H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                     Entry clearance officer - ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   UMER BI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Alim, instructed by Yaqub & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing an appeal by the applicant
    against the decision made on 19 April 2015 refusing to grant her  entry
    clearance as a family visitor.  In this decision I will  refer  to  the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, the  applicant  as
    the appellant and the ECO as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  18  July  1958.   Her
    daughter, the sponsor lives with her husband in the UK,  and  both  are
    British citizens.  The appellant applied for a visit  for  six  months.
    In the sponsorship declaration from the sponsor and her  husband,  they
    confirmed that they were able to support and accommodate her during the
    visit and provided documentary evidence to  support  their  account  of
    their financial circumstances.  They also confirmed that the  appellant
    had previously visited the UK in 2007, arriving on  25  June  2007  and
    returning to Pakistan on 27 September 2007.

3.   However the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant could  meet
    the requirements of para 41 of the Rules for the following reasons:

         "I acknowledge that  you  have  previously  travelled  to  the  UK;
         however, every application is based on its own merit.  It  is  your
         responsibility to satisfy me that your  personal  circumstances  in
         Pakistan are such that if granted leave to enter you will abide  by
         all of the conditions attached to any such leave and that you  will
         leave the UK on completion of the proposed visit but you  have  not
         done that because you have chosen not to  submit  any  evidence  to
         demonstrate what your personal and financial circumstances may  be.
         Therefore on the balance of probabilities I am not  satisfied  that
         you are genuinely seeking entry as a visitor for a  limited  period
         not exceeding six months or that you intend  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom at the end of the visit as required by paragraph 41(i)  and
         (ii) of the Immigration Rules.

         I  have  therefore  refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
         satisfied on the balance of probabilities, that you meet all of the
         requirements of  the  relevant  paragraph  of  the  United  Kingdom
         Immigration Rules."

4.   Following the appellant filing a notice of  appeal,  the  decision  was
    reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager (ECM)  who  concluded  that  the
    original refusal had been correct and in accordance with  the  law  and
    the Immigration Rules.  The ECM went on  to  consider  the  appellant's
    rights  under  article  8  and  concluded  that  the  refusal  of   the
    application would be proportionate to the need  to  maintain  effective
    immigration and border control.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing of the appeal the judge heard oral  evidence  from  both
    the sponsor and her husband.  They  confirmed  the  contents  of  their
    joint witness statement dated 19 December 2015 which confirmed that the
    appellant wanted to come and spend some time, twelve weeks, with family
    members settled in the UK.  In  Pakistan  she  was  looking  after  her
    mother-in-law and arrangements would be made for another relative to do
    so; she had income from  land,  business  and  animals;  they  were  in
    regular contact with the appellant by telephone and  would  be  meeting
    all the costs of the visit.



6.   The judge found the sponsor and her husband to  be  credible  witnesses
    describing them at [27] as honest, conscientious and  wholly  credible.
    He accepted the evidence  that  the  appellant  had  every  reason  and
    incentive to return to Pakistan after  the  proposed  visit  of  twelve
    weeks as she had done previously and that she  intended  to  return  to
    Pakistan following  the  visit.   The  judge  commented  that  the  ECM
    appeared to have been influenced  by  the  view  that  no  satisfactory
    reason had been put forward as to why the sponsor in the  UK  would  be
    unable to travel to Pakistan  to  be  with  the  appellant.  The  judge
    accepted that the requirements of the Immigration Rules were satisfied.
     He said at [28]:

         "Having  found  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41  of  the
         Immigration Rules are met in this case,  I  turn  to  consider  the
         scope of that rule.  In my view paragraph 41 is very far from being
         a complete code, sufficient to deal with all Article 8 issues.   It
         barely touches on the necessary range of factors, and an Article  8
         assessment outside the Rules is  certainly  warranted.   There  are
         significant relevant reasons to do so."

7.   The judge then went on to consider  article  8  finding  at  [29]  that
    plainly family life existed between the  appellant  and  her  sponsors.
    There was ample evidence of contact and  affection  between  them.   He
    commented that the ECM did not really dispute the existence  of  family
    life and the ECO failed to address  it  at  all.   He  found  that  the
    refusal of entry  clearance  would  interfere  with  that  family  life
    sufficiently to  engage  article  8.   On  the  issue  of  whether  the
    interference would be in accordance with the law he found that  it  was
    not because contrary  to  the  conclusions  of  the  ECO  and  ECM  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were met in this case.   He  went
    on to consider proportionality and found that the respondent's decision
    was disproportionate to its legitimate aim on the facts of  this  case.
    The appellant would be in the UK for twelve weeks and  no  more;  there
    was no particular cost to the public purse that had been identified and
    that would be  minimal;  there  was  no  realistic  prospect  that  the
    appellant would overstay; she would  be  accommodated  and  financially
    supported while she was  here.   He  commented  that  English  language
    requirements were of no consequence and carried no real  weight  for  a
    visit of such short duration and that  while,  on  the  one  hand,  the
    interference with family life  was  at  a  relatively  low  level,  the
    justification of the interference was flawed and  carried  very  little
    weight and that in these circumstances the refusal of  entry  clearance
    was wholly disproportionate.  Accordingly, the appeal  was  allowed  on
    article 8 grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds it is argued  that  the  judge  erred  by  finding  that
    article 8 was engaged on the basis  of  family  life.   It  is  further
    argued that the proportionality assessment was inadequate,  failing  to
    explain why the refusal of a visa which only allowed the parties to  be
    together temporarily was a disproportionate interference with article 8
    rights and that the judge  erred  by  failing  to  undertake  a  proper
    balancing exercise taking into account the factors set out in s.117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that, having found
    that the appellant met the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  the
    judge in substance used  the  appeal  under  article  8  as  a  general
    dispensing power.

9.   The appellant has  submitted  a  rule  24  reply  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal is invited to give further guidance as to the role of  article
    8 when clear and  uncontested  findings  are  made  that  the  relevant
    Immigration Rule is met within the context  of  an  appeal  limited  to
    human rights grounds.  The  grounds  refer  to  Adjei  (visit  visas  -
    Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00261, Kaur (visit appeals:  Article  8)  [2015]
    UKUT 00487 and  Bossade  (ss.117A-D  -  interrelationship  with  Rules)
    [2015] UKUT 00415.  The reply argues that the judge had not fallen into
    error in trying to follow the case law but had considered all  relevant
    factors and reached a lawful decision given the clear finding that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the relevant  Immigration  Rule.   If
    the appellant met the requirements of the  Rules,  then  there  was  no
    question of consideration outside the Rules.  The respondent's  grounds
    were therefore, so it was agreed, misconceived in focusing on article 8
    outside the Rules.

Assessment of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law

10.  There have been a number  Upper  Tribunal  reported  decisions  dealing
    with a human rights appeal based on article 8 where a visit application
    has been unsuccessful and there is  no  right  of  appeal  against  the
    decision under the Rules.  The head note in Mostafa (Article 8 in entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 is as follows:

         "In the case of appeals brought against refusal of entry  clearance
         under Article  8  ECHR,  the  claimant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules is not the  question  to  be  determined  by  the
         Tribunal,  but  is  capable  of  being  a   weighty,   though   not
         determinative,  factor  when  deciding  whether  such  refusal   is
         proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  enforcing  immigration
         control."

     The point being made in this decision  is  that  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds is a separate and distinct appeal from an appeal on  the
    merits from what would have been an appeal on immigration grounds until
    the abolition of that right of appeal taking effect on 25 June 2013.

11.  The issue of whether there has been a  breach  of  article  8  must  be
    assessed in the light of the five  step  approach  set  out  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 as  considered  in  subsequent  judgments  of  both  the
    Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal and not  simply  by  whether  the
    judge as opposed to the ECO is satisfied that the requirements  of  the
    Rules are met.  This approach is confirmed by  the  decision  in  Adjei
    where the Tribunal held that the first question to be addressed  in  an
    appeal against the refusal to grant entry clearance as a family visitor
    where only human rights grounds were available was whether article 8 of
    the ECHR  was  engaged  at  all  and,  if  not,  the  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the decision  of  the  ECO
    under the Rules and should not do so.  But if article  8  was  engaged,
    the Tribunal might then need  to  look  at  the  extent  to  which  the
    claimant was said to have failed to meet the requirements of the  Rules
    because that may inform the proportionality exercise that must  follow,
    a view endorsed in Kaur.

12.  The first question therefore is whether article 8 is engaged  and  this
    is the respondent's primary ground of appeal.  The grounds  argue  that
    it is established case law that  family  life  within  the  meaning  of
    article 8 will not normally exist between adult siblings,  parents  and
    adult children.   In  Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the Court of Appeal held that family life
    was not established between an adult and his surviving parent or  other
    siblings unless something more existed than normal emotional  ties  and
    that neither blood ties nor the concern and affection  that  ordinarily
    went with them were by themselves  or  together  enough  to  constitute
    family life.  In PT (Sri Lanka) v ECO Chennai [2016] EWCA Civ 612,  the
    Court of Appeal  confirmed  that  whether  family  life  existed  in  a
    particular case was always a fact sensitive question and that each case
    must be analysed on its own facts.

13.  In Mostafa, the Tribunal said:

         "It is the very essence of Article 8 that it lays down  fundamental
         values that have to be considered in all relevant cases.  It  would
         therefore be extremely foolish to attempt to be prescriptive, given
         the intensely factual and contextual  sensitivity  of  every  case.
         Thus we refrain from suggesting that, in this  type  of  case,  any
         particular kind of relationship would always attract the protection
         of Article 8(1) or that other kinds  of  relationship  would  never
         come within its scope. We are, however, prepared  to  say  that  it
         will only be in very unusual circumstances that a person other than
         a close relative will be able to show that  the  refusal  of  entry
         clearance comes within the scope of  Article  8(1).   In  practical
         terms this is likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship
         is that of husband and wife or  other  close  life  partners  or  a
         parent and minor child and even then it  will  not  necessarily  be
         extended to cases where, for example, the proposed visit  is  based
         on a whim or will not add significantly to the time that the people
         involved spend together...".

14.  In the present appeal  the  judge  found  that  family  life  "plainly"
    existed between the appellant and her sponsors.   He  noted  there  was
    ample evidence of contact and affection but has failed to carry out any
    assessment of whether in the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case
    there was family life between parents and adult children in  accordance
    with the guidance set out in the jurisprudence.  The judge  noted  that
    the ECM did not really dispute the existence of family life and the ECO
    had failed to address it at all but that, without more, does not amount
    to a concession that family life existed.  This was an  issue  of  fact
    for the judge to resolve.  There  was  nothing  in  the  evidence  that
    something more existed than  normal  emotional  ties.   It  was  common
    ground that the appellant's visit would be funded by her family in this
    country but on the  other  hand  the  judge  noted  at  [25]  that  the
    appellant had  means  of  financial  support  in  Pakistan  from  land,
    business and animals and took that into account when assessing  whether
    she was likely to return at the end of the visit.  He also  noted  that
    the appellant had her own caring responsibilities in  Pakistan  looking
    after  her  mother-in-law.   These  factors  are  relevant  as  far  as
    assessing the appellant's intentions to return at the end of the  visit
    but they also have a bearing on the nature and extent of whether  there
    is family life with the  sponsor  and  her  husband.   I  am  therefore
    satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing to apply  the  correct
    jurisprudence when considering whether there  was  family  life  within
    article 8.

15.  In these circumstances, I do not need to  consider  the  argument  that
    the proportionality assessment was inadequate or that the judge did not
    take proper account of the provisions of s.117B of the 2002 Act.

16.  Although the point is not made in the grounds I am also satisfied  that
    the judge erred by finding that the interference was not in  accordance
    with the law because the judge took the view that the  requirements  of
    the Rules were met.  There  was  no  right  of  appeal  on  immigration
    grounds  against  the  decision  under  the  Rules.   The  respondent's
    decision was a lawful decision  in  the  sense  that  it  was  made  in
    accordance with the law and the Rules even though there was no right of
    appeal against the respondent's adverse decision.

Re-making the Decision

17.  I am satisfied therefore that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law
    such that the decision should be set  aside.   It  was  agreed  at  the
    hearing before me that in these circumstances the proper  course  would
    be for me to re-make the decision.  When assessing an appeal  on  human
    rights grounds under article 8 as I have already  indicated  the  first
    issue to resolve is whether  the  appeal  engages  family  life  within
    article 8(1).  For the reasons I have already given I am not  satisfied
    that there are any factors which  justify  a  finding  that  there  was
    family life in the absence of some additional  elements  of  dependency
    going beyond the  normal  emotional  ties  between  a  mother  and  her
    daughter and son-in-law.  I note that in Kaur, the Upper  Tribunal  was
    satisfied on the particular facts of that case  that  there  were  such
    factors: the evidence was that the applicant had played a central  role
    in bringing up the two grandchildren.  However, there is no evidence of
    any such factors in the present case.

18.  It follows that as article 8 is not engaged  the  appellant  could  not
    succeed on article 8 grounds.  Had article 8 been  engaged,  the  other
    factors would  have  had  to  have  been  considered  including,  where
    necessary, making  relevant  findings  of  fact  as  indicated  in  the
    decision in Kaur.  I am not satisfied that there is any  need  to  give
    further guidance as sought in the reply as the issues relevant to  this
    appeal have been fully covered in the reported  decisions  to  which  I
    have referred.

Decision

19.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set aside.   I
    re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 15 September 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
