
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00606/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 February 2018                       |On 28 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SRS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. B. Amunwa, Counsel instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
     of First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane, promulgated on 8 November 2017,  in
     which he allowed SRS's appeal against  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
     decision to refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom as a spouse.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to SRS as the  Appellant  and
    to the Entry Clearance Officer  as  the  Respondent,  reflecting  their
    positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. I have made an anonymity direction, following on from that made in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


 4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "The grounds argue that the Judge had not given  sufficient  weight
         to the public interest in the exclusion of foreign  criminals  from
         the UK, refusal would simply maintain the status quo.  It  is  also
         argued  that  the  Judge  had  not  properly  considered  what   is
         reasonable in the context of the past history of the  relationship.
         The fact that the Sponsor did not  wish  to  live  in  Jamaica  was
         insufficient to show refusal was disproportionate.


         Where couples from different countries chose to marry and  wish  to
         live together one of them will have to live outside the country  of
         their nationality and there is no  automatic  right  of  a  British
         national to have their spouse live in the UK.   The  Appellant  and
         Sponsor were aware of the circumstances  when  they  married.   The
         grounds are arguable as the comparison with deportation is  apt  in
         the circumstances."

 5. The Sponsor attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 6. Mr. Clarke accepted that, were I to find that there was no error of law
    in the Judge's treatment of Appendix FM of the  immigration  rules,  he
    was in difficulty in showing that there was an error of law in the rest
    of the decision.  However, if the Judge's approach to  the  suitability
    requirements had been erroneous, the other grounds of  appeal  relating
    to Article 8 "outside the rules" were relevant.


 7. He submitted that there had been an  inadequate  consideration  of  the
    public interest when considering S-EC.1.5.  He provided the suitability
    requirements from Appendix FM as they were at the date of the decision,
    and the case of MW [2016] EWCA Civ 1273.  I was referred  to  the  2007
    Act which provided that offences where  sentences  of  over  30  months
    imprisonment had been handed down did not "fall  off  the  radar",  and
    were relevant for the purposes of the immigration rules.  This had been
    referred to in the Respondent's decision.


  8. He submitted that the reasoning in S-EC.1.5 was distinct to that  under
     S-EC.1.4.  Rehabilitation was not determinative.   I  was  referred  to
     [10] of the decision.  The Judge had erroneously taken into account  S-
     EC.1.4.  He had found that there was "not a shred of evidence emanating
     from the Respondent which bore materially on those issues of fact which
     Section EC.1.5 was concerned with".  It was submitted  that  there  was
     evidence of a conviction with a sentence of imprisonment of 42 months.


  9. He submitted that the public interest included public revulsion or  the
     deterrence of criminals.  Caselaw held that the  level  of  criminality
     needed to be taken into account when considering whether something  was
     unduly harsh.  The Judge had not  considered  the  seriousness  of  the
     offence and there been no holistic assessment.  Rehabilitation was  the
     only factor that the  Judge  had  considered.   To  simply  state  that
     because  the  Appellant  was  rehabilitated  the  public  interest  was
     weighted at one particular  level  could  not  be  right.   Criminality
     should be taken into account, and rehabilitation should not  have  been
     determinative of the public interest assessment.


 10. I was referred to the  case  of  MW  and  the  analogy  to  deportation
     appeals, [33] to [42].  Convictions outside the United Kingdom were  of
     importance in assessing the public interest.


 11. Mr. Clarke submitted that  if  the  assessment  under  the  suitability
     requirements  was  wrong  then  the  proportionality  assessment  under
     Article 8 was undermined.  The Judge's finding that the rules were  met
     had an impact on his  assessment  of  whether  the  relationship  could
     continue abroad.  It was clear when considering the Sponsor's  evidence
     set out at [5] that the test of insurmountable obstacles would  not  be
     met.  I was referred to the case  of  Agyarko.    However,  Mr.  Clarke
     accepted that this was the only point that could be made in relation to
     the other grounds, as it depended on whether there was an error in  the
     Judge's consideration of Appendix FM.


 12. Mr. Amunwa referred to his skeleton argument.  He  submitted  that  the
     argument regarding the Judge's treatment of Article 8 was fundamentally
     misconceived.  He referred to the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
     Freer promulgated in January 2015, in particular [45], [51],  [52]  and
     [66].  Judge Freer had made these findings with the aid of the decision
     of First-tier Tribunal Judge Archer promulgated in 2013.   His findings
     had not been disturbed by the Upper Tribunal decision.  Judge Keane had
     the full assistance of the previous decisions  and  was  not  persuaded
     that he had been presented with evidence to depart from the findings of
     Judge Freer.  I was  referred  to  [10],  the  findings  regarding  the
     Appellant's  rehabilitation.   He  submitted  that  Judge   Keane   had
     considered  with  some  care  the  offence  which  the  Appellant   had
     committed.


 13. He submitted that there was no error in the  Judge's  reference  to  S-
     EC.1.4 because this paragraph was referred to in S-EC.1.5.   These  two
     paragraphs were related but S-EC.1.5 followed a different structure  as
     it was aimed at  catching  conduct  which  fell  short  of  convictions
     covered by S-EC.1.4.  For example, where somebody had been convicted of
     shoplifting on many occasions but had not been convicted  to  a  period
     which amounted to 12 months, that person would be caught  by  S-EC.1.5.
     It was a sweep up provision.  In the Appellant's  case  the  Respondent
     had used a sweep up provision in respect of a conviction which did  not
     fall under S-EC.1.4 because of the passage of time of  ten  years.   He
     submitted that using S-EC.1.5  in  that  way  was  dissonant  with  the
     purpose of S-EC.1.4.  After a certain period of time  it  was  possible
     for someone to qualify under S-EC.1.4, and therefore to  qualify  under
     Appendix FM.  If the Respondent was right in  using  S-EC.1.5  in  this
     way, there was very little hope for anybody convicted of an offence for
     which he was sentenced to over 12 months to succeed under Appendix  FM,
     and it was clear from the structure of the rules,  and  S-EC.1.4,  that
     this should not be how it operated.


 14. It for was for the Judge to conclude whether the Appellant's  exclusion
     was undesirable.  His conclusion was in  line  with  the  two  previous
     decisions.  No further evidence had been marshalled by the  Respondent.
     In full view of all of the facts, the Judge found that  the  Respondent
     had not discharged the burden to show that  the  Appellant's  exclusion
     was conducive to the public good.  He had gone one  step  further  than
     this and made a specific finding that the Appellant's exclusion was not
     conducive to the public good.


 15. He submitted that nothing had been said at the hearing before  me,  and
     no evidence had been presented in  the  grounds,  which  had  not  been
     considered.  The Judge had considered the offence.  To use S-EC.1.5  in
     this way effectively undermined the balance contained in S-EC.1.4.


 16.  In  relation  to  the  consideration  of  human  rights  outside   the
     immigration  rules,  the  Judge  had  not  erred  in  considering   the
     immigration rules first.  Having found as he did that the Appellant met
     the suitability requirements, this was a powerful consideration in  the
     Appellant's favour.  He weighed it with  care  at  [11],  and  gave  it
     appropriate weight.  His findings in relation to Article 8 outside  the
     rules were entirely uncontroversial given his finding under the  rules.
     He had made a clear finding in [11]  that  it  was  not  reasonable  to
     expect the Sponsor to leave the United Kingdom.


 17. He submitted that the Judge was aware of the length of time  that  this
     case had taken.  There had been an interference in the  development  of
     family life for some considerable time and this was all relevant in the
     Article 8 analysis.  There was no material error of law in [11].  There
     was an entirely adequate assessment of  the  public  interest  and  the
     grounds were an attempt to open up the clear factual findings that  had
     gone  against  the  Respondent  on  two  occasions  in  the  First-tier
     Tribunal.


 18. With reference to the case of MW, that case  had  considered  S-EC.1.4,
     and the Appellant's case fell under S-EC.1.5.  The Court of Appeal  had
     not considered the cooperation of S-EC.1.4 and S-EC.1.5.   It  had  not
     considered the use of S-EC.1.5 when S-EC.1.4 could not be used  because
     a period of ten years had passed.

 19. In response  to  the  submission  that  the  balance  in  S-EC.1.4  was
     undermined by the use of S-EC.1.5, Mr. Clarke submitted that there  was
     a threshold of exceptional circumstances in S-EC.1.4, but that all that
     was required under S-EC.1.5 was the presence of a conviction.   It  was
     necessary to engage with the substance of the conviction  to  establish
     the weight to be given to the public interest.  The Judge had drawn  in
     consideration of S-EC.1.4 in [10].  The issue under S-EC.1.5  was  that
     the conviction and the substance of the conviction  was  sufficient  to
     meet the mandatory  exclusion  under  S-EC.1.5.   In  relation  to  the
     submission regarding  the  Sponsor  leaving  the  United  Kingdom,  the
     reasonableness test was erroneous.  I  was  referred  to  the  case  of
     Agyarko, [42] and [43].


Error of law


 20. I have carefully considered the grounds and the decision.  The  grounds
     are not clearly drafted, and I observe that there is  no  challenge  in
     the grounds to any of the findings in [10].  This paragraph states:

         "It was for the respondent to discharge the burden  of  proving  to
         the balance of probabilities that the exclusion  of  the  appellant
         from the United Kingdom was conducive to the public good because of
         his character, associations or other reasons.  A judge hearing  the
         appellant's appeal against the earlier  decision  to  refuse  entry
         clearance found that the appellant  had  not  committed  a  further
         offence and indeed that he had been rehabilitated [....].  Although
         the  judge's  decision  was  set  aside  on  the  ground  that  the
         respondent  was  entitled  to  exercise  discretion   pursuant   to
         paragraph 320(18) then in force  the  judge's  finding  as  to  the
         appellant's conduct in committing further offences and  as  to  his
         rehabilitation was not disturbed and if it be necessary for  me  to
         do so I approbate his findings.   The  respondent  did  not  induce
         relevant material in the notice of decision, by way  of  the  Entry
         Clearance Manager's review  or  at  the  hearing.   The  respondent
         merely relied on the conviction  and  resultant  sentence  and  the
         respondent did not rely on Section S-EC.1.4  perhaps  mindful  that
         more than ten years had elapsed since the end  of  the  appellant's
         sentence.  There was not a shred of  evidence  emanating  from  the
         respondent, which bore materially on those  issues  of  fact  which
         Section EC.1 .5 was concerned with.  Coupled with the  findings  of
         the Judge to which I have referred there were  merely  the  witness
         statements  of  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant's  letter   which
         emphasised adamantly that the appellant has not reoffended and  has
         lived a respectable life since committing his one offence.  For the
         respondent's finding that the exclusion of  the  application  (sic)
         from  the  United  Kingdom  is  conducive  to  the  public  good  I
         substitute my own finding that his exclusion is  not  conducive  to
         the public good and that it is not undesirable that he  be  granted
         entry clearance."

 21. I find that the Judge correctly stated that it was for  the  Respondent
     to discharge the burden of proving on the balance of probabilities that
     the Appellant's exclusion was conducive to the public good.  There  was
     no dispute about this.  I find that the Judge correctly considered  the
     findings of the previous Judge.  He found that the Respondent  had  not
     adduced any further evidence, and there was no challenge to  this.   He
     stated that the Respondent had relied  merely  on  the  conviction  and
     sentence.


 22. It was  submitted  by  Mr.  Clarke  that  it  was  sufficient  for  the
     Respondent to rely on the conviction and sentence for the purposes of S-
     EC.1.5.  If this is right, as submitted by Mr. Amunwa, it is  difficult
     to see how anyone convicted for  an  offence  of  over  12  months  can
     succeed under Appendix FM, and the way in  which  S-EC.1.4  is  drafted
     clearly indicates that there is the scope for someone with a conviction
     of over 12 months to meet the requirements of Appendix FM.  As referred
     to by the Judge, there was no reliance on  S-EC.1.4,  "perhaps  mindful
     that more than ten years had elapsed since the end of  the  Appellant's
     sentence".  It was further submitted by Mr. Clarke that the  Judge  had
     not properly considered the Appellant's offence, but I find  that  this
     is not the case.  The Judge was fully aware of the  offence  which  the
     Appellant had committed.  He set out the  contents  of  the  notice  of
     decision [3].  It is was clear that he had taken into account fully the
     previous  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   relating   to   the
     Appellant's offence and his behaviour subsequent to this offence.   The
     finding had been made by  Judge  Freer  that  the  Appellant  had  been
     rehabilitated, and Judge Keane adopted that finding.  I find that Judge
     properly considered the  offence  for  which  the  Appellant  had  been
     convicted.


 23. I find that, given the  findings  of  Judge  Freer  in  2015  that  the
     Appellant had been rehabilitated, it was open to Judge  Keane  to  find
     that the Respondent needed to do more than merely rely  on  an  offence
     which no longer fell within paragraph S-EC.1.4.  It  was  open  to  the
     Judge to give weight  to  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  been
     rehabilitated in coming to his conclusion that the Respondent  had  not
     shown that the exclusion of the Appellant was conducive to  the  public
     good.  It would have been an error had the  Judge  not  considered  the
     Appellant's rehabilitation,  be  that  either  with  reference  to  the
     findings of Judge Freer, or by making findings  on  the  basis  of  the
     evidence before him given the wording of S-EC.1.5.  The burden  lay  on
     the Respondent  to  show  that  the  exclusion  of  the  Appellant  was
     conducive to the public good, and she was aware that the Appellant  had
     been found by the Tribunal to have been rehabilitated.  She provided no
     evidence to displace these previous factual  findings.   S-EC.1.5  must
     involve a  consideration  of  an  applicant's  circumstances  when  the
     application is made.  It is not dependent on past conduct alone.


 24. I find that the Judge adequately considered the  public  interest  when
     considering S-EC.1.5.  It is  clear  that  the  rehabilitation  of  the
     Appellant  must  be  a  weighty  factor  when  considering  the  public
     interest, it cannot be otherwise.  In the face of a  finding  that  the
     Appellant had been rehabilitated, I find  there  is  no  error  in  the
     Judge's finding that the Respondent had merely relied on the conviction
     and sentence without any reference to what  had  occurred  in  the  ten
     years since, and therefore that she provided  no  evidence  which  bore
     materially on the issues under S-EC.1.5.


 25. I have considered the case of MW  but  I  find,  as  submitted  by  Mr.
     Amunwa,  that  this  is  concerned  with  the  use  of  S-EC.1.4.   The
     Appellant's application was decided with reference to  S-EC.1.5.  There
     is no consideration in MW of the interrelation of these two paragraphs.




 26. I find that there is no error of law in the  Judge's  consideration  of
     whether or not the Appellant  met  the  suitability  requirements,  and
     whether or not the Respondent had discharged the  burden  of  proof  to
     show that the Appellant's exclusion was conducive to the  public  good.
     He was aware of the previous decision which had gone in the Appellant's
     favour, and of which the Respondent was aware.  He  did  not  err  when
     finding that the Respondent had not discharged the burden of proof.


 27. I further find that there is no material error  of  law  in  [11],  the
     Judge's consideration of Article 8 outside the rules.  It was  accepted
     by Mr. Clarke  that,  if  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the  suitability
     requirements did not involve the making of an error of law, the further
     grounds of  appeal  were  difficult  to  argue.   The  Judge  correctly
     considered the immigration rules first.  Given  that  the  only  reason
     that the application was refused was in  relation  to  the  suitability
     requirements, a matter which goes directly to the public interest,  and
     given that I have found that the Judge did not err in his consideration
     of the suitability requirements, and therefore found that the Appellant
     met the requirements of the immigration  rules,  I  find  there  is  no
     material error of law in [11].


Decision


 28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
     a material error of law and I do not set the decision aside.


 29. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 23 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

