
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/00282/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2019                     |On 30 September 2019              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D HARRIS

                                   Between

                               SIKANDAR AMJAD
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance and no legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Young ("the judge"), promulgated on 16  April  2019,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his human rights claim.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Pakistan born on  26  November  1990,  had
    come to the United Kingdom on 10 November 2009 as  a  Tier  4  student.
    Following a number of extensions to his original leave,  on  30  August
    2016 the human rights claim was made (at no  stage  has  the  Appellant
    made a protection claim and  no  question  of  humanitarian  protection
    arises in this case).  This  was  based  on  the  Appellant's  physical
    health, in particular the fact that he suffered from a severe  form  of
    ulcerative colitis, a condition affecting the colon. It was  said  that
    he had been placed on a randomised trial of a new  form  of  biological
    therapy called Etrolizumab. A number  of  alternative  treatments  have
    been tried without success and that his condition was severe enough  to
    warrant his inclusion in the cohort of  individuals  selected  for  the
    trial. The trial was  "double-blind"  in  that  participants  would  be
    randomised into treatment groups receiving  either  active  Etrolizumab
    and a placebo of an  alternative  biological  therapy,  Infliximab,  or
    active Infliximab and a placebo of Etrolizumab.

 3. The Appellant asserted that he needed to continue within the trial  and
    that its cessation (as a result of his potential removal  to  Pakistan)
    would seriously jeopardise his health. His assertions  were  supported,
    to an extent, by evidence from relevant medical  professionals  in  the
    United Kingdom including those within the  Inflammatory  Bowel  Disease
    Service at Kings College Hospital, London, and  a  medico-legal  report
    from Professor D Silk, Consultant Gastroenterologist,  dated  9  August
    2018. There was also evidence from medical professionals  in  Pakistan,
    asserting that the treatment he was receiving  in  the  United  Kingdom
    would not be available in that country.

 4. In refusing the human rights claim, the Respondent concluded  that  the
    Appellant could not meet any of the relevant Immigration Rules and that
    there were no exceptional circumstances in his case., It was said  that
    relevant treatment was available in Pakistan and that in any event  his
    removal would not have such severe consequences as to violate article 3
    ECHR in light of N v United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 453.

The judge's decision

 5. For reasons of his own,  the  Appellant  elected  to  have  his  appeal
    decided without an oral hearing. It appears at that stage as though the
    Appellant had legal representation (Pasha Law Chambers Solicitors). The
    representatives had prepared a bundle containing the  relevant  medical
    evidence alluded to above.

 6. Before turning to a detailed consideration of the  medical  issue,  the
    judge refers to N, the decision of the Strasbourg Court  in  Paposhvili
    [2016] ECHR 1113, and the Court of Appeals decision  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 64. The judge appears to proceed on the basis that  the
    modestly altered test in medical cases as set  out  in  Paposhvili  was
    applicable.

 7. At paras 38-40, the judge considers the medical evidence.  In  summary,
    he notes that Infliximab was a  possible  alternative  to  Etrolizumab,
    which may have been of benefit to the Appellant. However, none  of  the
    medical evidence addressed this particular  issue.  There  was  nothing
    from Professor Silk as to why the Appellant  could  not  be  placed  on
    Infliximab, and there was no evidence emanating  from  Pakistan  as  to
    whether this therapy was available in that country. As  a  consequence,
    the judge concluded that the Appellant had not shown that there was  an
    absence of relevant treatment for his condition in Pakistan.

 8. At paras 41 and 42, the judge makes  an  alternative  finding,  stating
    that even if Etrolizumab and Infliximab were not available in Pakistan,
    the Appellant had not shown that the cessation of his current treatment
    would result in a "rapid decline" in his  health  leading  to  "intense
    suffering or death". Professor Silk acknowledged that there was no data
    available on the risks or rates of flare-ups of the  medical  condition
    on discontinuation of Etrolizumab, and if surgery was  required,  there
    was only a 30/40% chance of this actually occurring within a three-year
    period after the discontinuation. On this basis,  the  judge  concluded
    that the high threshold set by Paposhvili was not satisfied.

 9. Article 8 is then considered. Citing GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, the
    judge concludes that once the Article 3 claim failed, on the  facts  of
    the Appellant's case it was not  possible  for  him  to  succeed  under
    Article 8. Finally, the  judge  concludes  that  there  were  no  "very
    significant obstacles" to the Appellant's reintegration into  Pakistani
    society, having regard to the relevant familial, cultural,  and  social
    connections to that country.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. It appears as though the Appellant drafted the grounds  of  appeal.  In
    summary, they assert that the judge  was  wrong  to  have  reached  the
    conclusions he did on  the  core  medical  issue.  One  aspect  of  the
    challenge is that the judge was  wrong  to  have  raised  the  apparent
    possibility of the Appellant taking Infliximab instead  of  Etrolizumab
    and not then have given the Appellant and opportunity  to  respond.  In
    addition, it is said that further evidence had been obtained after  the
    judge's decision to show that Infliximab was not in fact  available  in
    Pakistan.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  9
    July 2019. His grant focuses on an arguable unfairness in the judge not
    giving the Appellant and opportunity to  respond  to  the  question  of
    whether Infliximab was an alternative  treatment.  He  also  makes  the
    point that whilst judge applied the test set  out  in  Paposhvili,  the
    actual test under domestic law remains that in N.

The hearing

12. The Appellant did not attend the hearing and is not legally represented
    in any way. By a handwritten letter dated 25 September 2019, he  stated
    that he was suffering from a flare-up of his ulcerative colitis and was
    unable to attend. In support of this assertion, he attached a  standard
    form certificate (commonly referred to as a "Med 3" form) signed by his
    GP, dated 25 September 2019, and confirming that the Appellant was "not
    fit for work" for a period of some ten  days  due  to  a  flare  up  of
    ulcerative colitis. The letter  goes  on  to  request  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal sends his appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  "new
    hearing" in order that he could present his case and provide additional
    evidence. There is no specific request for the error of law hearing  to
    be adjourned.

13. Mr Singh opposed any implicit suggestion that  the  hearing  should  be
    adjourned.

14. Having specific regard to rules 2 and  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, we concluded that  we  should  proceed  to
    reach an error of law decision in the  Appellant's  absence.  We  noted
    that there had been a previous adjournment of an error of  law  hearing
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 15 August 2019. This was because the
    Appellant was too unwell to attend. Judge Canavan made it very clear in
    her Decision and Directions Notice  that  there  would  be  no  further
    adjournments  unless  "good  reasons"  were  given.  In  reaching   our
    conclusion, we take into account the undisputed fact of the Appellant's
    medical condition and the possibility of flare-ups. On the other  hand,
    the Med 3 form specifically relates to unfitness to work, not unfitness
    to attend a hearing. In any event, notwithstanding some concerns as  to
    the actual ability of the Appellant to attend, as we read  his  letter,
    he has not sought an adjournment of the error of law  hearing.  Rather,
    it is implicit in the letter that he wishes us to make an error of  law
    decision and, by way of disposal, to remit his case back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In all the circumstances, it is both  fair  and  in  the
    interests of justice for us to determine the question of error  of  law
    at this stage.

15. We heard brief submissions from Mr  Singh.  He  acknowledged  that  the
    judge may have overlooked an item of evidence from Dr Mohammad Usman, a
    medical professional from Pakistan, in which he stated  that  "neither"
    of the drugs which the Appellant was taking at the time  (the  doctor's
    letter is dated 5 December 2016) were available or licensed for use  in
    that country. Mr Singh acknowledged that this evidence could have  been
    referring to Etrolizumab and Infliximab. However, despite this possible
    error, Mr Singh submitted that it was not, in  all  the  circumstances,
    material to the outcome of the appeal. The judge  had  wrongly  applied
    the test in Paposhvili, when it should have been that in N.  Thus,  the
    threshold for the Appellant to have  met  was  even  higher  than  that
    applied by the judge. Further,  it  was  submitted  that  even  on  the
    slightly lower threshold, the judge had been  fully  entitled  to  have
    reached the alternative conclusion that the evidence  was  insufficient
    for the Appellant to have succeeded.

Decision on error of law

16. We conclude that the judge has not materially erred in law such that we
    should set his decision aside under section 12(1)(a) of the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

17. The fact that the Appellant elected to have his appeal decided  without
    an oral hearing did not assist him in the sense  that  matters  arising
    from the evidence could not have been addressed then and there. Be that
    as it may, the judge was still obliged to deal with the  appeal  fairly
    and give adequate consideration to all relevant evidence before him.

18. On our initial reading of the decision, we formed  the  view  that  the
    judge may have acted unfairly in  failing  to  give  the  Appellant  an
    opportunity  to  respond  to  the  possibility  of  Infliximab  as   an
    alternative treatment. With the assistance of Mr Singh,  we  have  been
    directed to the letter of Dr Usman, referred to above. We are satisfied
    that the judge failed to have specific regard to this  evidence.  Given
    that it states that Infliximab was  not  available  in  Pakistan,  this
    evidence was relevant to the  judge's  consideration  of  whether  that
    possible alternative had a bearing on the  Appellant's  case.  In  this
    regard, there is an error on the judge's part.

19. However, notwithstanding this error, the insuperable obstacles  in  the
    Appellant's path towards showing that it made a material difference  to
    the outcome of the appeal are as follows.

20. First, the applicable legal test was not  that  under  Paposhvili,  but
    that set out in N [2005] UKHL 31; [2005] 2 AC 296 (it is of course  the
    judgment of the House of Lords that  represents  the  binding  domestic
    authority, not the subsequent judgment of the Strasbourg  Court).  That
    particularly high threshold remains applicable  until  and  unless  the
    Supreme Court decides otherwise.

21. Second, whether in relation to his primary finding in para  40  or  his
    alternative finding at paras 41 and 42, the judge  was,  in  our  view,
    entitled to conclude that on the evidence before him, the very exacting
    threshold under Paposhvili had not been met. Professor Silk's  evidence
    was that there was a 50% chance of  a  flare-up  within  two  years  of
    cessation of the treatment. If surgery were required as an  alternative
    treatment on the grounds that neither Etrolizumab nor  Infliximab  were
    available in Pakistan, the evidence was that there was a 30/40%  chance
    of this occurring at three  years  after  cessation.  On  the  evidence
    before the judge, it could not be said that the  fact  of  a  colectomy
    would, of itself, be sufficient to meet  the  relevant  threshold.  The
    same applies to the possibility of  developing  pouchitis.  Taking  the
    judge's reasoning and conclusions as  a  whole  and  in  light  of  the
    evidence, we cannot justifiably find that he materially erred in law.

22. If, as it should have been, the even more demanding threshold in N were
    applied to the factual matrix, the judge would have inevitably  arrived
    at the same conclusion. Indeed,  the  sustainability  of  his  decision
    would be that much the clearer.

23. Third, we conclude that, on the particular  facts  of  this  case,  the
    judge was also entitled to find that once the Article 3  claim  failed,
    the Article 8 claim (based as it was almost  entirely  on  the  medical
    condition) must also fail in light of GS (India). In truth,  there  was
    nothing of any substance to the Article 8 claim apart from the  medical
    condition.

24. Fourth, and for the sake of completeness, the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that  there  were  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration into Pakistani society, given  the  focus  of
    the applicable  test  on  a  wide  range  of  factors,  not  simply  an
    individual's medical condition.

25. We wish to make it clear that in reaching our decision, we have not had
    regard to the additional evidence sent in by the Appellant  in  support
    of his challenge in the Upper Tribunal. The letter from Dr Usman, dated
    28 June 2019, cannot inform our  consideration  of  whether  the  judge
    materially erred in law on the evidence then before  him.  Having  said
    that, there is nothing preventing  the  Appellant  from  providing  the
    Respondent with  this  further  evidence  and  requesting  that  it  be
    considered on a compassionate basis. Whether that is  done  is  not  of
    course a matter for us.

Anonymity


26. The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction and nor do we.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed      [pic]            Date: 26 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





