
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00545/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st October 2018                          |On 26th November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [M N]
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Reyaz (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J L Bristow promulgated on 27th June 2018, following a hearing at
    Birmingham on 5th June 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, is a male, and was born on  5th
    May 1992.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated  5th
    December 2017, refusing his human rights claim to remain in the  UK  on
    the basis of his family life with his partner, [SR],  and  their  child
    [MA].  The child is a British citizen.  He was born on  20th  September
    2016 and was at the date of the hearing 21 months of age.

 3. The decision to refuse was on the basis that the Appellant did not meet
    the suitability requirements under Section S-LTR to remain  in  the  UK
    because he had used deception in his application of 23rd April 2013  by
    using a fraudulently obtained TOEIC  certificate.   The  Appellant  had
    taken four tests on  6th  February  2013  at  the  Manchester  Learning
    Academy.  Two of the results had questionable status.   The  other  two
    were declared invalid.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found, in relation to the evidence produced, and assessed  at
    the civil standard, that the allegation of deception having  been  used
    by the Appellant was proven (see paragraph 32) and that the Appellant's
    own evidence in response was "unsatisfactory  and  lacking  in  detail"
    (paragraph 33).  The judge then went on to consider the position of his
    British citizen child.

 5. He observed that the Appellant had not proved that the child  would  be
    expected to leave the UK.  He can  remain  with  Mrs  [SR],  a  British
    citizen, in the UK, who was his mother.  The child  was  in  any  event
    very young.  He would adapt to the absence of the Appellant and to life
    with Mrs [SR] alone.

 6. The judge went on to say that

         "Children can be and  are  separated  from  a  parent  for  various
         reasons.  They cope and succeed in life nonetheless.  Even though I
         have found that it would be in his best interests  to  remain  with
         both parents is not a 'trump card' and the Appellant has not proved
         that [MA] would be expected to leave the  UK  if  he  was  removed"
         (paragraph 37).

    The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge fundamentally erred  in
    his approach to Section 117B(6) which has a two tier approach.   First,
    it is necessary to show that the person has a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a  qualifying  child  (which  was  the  case
    here); but secondly, it was also necessary to show that "it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom."   In
    this case, the judge, having accepted that there was a qualifying child
    (at paragraph 54), and having also accepted that the best interests  of
    the child were to remain in the UK with both  parents  (paragraph  36),
    then it did not make a finding  as  to  reasonableness.   There  was  a
    direct failure on his part to do so.  Instead, what the judge  did  was
    to say that the Appellant had to prove to a  civil  standard  that  the
    child was "expected" to leave the United Kingdom (see paragraphs 37, 38
    and 54).

 8. Second, the approach was also contrary to the  favourable  Home  Office
    policy as highlighted  by  the  Tribunal  decision  of  SF  and  Others
    (Guidance post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT  120,  which  was  to  the
    effect that,

         "The Tribunal ought to take the Secretary of State's guidance  into
         account if it points clearly to a particular Article in the instant
         case.  Only in that way can consistency be obtained  between  those
         cases that do, and  those  cases  that  do  not,  come  before  the
         Tribunal".

 9. Moreover, the Immigration Directorate Instruction -  Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0B - paragraph 11.2.3, is clear that

         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer".

10. Third, it was submitted that the judge's failure to make a  finding  on
    reasonableness, in turn also led to a failure to consider  the  wording
    of Section 117B(6) and  to  properly  assess  the  public  interest  in
    removal.  The test  in  Section  117B(6)  is  met  in  cases  where  an
    Appellant is not liable to deportation and there is no public  interest
    in removal in this case.

11. On 28th August 2018, permission to appeal was granted by  the  Tribunal
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge had erred  in  failing
    to make a finding  as  to  whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant and British child to leave the United Kingdom.

12. On 8th October 2018 a Rule 24 response was entered to the  effect  that
    the judge accepted that the British child was a qualifying child  under
    Section 117B(6) but gave adequate reasons for finding  that  the  child
    could remain in the UK with his mother and would  not  be  required  to
    leave the UK if the Appellant were removed.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 31st October 2018, Mr Reyaz,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, went through the grounds  of  application  and
    emphasised the fact that it was for the judge to deal properly with the
    second tier of Section 117B(6) and to actually make a finding as to why
    it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom, which he had not  done.   What  the  judge  had  done  was  to
    repeatedly phrase the  question  in  terms  of  whether  the  child  is
    expected to leave the UK at paragraphs 37, 38 and  54.   Moreover,  the
    Home Office's policy in question here was clear  that  barring  a  case
    where deportation was clearly in the public interest  for  a  committed
    criminal, the existence of a British citizen child was a telling factor
    to allowing a parent to remain in this country.

14. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the 2018 policy of 22nd  February
    is to the effect that it is not unreasonable to expect a child to leave
    where the child can live with another parent in this country.   Indeed,
    the recent case of KO (Nigeria) of the  Supreme  Court  also  asks  the
    question as to what  the  position  is  in  the  real  world.   If  the
    Appellant is expected to leave the UK then that is the context in which
    the child's position should  be  assessed.   The  judge  in  this  case
    properly approached the matter at paragraph 53 by observing  that  "the
    starting  point  is  that  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest."  The judge then  went  on  to  say
    that although there was a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    of the child with the Appellant, "[MA] will not be  required  to  leave
    the UK if the Appellant is removed" (paragraph 54).  This was a finding
    that was entirely open to the judge.

15. In reply, Mr Reyaz submitted that he would also place reliance  upon  a
    recent case of SR (subsisting parental relationship, s.117B(6))  [2018]
    UKUT 334, where the Tribunal had stated that

         "The question of whether it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
         child to leave the United Kingdom in Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002
         Act does not necessarily require a  consideration  of  whether  the
         child would in fact or practise leave the UK.  Rather, it  poses  a
         straightforward question: would it be reasonable  'to  expect'  the
         child to leave the UK?".

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

17. First, in this case the judge did ask the wrong question at  paragraphs
    37, 38 and 54 by enquiring into whether the child is expected to  leave
    the UK.  As UTJ Plimmer makes it clear  in  SR  [2018]  UKUT  334,  the
    question is a straightforward question, namely,  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable "to expect" the child to leave the  UK.   In  this  case  it
    would not be reasonable to expect [MA], the child, to leave the UK.  He
    is a British citizen.  And born of a British  citizen  mother,  and  is
    entitled to live in this country.

18. Second, however, the Tribunal is required  to  take  into  account  the
    existing Home Office policy and what was made clear in SF  [2017]  UKUT
    00120, in relation to the IDI on  family  migration  was  that  if  the
    Appellant is not liable to deportation then provided  that  it  is  not
    reasonable to expect the British citizen child  to  leave  the  UK  the
    Appellant succeeds in the appeal: CMA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705
    (at paragraph 48 per Elias LJ).  That case drew upon  EV  (Philippines)
    at paragraphs 34 to 37).  Clarke LJ had made it clear  that  if  it  is
    overwhelmingly in the child's best interest  to  remain,  the  need  to
    maintain immigration control may well not tip the balance.

19.  Third,  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0B Family Life  (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: ten year route August  2015",  makes  it  clear  in  that
    guidance that

         "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of  at  least  seven  years  immediately
         preceding the date of the application, recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate  into  life  in  the
         UK...".

20. In this case, of course, the child has not lived in the  UK  for  seven
    years.  He is in fact a British citizen.  Lord Bingham made it clear  a
    decade ago that,

         "It will rarely be proportionate to uphold an order for removal  of
         a spouse if there is a close and genuine bond with the other spouse
         and that spouse cannot reasonably be expected to follow the removed
         spouse to the country of removal, or if the effect of the order  is
         to sever a genuine and subsisting relationship between  parent  and
         child" (see EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHF 41 at paragraph 12).

21. In  the  circumstances,  the  question  of  whether  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom was one that
    had to be addressed in the terms of the provision as expressed, and the
    failure of the judge to do so, amounts to an error of  law.   What  the
    judge has done is to require the Appellant to prove that the  child  is
    expected to leave the UK.  This is not the test.  The judge has  failed
    to make a finding on whether it was reasonable to expect the  child  to
    leave.  For these reasons, the matter is remitted back  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge Bristow  at
    the next available hearing pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(a) of the
    Procedure Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Bristow pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(a).  An anonymity order  is
made.

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018
