
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00690/2015
                                                               HU/00692/2015
                                                               HU/00693/2015
                                                               HU/00694/2015
                                                               HU/00696/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2017                                |On 13 June 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            CHINTA MANI BHANDARI
                        KALIKA DEVI SAPKOTA BHANDARI
                                ASIM BHANDARI
                                    [S B]
                                    [A B]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, a Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondents:   Mr E Wilford of Counsel, instructed by Advisa
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross given on  2  November  2016  whereby  he
    allowed the appeal of the respondent, as he now is, against the refusal
    of the Secretary of State to permit  him  to  remain,  he  having  been
    served with an IS151A notice because his leave, together with  that  of
    his family, had been cancelled on 21 January 2015.  The reason for that
    cancellation was because it  was  said  that  he  had  been  guilty  of
    obtaining the necessary English proficiency with ETS in December  2012,
    that is when he underwent the necessary testing and  as  is  well-known
    there have been a large number of cases in which it has been said  that
    there has been fraud practised in that the English  language  test  has
    been taken by proxy.

2.   The evidence relied on by the  Secretary  of  State  in  this  case  is
    limited to  the  witnesses  who  had  been  held  not  to  be  entirely
    satisfactory in the Tribunal case of SM  and  Qadir  [2016]  UKUT  229.
    However the Court of Appeal has accepted that the evidential burden has
    been discharged in furnishing proof of deception and  the  evidence  is
    that there is only a 2% error rate in identifying cheating.  Of  course
    this does not mean necessarily that an individual, and this  respondent
    in particular, was not one of the 2%  but  the  judge  dealt  with  the
    matter by referring to the situation in SM and Qadir  and  then  saying
    that the appellant's evidence was in his view acceptable.  He was  able
    to remember how many people  were  in  the  room  with  him,  he  could
    remember which tests he  did  on  which  days  and  how  the  room  was
    arranged.  Since it was all of four years ago  it  was  not  surprising
    that he was not able to remember the detail other than that.   He  gave
    his evidence in English,  he  had  a  Masters  degree  from  a  British
    university which tended to indicate proficiency.  Whether or not he was
    guilty, the reality is surely that it would have been strange if he had
    not known the manner in which the tests were undertaken and was able to
    give the evidence that was accepted by Judge Ross.

3.   However, if that were the only point it might  be  that  this  decision
    could not overturned; unfortunately it is  not  because  the  claim  on
    which reliance was placed was an Article  8  claim  and  that  did  not
    depend upon the deception finding.  True, the reason why his leave  was
    curtailed was because of the deception and that  necessitated  reliance
    on Article 8.  On the other hand, he had limited leave and  that  would
    have expired last year so he  would  in  any  event  have  to  make  an
    application for leave to remain.  The question that arises  is  whether
    that should prevail, that is to say his Article 8 rights should prevail
    whether or not he was guilty of deception on the assumption that he was
    not.  The difficulty is that  all  Judge  Ross  did  was  to  state  in
    paragraph 19 that he had first to consider whether the removal amounted
    to an interference with the exercise of his right to  respect  for  his
    private or family life.  He decided that  it  did  not  interfere  with
    family life because the whole family would  be  returned  together  and
    there was no reason on the face of it why they should not  go  back  to
    Nepal.  The second step he said was to consider whether it  would  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    Article 8 and since he considered  that  it  did  involve  sending  the
    appellants back to Nepal it  did  potentially  engage  the  Convention.
    That may well be correct, but that does not go  nearly  far  enough  to
    justify the decision  that  Article  8  entitled  him  to  remain.   He
    clearly, as is accepted, did not qualify under the Rules and so had  to
    show that he could remain under Article 8 outside  the  Rules,  and  it
    must be recalled that the judge does not refer  to  this  anywhere  and
    that since his and his family's presence here  was  precarious  Section
    117B(5) of the 2002 Act applied and weakened his  private  life  claim.
    Indeed, all that the judge did was to assert, paragraph  24,  that  his
    appeal should be allowed under Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   Nowhere
    did he go into any of the relevant matters which should have been taken
    into account in considering whether in the circumstances since  he  did
    not qualify under the Rules it was  appropriate  to  allow  the  appeal
    outside the Rules.  The grounds of appeal do  not  themselves  directly
    refer to Article 8, they concentrate on the deception  point  and  they
    start badly by referring to a non-existent paragraph in  the  decision.
    It looks as if  whoever  was  responsible  was  looking  at  the  wrong
    judgment when drafting the grounds.  However, be that  as  it  may  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge who granted permission picked  up  the  point
    that I have raised in relation to Article 8 and it is clearly  what  is
    sometimes described as a Robinson point, that is an obvious point which
    even if not directly spotted means that an error of law existed.

4.   In those circumstances I must allow this  appeal  and  obviously  since
    the outcome will depend upon a  re-assessment  of  evidential  material
    remit it for a rehearing preferably at Taylor House,  or  alternatively
    Hatton Cross.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 7 June 2017

Mr Justice Collins

