
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00334/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 September 2019                 |On 11 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 OKE ONYENSO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. On 27 August 2019 the Upper Tribunal found a judge of the  First-Tier
       Tribunal held erred in law in a manner material to  the  decision  to
       allow the appeal.
    2. Although the above appellant's skeleton argument filed in support  of
       the resumed hearing asserts an error of  law  should  not  have  been
       found the case has proceeded beyond that  point  as  such  error  was
       found and the earlier decision set aside.
    3. The appellant, during the course of the Resumed hearing, accepted the
       documentation  provided  by  the  respondent  which  the   First-Tier
       Tribunal had not received was more extensive than that  the  original
       Judge had, reinforcing the fairness point in the error of law hearing
       and the extent of the lack of analysis of the applications which  are
       said by the respondent to be frivolous or vexatious.   Such  lack  of
       analysis in the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  also  reinforces
       the finding of error of law.


Background


    4. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  25  May  1974.  On  15
       August 2017 he applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the
       husband of Mrs Onyenso a British citizen. The Entry Clearance Officer
       was satisfied the appellant met the eligibility requirements of E-ECP
       of Appendix FM but  refused  the  application  pursuant  to  S-EC  of
       Appendix FM as it was found  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration
       Rules applied on the basis it was said the appellant had contrived in
       a significant way to frustrate the intention of  the  Rules  for  the
       reason stated in the refusal.
    5. The leading case when assessing a paragraph  320(11)  appeal  remains
       that of PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed)  India  [2010]
       UKUT 440 (IAC) in which a panel composed of Mr Justice Kenneth Parker
       and Senior Immigration Judge Spencer (the Panel) found,  as  recorded
       in the headnote:

           "In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11) of HC 395,  as
           amended, to refuse an application for entry clearance in a  case
           where the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry  clearance
           in paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied  by  paragraph  320(7C),  the
           decision-maker  must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing   the
           aggravating circumstances that justify  refusal  and  must  have
           regard to the public interest in encouraging those unlawfully in
           the United Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise their  status
           by an application for entry clearance.

    6. At [14] the Panel write: "if the aggravating  circumstances  are  not
       truly aggravating there is in this context a serious risk that  those
       in the position of Mr S will simply continue to remain in the  United
       Kingdom unlawfully and will not seek to regularise their status as he
       has sought to do."
    7. The respondent's guidance recognised that there must be  some  manner
       of a breach plus aggravating circumstances.
    8. The chronology attached to the letter now available to this  Tribunal
       from the respondent reads:

       10/11/2002 -    Appellant entered the UK via Rome. Claimed asylum  at
                    Port. Outcome as void as  no  response  to  request  for
                    information.


       13/12/2002 -    Convicted at Uxbridge Magistrates Court on 13/12/2002
                    for use of a false instrument contrary to Section 3  and
                    6 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981; seeking to
                    enter the UK by deception contrary to Section  24  A  of
                    the Immigration  Act  1971.  4  months  imprisonment.  4
                    months concurrent.


       2002 -      Failed to attend asylum interview. Letter to solicitors.


       12/10/2007 -    Registered as an absconder.


       30/7/2008 -     Appellant makes EEA application as family  member  of
                    his cousin.


       26/03/2010 -    Application refused.


       30/6/2010 -     EEA application.


       11/11/2010 -    Application refused


       2/7/2014  -   353B  consideration  not  actioned  as   asylum   claim
                    outstanding. Asylum case previously outcome as void  now
                    removed and considered.


       29/8/2014 -     Asylum refused - noncertified


       3/2/2016 -  Appellant encountered  and  arrested  during  an  illegal
                    working operation by the enforcement  team  at  business
                    address Nnena Textiles  Ltd.  Detention  authorised  and
                    served with RED0001., and RED3, IS 86/91/91R/98/98  A/96
                    (EFN)


       3/2/2016    Appellant refused to comply with ETD process


       8/2/16 -    Appellant requested for voluntary departure


       9/2/16 -    Signed disclaimer received, and ATR  Voluntary  departure
                    sought and granted. Appellant instructed to purchase own
                    ticket.


       17/2/2016 -     Appellant removed on ATR (voluntary departure).


       12/7/2017 -     Registered as absconder.

    9. Whilst it seems 'odd' that the appellant should be recorded as  being
       an absconder on a date after he left the United Kingdom the  fact  of
       the matter is he did leave voluntarily, which is not disputed.
   10. The original Judge noted that the ECO's refusal only referred to  one
       claimed 'aggravating circumstance' namely  the  making  of  frivolous
       applications. The reviewing Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) referred to
       'numerous aggravating factors' but the decision  under  challenge  is
       that of the ECO as a review by an ECM is not a fresh decision.
   11. In any event, the First-tier Judge  considered  separately  the  fact
       that in 2002 the appellant was convicted of an offence in the UK  and
       sentenced to 4 months imprisonment, that the  appellant  was  in  the
       United Kingdom without leave between 2002 and 2016, that in  2016  he
       was found to  be  working  illegally,  and  that  the  appellant  had
       previously used an assumed identity that  was  not  declared  on  his
       application. These issues were considered separately  between  [38  -
       40] and at [42] of the First-tier decision in which the  Judge  finds
       he was not satisfied  that  these  matters  amounted  to  aggravating
       circumstances. As noted  in  the  Error  of  Law  finding  these  are
       preserved findings.
   12. The issue at large in this appeal therefore relates to the one matter
       raised by the ECO namely the making of frivolous applications.


Discussion


   13. The finding of the error of  law  at  [11]  defined  a  frivolous  or
       vexation claim in the following terms:

           "11.    The  making  of  a  frivolous  or  vexatious  claim   is
                recognised as an aggravating circumstance  in  the  relevant
                guidance. A frivolous claim is where the claim has no  merit
                whatsoever, while a vexatious claim is  made  for  the  sole
                purpose of harassing or injuring another party, through, for
                instance,  continually  bringing  claims  against  them,  or
                bringing various claims for different issues  that  are  not
                based on fact or have no merit."

   14. It is not suggested  by  Ms  Jones  that  the  sole  purpose  of  the
       applications made by the appellant has been  to  harass  or  seek  to
       injure the Secretary of State for the Home Department. The purpose of
       the applications appears on the face of it to be an  attempt  by  the
       appellant to seek leave to enable him to remain in the United Kingdom
       and/or to prevent his removal to Nigeria.
   15. The issue is therefore whether any of the applications can be classed
       as frivolous. Mr Mukherjee, when seeking an authority in  support  of
       his case  that  the  applications  made  by  the  appellant  are  not
       frivolous relied upon a decision of the Queens Bench Division of  the
       High Court of R v Special Adjudicator ex parte Alves Paulino and R  v
       Special Adjudicator ex parte George Edoukou [1996] Imm  AR  judgement
       of which was handed down on 13 October 1995.  In  that  Rose  LJ  and
       Wright J were considering whether an asylum application characterised
       by the Secretary of Status as frivolous was so, where  such  a  claim
       however incredible raised an issue under the Refugee Convention.  The
       requirement to do so arose as a result of the wording of the relevant
       provisions at that time to be found in RSC Order 18,  rule  19  which
       provided:

           '(1)   The Court may at any time of the proceedings order to  be
                struck out or amended any pleading or the endorsement of any
                writ in the action, or anything in any pleadings or  in  the
                endorsement, on the ground that -


                 a)     it  discloses  no  reasonable  cause  of  action  or
                    defence, as the case may be; or


                 b)    it is scandalous, frivolous or vexatious.'

   16. The earlier rules were replaced  by  the  Civil  Procedure  Rules  in
       relation to which the power to strike out a statement of case is  now
       to be found in CPR Part 3. There is also  provision  within  CPR  for
       orders to  be  made  against  litigants  who  are  considered  to  be
       vexatious who may be made the subject of orders forbidding them  from
       starting civil cases in courts without permission.
   17. The  sections  of  the  judgement  specifically  relied  upon  by  Mr
       Mukherjee included reference  to  submissions  made  by  one  of  the
       advocates before the High Court, Mr Tam, and the specific section  of
       the judgement in which the Court write:

           "It does not follow that want of credibility on the part of  the
           applicant in itself justifies characterisation of his  claim  is
           frivolous or vexatious. If the appellant's  account  is  totally
           incredible on matters which provide the basis for  engaging  the
           Convention then his claim can properly be so described.  But  if
           his lack of credibility is not so  fundamental  either  because,
           for example, it  only  relates  to  fringe  matters  or  because
           arguably it does not lean on the basis  of  the  claim,  in  our
           judgement it is not possible for  an  applicant's  claim  to  be
           characterised either by the Secretary of State or by the special
           adjudicator as frivolous under 5 (3) (b)."

   18. Similar provisions to those found in Order 18 are set out in  section
       94 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which  enables
       the Secretary of State to certify a claim as being clearly unfounded,
       the effect of which is that an individual is not entitled  to  an  in
       country right of appeal and can only lodge such an appeal  once  they
       have left the United Kingdom.
   19. The chronology shows the appellant did make a claim for asylum  which
       was initially refused on the basis it  was  said  the  appellant  had
       failed to attend his asylum interview. The chronology records that on
       2  July  2014  the  previous  outcome  in  relation  to  that  asylum
       application was void and removed and  the  claim  considered  on  its
       merits. On 28 August 2014 the asylum claim was refused but the  claim
       was not certified pursuant  to  section  94  indicating  it  was  not
       considered by the decision-maker to  be  a  claim  that  was  clearly
       unfounded or frivolous. It is not known whether there was  any  merit
       in the claim or not or whether the claim included  a  combination  of
       both protection and human rights elements. What  is  known  from  the
       information available is that it was not a claim that was  considered
       suitable for  certification  under  the  applicable  provisions  that
       existed at that time; although the appellant did not seek  to  appeal
       the decision and agreed to return to the country in relation to which
       he was claiming a right of international protection.
   20. The second application  was  made  on  30  July  2008  in  which  the
       appellant made an EEA application as a family member of  his  cousin.
       The first issue to note is that an application as a family member  of
       a cousin is bound to fail for, as accepted by Mr Mukherjee, a  cousin
       does not fall within the definition of a family members to  be  found
       in Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations which defines such person  as,
       inter alia, either a spouse or civil partner, a direct descendant  of
       his, his spouse or his civil  partner  who  is  under  21,  dependent
       direct relatives in the ascending line of that person of  his  spouse
       or civil partner, or a person who is to be treated as  family  member
       of that person under subparagraph (3) of the regulation; which is not
       applicable on the facts. The application was not successful  for  the
       reasons set out in the refusal letter of 26 March 2010 which  advised
       the appellant that on 19 October 2009 a letter had been sent  to  his
       representative advising that the decision-maker  needed  evidence  of
       his relationship with the EEA national but that such evidence had not
       been provided. The application was therefore refused on the basis the
       appellant had not  provided  evidence  in  the  form  of  a  marriage
       certificate or birth certificates  needed  as  evidence  that  he  is
       related as claimed to an EEA national. The appellant does not dispute
       the fact that such information was not provided by him. Without  such
       material the application was bound to fail and, if made in the  wrong
       category, was also arguably frivolous.
   21. The appellant's case is that he was unable to provide  the  documents
       requested in time and so made the second application for a  Residence
       Card as confirmation of right to reside as the family  member  of  an
       EEA national which was refused on 11 November 2011 for the  following
       reasons:

           "You have claimed that your mother and your sponsor's mother are
           sisters. Your birth certificate names Florence Ehimwenma Onyenso
           as your mother. Your sponsor's  birth  certificate  names  Grace
           Ehimwenma as his mother. However in the  absence  of  both  your
           mother's and your sponsors mother's birth certificates, there is
           no evidence to show that your mother and your  sponsor's  mother
           are sisters as claimed.


           Furthermore, no evidence has been submitted  to  show  that  you
           have been dependent upon your sponsor even in another  State  or
           in the United Kingdom. The Secretary of State is of the  opinion
           that genuine dependants of EEA nationals have the opportunity to
           apply for  entry  clearance  prior  to  arrival  in  the  United
           Kingdom. Check show that you have not  applied  for  such  entry
           clearance, therefore this casts doubt upon your claim  that  you
           are genuinely dependent upon Victor Uwadiae Erhabor."

   22. Mr Mukherjee's submissions that the decision was unfair or  that  the
       decision-maker should have done more has no arguable merit. There was
       no right of appeal against this decision,  but  the  appellant  could
       have sought judicial review but did not  do  so.  The  assertion  the
       appellant should not be prejudiced as  there  was  no  place  in  the
       application form to provide details of the dependency has no arguable
       merit.
   23. The appellant was represented  by  solicitors  as  the  copy  of  the
       application form clearly shows. If the solicitors incorrectly applied
       on the form  applicable  for  family  member  rather  than  dependent
       extended family member that is a matter for them. The  decision-maker
       clearly understood the nature of the application  but  did  not  find
       that sufficient  evidence  had  been  provided.  Even  if  the  wrong
       application form was used which  did  not  contain  a  box  in  which
       details of dependency could be provided this did  not  or  would  not
       have stopped  the  appellants  representatives  from  providing  such
       details in a covering letter, if they existed. The fact the appellant
       could not prove he and  the  EEA  national  are  related  and  as  he
       provided no evidence of dependency this was an application that  from
       the outset was bound to fail  as  being  totally  without  merit  and
       therefore, arguably, frivolous.
   24. Both advocates in their submissions referred to the  need  to  assess
       the evidence in the round. The need to do so assessing the weight  to
       be given to immigration control is the foundation for the decision in
       PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT  440
       (IAC). It is clearly of benefit that  those  in  the  United  Kingdom
       should be encouraged to leave voluntarily if at all possible as  this
       appellant did.
   25. Considering matters cumulatively,  the  appellant  is  a  person  who
       entered the United Kingdom using a false identity for  which  he  was
       convicted and  sentenced  to  4  years  imprisonment.  The  appellant
       remained illegally between 2002 to 2016 without  leave  during  which
       time he made frivolous applications with a view to try and extend his
       stay. The appellant worked  illegally.  It  was  said  by  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer that the appellant's use of an assumed identity was
       not declared on his application form. The Judge did not find this  an
       aggravating factor as the appellant said he was sentenced in 2002 for
       the use of a false passport in the UK which he sets out a Section  8,
       reply to 8.1, of the application form, but this is not declaring  his
       use of an assumed identity. The false passport the appellant admitted
       to  could  have  been  a  false  passport  in  the  appellant's   own
       name/identity. This is, on the face  of  it,  a  further  aggravating
       feature.
   26.  The  appellant  left  the  United  Kingdom  in  February  2016.  The
       appellant's relationship with his spouse in  the  United  Kingdom,  a
       British citizen, has been found to be genuine.  The appellant's  case
       is that notwithstanding his actions recorded above  the  decision  to
       refuse to grant entry clearance to  enable  him  to  live  and  enjoy
       family life with his spouse is not proportionate.
   27. The decision in PS does not state that the fact  the  person  returns
       voluntarily to their home country is the determinative factor but  is
       clearly one that warrants weight being attached to it. The  grant  of
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal posed the question whether
       it been established that the time  had  come  when  entry  should  be
       permitted.
   28. As noted above the requirement is for there to be a  breach  together
       with aggravating factors. The preserved findings  show  that  matters
       other than the making of frivolous applications have not  been  found
       to warrant the appeal being dismissed. Those findings are  preserved.
       Even weighing the important aspect of  immigration  control  and  the
       positive benefit to the  United  Kingdom  in  persuading  those  here
       illegally to leave voluntarily at the earliest opportunity,  this  is
       still a case in which  there  is  clearly  an  existing  family  life
       recognised by article 8 ECHR.  There is a  positive  obligation  upon
       the United Kingdom to promote the development  of  family  life.  The
       appellant has been out of United Kingdom for a number of years  since
       his voluntary departure. This  is  a  finely  balanced  decision  but
       weighing up the competing interests it is found that  the  making  of
       the frivolous applications, considering  the  extent  to  which  they
       amount  to  aggravating  factors,  does  not  outweigh  the  positive
       benefits identified in PS of encouraging those in the United  Kingdom
       illegally to leave voluntarily. It is not established on the evidence
       that there are any other  aggravating  factors  that  would  tip  the
       balance in favour of the Secretary of State.
   29. I find the respondent has not made out her case that the decision  to
       refuse the application is proportionate to any  further  interference
       with the appellants right to family life with his wife.

Decision

   30. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed on article 8
       ECHR grounds.


  Anonymity.


   31. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 4 October 2019
