

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/00309/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24 April 2018                         |  On 09 May 2018                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                              Jackey Hang Limbu
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. H. Kannangara, Counsel, instructed by Jusprowess
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kaler, promulgated on  18  August  2017,  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    grant entry clearance as the dependent child of the Sponsor.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is an arguable error of law that  as  the  Judge  did  not  receive
    various witness statements sent to the Tribunal on 11  August  2017  to
    prove that the Sponsor has sole responsibility for the Appellant,  such
    evidence may have made a material difference to the outcome or  to  the
    fairness of the proceedings."


 3. The Sponsor attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I stated that I found that the decision
    involved the making of a material error of  law  due  to  a  procedural
    irregularity.  I remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


Error of Law


 4. The Rule 24 response from the Respondent states:


    "If the Tribunal is satisfied that the documents were received but  for
    some reason not passed to the judge the Secretary of State  would  have
    no  objection  to  the  case  being  heard  afresh  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal."


 5. The appeal was decided "on the papers".  The  file  was  given  to  the
    Judge on 11 August 2017 at Yarl's  Wood.   The  decision  is  dated  15
    August 2017.  It was promulgated on 18 August 2017.


 6. On the Tribunal file is a bundle  containing  four  witness  statements
    with a covering letter dated  11  August  2017.   At  the  hearing  Mr.
    Kannangara provided a letter from the Appellant's representatives which
    states that these were posted by first class post to the Tribunal on 11
    August 2017.  It states "We also confirm that delay in posting occurred
    due to the reason that we were waiting  for  the  Appellant's  father's
    statement to include in the bundle".


 7.  The  notice  sent  by  the  Tribunal  to   the   Appellant   and   his
    representatives acknowledging that the Appellant had  elected  for  the
    appeal to be decided on the papers, states that any further evidence or
    submissions  must  be  sent  by  21   July   2017.    The   Appellant's
    representatives did not send any further evidence until 11 August 2017.
     However, it is established in law that the Judge is  still  seized  of
    the matter until the determination is promulgated.   The  determination
    was promulgated on 18 August 2017.  It is not entirely clear  from  the
    bundle of witness statements on the file, but it appears that they were
    received on 14 August 2017.  However, there is no indication that these
    documents were forwarded to the Judge in order that they could be taken
    into account when she made her decision.


 8. Therefore, although it is clear that the blame  partly  lies  with  the
    Appellant's representatives, given the  principle  that  the  Judge  is
    seized of the matter until promulgation, and  given  that  the  witness
    statements were received by the Tribunal  at  the  very  latest  on  14
    August 2017, some four days before the decision was promulgated, I find
    that there has been a  procedural  irregularity  which  has  led  to  a
    material error of law.  Clearly, this this is not due to any conduct of
    the Judge.


 9. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature of the error, I find that it  is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


10. It was submitted by Mr. Kannangara that the  Appellant  now  wanted  an
    oral hearing.  It is for the Appellant's representatives  to  sort  out
    any ancillary matters relating to the request for an oral hearing.


Notice of Decision


11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.


12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.


13. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 2 May 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

