
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00034/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 June 2021                     |On 24 June 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                 NUMAN AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, instructed by Berlad Graham Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.  This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  to  which  both   parties   have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams
      (V). A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party  expressed  any
      concern, with the process.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 11 February 1992. He
      entered the UK as a visitor in 2009, with leave until 2 February 2010.
      He applied for leave to remain on 1 February 2010 but this was refused
      on 5 March 2010. He has remained since then in the UK without leave.

   3. On 2 October 2019 the appellant made a  human  rights  claim.  It  was
      refused by the respondent on  9  December  2019.  The  appellant  then
      appealed to the First-tier Tribunal,  where  his  appeal  came  before
      Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Robertson  ("the  judge").  In  a
      decision promulgated on 6  April  2020,  the  appellant's  appeal  was
      dismissed. The appellant is now appealing against this decision.

The appellant's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal

   4. Given the grounds that are being argued before me, it is important  to
      set out in detail some of the evidence that was before the judge.

   5. The appellant relied on a letter from Mamum Rashid, dated 30 September
      2019. Mr Rashid states that he met  the  appellant  through  a  mutual
      friend. He states:

            "we are very close now and we spend time  with  each  other.  I
           would say he is one of my best friends..."

   6. The appellant also relied  on  a  letter  from  Abu  Hasan,  dated  27
      September 2019. Mr Hasan states:

           "I met [the appellant] through a mutual friend around six  years
           ago. Since then we have been close and we spend time  with  each
           other and our other friends from the area."

   7. The appellant also relied on a letter dated 1 October 2019 from  Rumel
      Miah. Mr Miah states:

           "[The appellant] is known to my  wife  and  children  and  comes
           around often to spend time with us.... I would like him to  stay
           in the UK where he is safe and surrounded by his friends."

   8. The appellant relied on several photographs showing him surrounded  by
      family and friends, including photographs  with  friends  on  a  beach
      dated "summer 2019"

   9. The appellant relied on two  psychiatric  reports  from  a  consultant
      psychiatrist Dr Lawrence. The first report is dated 18 November  2013.
      The second (addendum) report is dated 10 February  2020.  Dr  Lawrence
      seems to have been told, and to have formed the impression,  that  the
      appellant does not interact with anyone outside of the  home  or  even
      leave the home. For example, within the addendum report he stated:

           "[The appellant] lives a very restricted life, just  staying  at
           home"


           "[H]e told me that he cannot mix with the wider community"


           "He has no life outside the home and makes  no  contribution  to
           the home... He has no hobbies; he does not even watch TV"


           "It is of great concern that this young man has  literally  done
           nothing for the last six years or so. He is not involved to  any
           extent  with  the  local  Bangladeshi  community.  He  does  not
           complete chores or errands on  behalf  of  his  brother  or  his
           sister-in-law.  It  is  very  unusual  for  somebody  without  a
           psychotic illness to be so passive and inactive"

  10. The appellant needed an  interpreter  for  the  consultation  with  Dr
      Lawrence. At the outset of the report  Dr  Lawrence  stated  that  the
      interpreter was very experienced and he was sure that difficulties  in
      communication were related to the appellant's mental state rather than
      to language barriers. However, later in the report he stated:

           "[W]hich  illness,  or  combination   of   illnesses,   he   has
           specifically, is impossible to say; he needs to be assessed by a
           Bangladeshi speaking psychiatrist"

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

  11. The appellant's argument before the First-tier Tribunal  was  that  he
      suffers from depression but has been unable to access health  services
      due to his immigration status. He claimed to be reliant on his brother
      and extended family in the UK and to lack any support  in  Bangladesh,
      where his father is deceased and mother elderly. It was argued on  the
      appellant's behalf that his removal would violate article 8 ECHR as he
      would face very significant obstacles integrating into Bangladesh  and
      therefore the conditions of paragraph 276ADE(vi)  of  the  Immigration
      Rules were satisfied. It was not argued that the  appellant's  removal
      would breach article 3 ECHR.

  12. The judge did not accept that the appellant would lack family  support
      in Bangladesh as there was no evidence that his father was deceased or
      that his mother would be unable to assist him.

  13. The judge noted that  the  appellant  has  not  accessed  any  medical
      treatment in the UK and that no evidence was submitted  to  show  that
      suitable medical treatment would not be available in Bangladesh.

  14. The judge stated that he had considered Dr Lawrence's report. He noted
      that Dr Lawrence was unable to give a clear  diagnosis  and  that  his
      ability to  diagnose  the  appellant  was  impacted  by  requiring  an
      interpreter. The judge stated in paragraph 11(x) that:

           "Dr Lawrence noted that the appellant lives a  restricted  life,
           staying at home and  that  he  could  not  mix  with  the  wider
           community. However, photographs submitted include the  appellant
           not only with extended family but also with friends. I also have
           letters submitted in support of  the  appeal  from  friends  who
           state that they are very close to the appellant and  spend  time
           with him."


  15. The judge found that although the appellant would face difficulties
      returning to Bangladesh he would not face serious hardship and would
      be able to adapt. The judge stated in paragraph 12:


           "The appellant has adapted in the past to a new life in the UK
           and could settle back to life in Bangladesh, a country with
           which he is familiar"

Grounds of Appeal

  16. The grounds of appeal argue that it was "completely  contradictory  to
      the evidence" for the judge to find that the appellant had adapted  to
      life in the UK when, according to Dr Lawrence, he  "effectively  lives
      the life of a  recluse  within  the  home".  It  is  stated  that  the
      appellant has never worked, has no means to support himself,  and  the
      evidence does not support that he  would  settle  back  into  life  in
      Bangladesh.

  17. The grounds state that the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
      seriousness of the appellant's mental illness and that  it  was  wrong
      for the judge to find that the use  of  an  interpreter  affected  the
      ability of Dr Lawrence to diagnose the  appellant.

  18.  The  grounds  also  argue  that  the  judge  failed  to   take   into
      consideration the evidence  about  the  inadequacy  of  mental  health
      treatment in Bangladesh.

  19. It is also argued that the judge failed  to  take  into  account,  and
      properly analyse, the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
      brother.

  20. The grounds also argue that the judge erred by not taking into account
      that the appellant applied for leave on 1 February 2010 and by  giving
      weight to the appellant's  inability  to  speak  English,  given  "his
      serious mental health problems and his cloistered life".

Analysis

  21. Before addressing the individual grounds, I  pause  to  highlight  two
      troubling aspects of Dr Lawrence's report, which I raised with Mr Khan
      at the hearing.

  22. Firstly, the appellant's solicitor provided Dr Lawrence with a  letter
      from Mr Rashid saying that he and the appellant are close friends  who
      spend a lot of time with each other, a letter  from  Mr  Hasan  saying
      that he and the appellant are close and spend time with each other and
      their mutual friends from the area, a letter from  Mr  Miah  who  says
      that the appellant visits him often to spend time with him,  his  wife
      and children, and photographs of the appellant at family events and on
      holiday with friends in 2019.  Yet, Dr Lawrence took as  his  starting
      point, and appears to have assumed,  when  assessing  the  appellant's
      mental health, that the appellant hardly ever  leaves  the  house  and
      does not interact with anyone outside of it. It is  nothing  short  of
      remarkable that Dr Lawrence makes no reference to  these  letters  and
      photographs in his report (other than to say he read  them)  and  does
      not address the obvious incongruity between them  and  his  assumption
      that the appellant does not interact with anyone.

  23. I put this to Mr Khan whose response was that most of the  photographs
      are from over five years ago and show  the  appellant  with  family  -
      although he acknowledged that there are photographs of  the  appellant
      on a beach in 2019 with friends.  Mr  Khan  argued  that  there  is  a
      difference between the appellant associating with people with whom  he
      feels comfortable and not being comfortable going out and  undertaking
      activities such as shopping. He submitted that the psychiatric  report
      paints a more accurate  picture  of  the  appellant's  life  than  the
      letters  from  friends.  Mr  Khan  did  his  best  to  reconcile   the
      irreconcilable  but  there  is  nothing  he  said  that  explains  the
      incongruity between the clear evidence  of  the  appellant  having  an
      active social life and Dr Lawrence's assessment where it  is  said  he
      lives effectively as a recluse. Nor was Mr Khan able to shed any light
      on why Dr Lawrence did not address  in  his  report  the  letters  and
      photographs which, on their face, paint a  picture  of  the  appellant
      that is entirely at odds with what he states in his report.

  24. Secondly, Dr Lawrence appears to have sought,  and  relied  upon,  the
      opinion of the interpreter as an aid to forming his own view about the
      appellant. On pages 10 and 11  of  the  addendum  report  Dr  Lawrence
      stated the following:

           "I then spoke to the interpreter who told me "he seems lost""
           (page 10)

           "I asked the interpreter what level of work this man could do  -
           would he be responsible to stack  shelves  in  Sainsbury's.  The
           answer was negative but perhaps he could be  a  kitchen  porter,
           just washing up. That was the opinion of the interpreter." (page
           11).


  25. Mr Khan acknowledged that it was not appropriate for  Dr  Lawrence  to
      ask the interpreter his opinion about  the  appellant  but  maintained
      that the opinion of the interpreter could be ignored without the  rest
      of the report being undermined.

  26. In my view, the  confidence  that  can  reasonably  be  placed  on  Dr
      Lawrence's report is reduced because Dr Lawrence has - or at least has
      given the impression that he has - relied on the interpreter's opinion
      about the appellant without explaining why he felt it was  appropriate
      to take this unusual step and without providing any information  about
      the interpreter's background and expertise that might explain  why  he
      was qualified to provide an opinion about the appellant.

  27. The only evidence to support the appellant's  claim  that  he  suffers
      from a serious mental health disorder are the reports of Dr  Lawrence.
      No medical records have been submitted. The appellant and his  brother
      say that this is because the appellant is unable to  register  with  a
      GP. Whether or not that is the case, given the shortcomings identified
      in respect of Dr Lawrence's report, there is, at  most,  only  a  very
      weak basis for finding that the appellant has a mental health  problem
      of any kind.

  28. I now turn to consider the grounds of appeal.

  29. The grounds submit that it was contradictory to the evidence  for  the
      judge to find that the appellant had adapted to life in the UK when he
      lives the life of a recluse. This ground plainly has no merit  because
      there was a substantial body of undisputed evidence before  the  judge
      showing that the appellant has an active social life in the  UK.  This
      evidence, as  discussed  above,  includes  three  letters  from  close
      friends of the appellant, who he sees regularly,  and  photographs  of
      the appellant at social events and on holiday.

  30. The grounds submits that the judge failed  to  properly  consider  the
      seriousness of the appellant's mental illness and that  it  was  wrong
      for the judge to find that the use of an interpreter impacted upon the
      ability of Dr Lawrence to diagnose  the  appellant.  This  is  plainly
      lacking in merit because Dr Lawrence explicitly stated in the addendum
      report that  the  appellant  needed  to  see  a  Bangladeshi  speaking
      psychiatrist in order to be diagnosed. As  to  the  weight  the  judge
      attached to Dr Lawrence's assessment, for the reasons given above,  it
      was open to the judge to attach only limited weight to it. Indeed,  it
      is difficult to see how any judge could legitimately  have  given  the
      report more than little weight.

  31. The grounds submit that the judge failed to  take  into  consideration
      the evidence about  the  inadequacy  of  mental  health  treatment  in
      Bangladesh.  This  ground  has  no  merit  because,  for  the  reasons
      explained above, there was no reliable evidence before the judge  that
      the appellant suffers from a  serious  mental  health  condition  that
      requires treatment. In any event, as pointed  out  by  Mr  Kotas,  the
      judge considered the position the appellant would face  in  Bangladesh
      in paragraphs 11 (i)-(iv) and gave adequate reasons  for  finding  the
      appellant would not be without support.

  32. The grounds submit that the judge failed to  take  into  account,  and
      properly analyse, the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
      brother. I disagree. There was very little evidence before  the  judge
      about the relationship.  The  witness  statement  of  the  appellant's
      brother is extremely short (just over one page)  and  contains  hardly
      any detail. The judge, at paragraph 11(x), stated that the appellant's
      brother was "rather vague and somewhat inconsistent".  The  fact  that
      adult siblings live together  does  not,  without  more,  establish  a
      family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR. On the basis of  the
      evidence  before  him,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
      relationship did not engage article 8 ECHR.  In  any  event,  even  if
      (which I do not accept) the judge fell into error, the error  was  not
      material because the judge was  entitled  to  find,  for  the  reasons
      given, that the appellant's removal from the UK would be proportionate
      under article 8 ECHR.

  33. The grounds submit that the judge erred by  not  taking  into  account
      that the appellant applied for leave on 1  February  2010.  The  judge
      stated at paragraph 14 that the  appellant  became  an  overstayer  in
      2009. This is incorrect as he  became  an  overstayer  in  2010.  This
      mistake is immaterial because it has no impact on  the  assessment  of
      whether the appellant's removal from the UK would be disproportionate.

  34. The grounds submit that the judge should not have given weight to  the
      appellant's inability to  speak  English  due  to  his  mental  health
      condition. This  argument  has  no  merit  because,  for  the  reasons
      explained above, there was not, before the judge, reliable evidence to
      support a finding that the  appellant  has  a  serious  mental  health
      condition.

  35. Mr Khan argued that consideration should be given to article  3  ECHR,
      even though it was not raised in the First-tier Tribunal,  because  of
      the change in the applicable test following AM (Zimbabwe) v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17. The  contention  that
      the appellant's removal  from  the  UK  would  violate  article  3  is
      entirely lacking in merit given the absence of  reliable  evidence  to
      show that he suffers from a serious health condition.

Notice of Decision

  36. The appeal is dismissed.

  37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      a material error of law and stands.


|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 16 June 2021                |




