
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00465/2016
                                                               HU/00474/2016
                                                               HU/00482/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July 2019                      |On 09 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                            KM (First Appellant)
                            AN (Second Appellant)
                            BN (Third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D. Bazini (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Lindsay (Home Office presenting officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Devittie) ("FtT") promulgated on 16 November 2018 in which the  appeals
    were dismissed on human rights grounds.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of  Sri  Lanka  and  are  mother  and  twin
    daughters now aged 12.  The brief facts  were  as  follows.  The  three
    appellants are living  with  the  1st  appellant's  mother,  a  British
    Citizen, who was employed full time as a nurse until more recently  she
    has semi-retired and reduced her hours.   She  provides  emotional  and
    financial support for the  family.   The  third  appellant  has  Down's
    syndrome with global development delay  and  a  bilateral  squint.  The
    evidence dated 2012 showed that she had severe delay  in  manipulative,
    visual, hearing  and  speech  &  language  skills  and  some  delay  in
    locomotor, interactive and self-care skills.   She  is  established  in
    mainstream school and making good progress.  Her sister recently  moved
    into secondary school and has  settled  well.   The  children's  father
    lives in Sri Lanka.  He abandoned and rejected the family.   There  was
    evidence that educational facilities in Sri Lanka  were  available  for
    disabled children.  The  background  evidence  stated  that  there  was
    stigmatisation and mocking behaviour towards  disabled  people  in  Sri
    Lanka.  The third appellant had attended for  a  short  period  at  the
    Chitra school in Sri Lanka where she  had  made  no  progress  and  her
    behaviour regressed as she would copy the  behaviour  of  others.   The
    appellants relied on an independent social worker's report.

FtT decision

3.   The FtT refused an application for an adjournment made on  the  grounds
    that the grandmother was unable to attend for the hearing  as  she  was
    looking after one of the children who was sick.  The  FtT  refused  the
    application having taken the view that the evidence of the  grandmother
    was not disputed and her  witness  statement  could  be  taken  as  her
    evidence.

4.   The FtT found that the appellants could return to Sri Lanka  and  would
    have financial support available in order to provide for the  needs  of
    the third appellant and to make up for any  shortcomings  in  the  care
    available in Sri Lanka.

Grounds of appeal

5.   The grounds of appeal were in essence that the FtT failed to  refer  to
    the adjournment application,  was  unfair  in  refusing  the  same  and
    inadequately dealt with the evidence in assessing the best interests of
    the two children, family life and Article 8, and further failed to have
    any regard to the expert evidence of the social worker.

Permission

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on  all
    grounds.

Discussion and decision

7.   I heard submissions from both representatives,  the  details  of  which
    are set out in the record of proceedings. I  am  satisfied  that  there
    were errors of law disclosed in the decision and reasons.  All  grounds
    are made out.

8.   In terms of the adjournment application, I am satisfied  that  the  FtT
    failed to fully consider the  issue  of  fairness.   The  FtT  made  no
    reference to the reasons for the adjournment decision and it is unclear
    how the FtT reached its decision.  The  appellant's  mother's  evidence
    was clearly material to the issue of family life. It was  argued,  that
    the relationship she had with her daughter and the twins was  over  and
    above  the  normal  family  life  (Kugathas).   Further,  although  her
    evidence was accepted by the FtT, it was not in fact fully  taken  into
    account by the FtT in reaching findings of fact. She had stated in  her
    letter that the third appellant had regressed in terms of her behaviour
    after having attended the Chitra school in Sri Lanka. This was a matter
    that the FtT had not taken into account.

9.   Secondly, in terms of the approach taken to the Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 I find material errors of law.  The FtT  failed  to  consider
    the interests of the second appellant at all and/or the fact  that  she
    had lived in the UK  for  nearly  seven  years  and  had  just  started
    secondary school.  The FtT failed to expressly make any finding  as  to
    the  existence  of  family  life  between  the  grandmother   and   the
    appellants, but found that there was a strong bond  and  emotional  and
    financial support.  The FtT failed to reach  any  findings  as  to  the
    evidence in the expert report and/or to express any view as to  whether
    or not weight was placed on that report.  The FtT appeared to find that
    there were significant obstacles but  then  concluded  that  there  was
    evidence of finance  available  for  the  first  appellant  that  would
    mitigate such obstacles.  I am  satisfied  that  there  was  no  direct
    evidence as to what finances would be available to the first  appellant
    or as to her capacity to provide such finance.  The FtT's finding  that
    such finance could come from  the  appellant's  mother  or  the  former
    husband was based on speculation.

10.  Overall I take the view that the FtT, whilst considering  the  relevant
    issues, failed to take into account the material evidence and failed to
    factor in that evidence in reaching a conclusion on the family life  of
    the  appellants  and  in  terms  of  where  the  best  interests   lay,
    particularly for the third appellant.  Whilst the  FtT  concluded  that
    educational facilities were  available  in  Sri  Lanka  for  the  third
    appellant, there was a significant failure by  the  FtT  to  take  into
    account the individual characteristics of the third appellant  and  the
    negative impact on her of a return to Sri Lanka  as  concluded  by  the
    expert.  The expert evidence ought to have been considered by  the  FtT
    and/or some indication given as to whether it was rejected  and  if  so
    for what reasons.   I  conclude  that  the  Article  8  assessment  was
    materially flawed such as to amount to an error of law.

Decision

11.  The decision revealed errors in law and is set aside.

Remaking

12.  I have decided to allow the appeal on human rights  grounds.   I  heard
    submissions from both representatives and also taken into  account  the
    skeleton argument produced for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

13.  The findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal  were  essentially
    unchallenged.  The error of law hearing was argued on the grounds  that
    the FtT failed to take into account material evidence in  reaching  its
    decision.  The FtT had largely considered all the relevant  issues  but
    reached a decision that was not supported by the evidence  before  him,
    in particular the expert evidence from the independent  social  worker,
    Mr John  Abdullah-Zadeh.   The  FtT's  decision  was  premised  on  the
    existence of finance available to the appellant where there was in fact
    no evidence to support that finding.

14.  The FtT found that the best interests of the  third  appellant  lay  in
    her remaining in the UK with her sister, mother and grandmother.  There
    was also evidence before the FtT that the  second  appellant,  who  was
    aged 12 years, had started secondary school and lived for a significant
    period of time in the UK to remain with her grandmother and mother.  It
    is clear that her interests too lay in remaining in  the  UK  with  her
    mother and grandmother.

15.  There was no  evidence  of  any  meaningful  relationship  between  the
    children and their father.  Indeed, in an undated letter the children's
    father states "I have no intention of continuing the married life  with
    her and would like to terminate this.  I myself don't want to become  a
    mental patient because of  these  events.   I  am  looking  forward  to
    sending divorce papers".  Clearly he indicated that he wishes  to  have
    no further contact with the family. There was no evidence to show  that
    finance would be forthcoming from the father either currently or in the
    future.

16.  The FtT found that the first appellant  could  seek  financial  support
    from her mother. However the grandmother did not give evidence  at  the
    hearing and her witness statement confirmed that whilst  she  currently
    provided financial support for her daughter and a home for the  family,
    there was no consideration of future financial support.  I am satisfied
    that the FtT's finding as to the availability of finance on  return  to
    Sri Lanka  was  entirely  speculative.   The  FtT  concluded  that  the
    financial support would go towards mitigating significant obstacles  to
    the appellants' return to Sri  Lanka.   Specifically,  that  the  third
    appellant would be able to attend a school (the Chitra School) and  any
    shortcomings in her care could be paid for from the finance  available.
    Again, this finding and conclusion is based entirely on speculation and
    is not sustainable.

17.  I now consider the evidence material to the decision  that  was  before
    the FtT.  The  report by Mr Abdullah-Zadeh  is  an  expert  report  and
    carries weight in my view.  There was no challenge to  the  content  or
    the expertise. Mr Abdullah-Zadeh is an independent  social  worker  and
    his conclusions are set out in the report as follows:-

         "I have concluded that both children concerned  are  vulnerable  in
         different ways and to varying degrees.  They  would  be  even  more
         vulnerable and certainly at risk of avoidable  harm  if  forced  to
         live in Sri Lanka.  There are no  educational  resources  that  are
         geared for  children  with  these  kinds  of  problems  facing  the
         disabled child.  The child would  in  my  view  have  a  very  poor
         quality of life that could even result in  lower  life  expectancy.
         If the mother were to pass away, it would be almost impossible  for
         this child to survive there.


         Sri Lanka has not recovered from years of civil  war,  corrupt  and
         poor governance, population and poverty  issues  (especially  child
         poverty).   There  is  an  absence  of  child  welfare  and   child
         protection infrastructures and laws.  This culture of  corrupt  and
         disinterested judiciary and the concerning record  of  child  abuse
         has been noted and recorded by UNICEF for decades.  ... Some  well-
         known and well-advertised special needs schools too were  found  to
         exercise physical  punishment  supposedly  to  encourage  learning.
         There is a culture of parents  with  similar  children  overwhelmed
         with the task, forced to disown  and  abandon  their  difficult-to-
         manage children because of lack of any support infrastructure.


         I am  therefore  of  the  firm  opinion  that  the  disabled  child
         concerned here would be at huge risk, should she be forced to  live
         in Sri Lanka permanently.   Over  the  past  years  both  children,
         albeit in different ways, have become accustomed to good care here.
          Repatriation to Sri Lanka would not just  be  an  upheaval  but  a
         traumatic  experience  that  is  very   likely   to   significantly
         compromise their physical and mental wellbeing.  Therefore I  would
         strongly recommend that these children should be allowed to  remain
         and continue their current lifestyles they are  accustomed  to  and
         settled in."


18.   I place weight on the  expert  report  in  terms  of  where  the  best
    interests and needs of the second and  third  appellants  lie  and  the
    impact on them of any return to Sri Lanka.

19.  In addition the oral evidence from the first appellant was found to  be
    reliable and again overwhelmingly in support of the best  interests  of
    the third appellant remaining in the UK.  The significant  features  of
    that evidence was that the third appellant  was  in  mainstream  school
    where she had been accepted, was able to socialise with her  peers  and
    she was provided with  additional  care  and  support.   She  has  made
    significant progress and has been used to one-to-one support.  The  FtT
    [11] found that it would be difficult for the third appellant to attend
    mainstream school in Sri Lanka and that she had  no  ability  to  speak
    Sinhalese and had language difficulties.

20.  The medical evidence from the GP supported the third  appellant's  need
    for stability and to remain at mainstream school in  the  UK,  and  the
    need for family support.

21.  As to the circumstances in Sri Lanka  the  FtT  found  that  the  third
    appellant would be able to return to the Chitra school  where  she  had
    previously attended for a short time only.  There was some reference to
    background evidence that the schooling in Sri Lanka was  free  and  was
    able to accommodate children of all disabilities.  I do not  doubt  the
    accuracy of that evidence and it was not specifically  challenged,  but
    it  must  be  considered  having  regard  to  the   third   appellant's
    circumstances and needs.  From that perspective it is abundantly  clear
    on the evidence that the third appellant would  have  very  significant
    obstacles to integrating in Sri Lanka.   She  is  only  able  to  speak
    English and would therefore not be able  to  communicate  in  Sinhalese
    with anyone, let alone at the school.  The evidence did not  show  that
    the school would provide or maintain the specific needs  of  the  third
    appellant as they cater for generic disabilities.  There  was  evidence
    from the expert, the grandmother and the first appellant, that  if  she
    were to attend the Chitra school it would be detrimental  to  her  both
    socially, educationally and emotionally.   Having  got  established  in
    mainstream school and making progress as  evidenced  in  the  EHC  plan
    (supplementary bundle),  I am satisfied  that  a  move  to  the  Chitra
    School  or  any  other  establishment   for   children   with   general
    disabilities would be contrary to her interests and be  detrimental  to
    her and that would be the only option open to her in  Sri  Lanka.   The
    EHC annual review dated May 2017  identified  that  change  was  highly
    detrimental to the third appellant who needed continued support in  the
    form of 1:1 assistance in order to identify  her  surroundings.   There
    was no evidence of any financial support available to the appellants so
    as to mitigate the difficulties so as not to be "very significant."

22.  In addition there was  background  evidence  to  show  that  there  was
    significant stigma against children with disabilities in Sri Lanka  and
    the expert cited independent evidence of that.  This is consistent with
    the evidence from the grandmother and the first  appellant  as  to  the
    ridicule, mockery and derogatory comments that the third appellant  was
    subject to while in Sri Lanka.

23.  In the event of a return to Sri Lanka the first  appellant  would  have
    no family support.  If she were to obtain employment she would  not  be
    available to care for the second and third appellants outside of school
    hours.  It was clearly in the best interests for the second  and  third
    appellants  to  have  support  from   their   grandmother;   practical,
    emotional and financial, and there was no dispute as to the strong bond
    between the family members  which  arguably  reached  the  criteria  of
    family life under Kugathas, although no specific finding  was  made  by
    the FtT.

24.   I  conclude  therefore  there  are  very  significant   obstacles   to
    integration  in  Sri  Lanka.     The  appeal  is  allowed   under   the
    Immigration Rules with reference to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).  In  the
    alternative I allow it under Article 8 outside  of  the  Rules  as  the
    third appellant's circumstances amount to compelling circumstances that
    justify consideration  outside  of  the  Rules.   The  appellants  have
    established family life in the UK and the second and  third  appellants
    have established private lives in the UK.  The evidence also shows that
    the grandmother has  strong  and  close  relations  with  each  of  the
    appellants and that she has a significant role in the day to day  lives
    of the appellants. She herself cannot return to Sri Lanka  for  medical
    reasons. There would be an  interference  in  terms  of  disruption  of
    relationships between the parties and a significant disruption  to  the
    private life of the third  appellant  who  would  not  thrive  and  any
    progress made would cease  and  she  would  deteriorate  educationally,
    socially and emotionally.  The decision would not be in accordance with
    the law as paragraph 276ADE is met.   In  terms  of  proportionality  I
    consider Section 117B  Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act  2002  (as
    amended).  The first appellant  speaks  English.   They  are  supported
    without recourse to public funds,  although  I  accept  that  there  is
    access to state education.  Their immigration  status  is  unlawful  as
    they are over stayers and their private  lives  were  established  when
    their circumstances were precarious.  However, in this case  there  are
    no other compelling factors aside from immigration control  that  weigh
    against  the  appellants.   This  is  a   case   where   the   evidence
    overwhelmingly establishes that the interests  of  the  appellants,  in
    particular  the  third  appellant,  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    immigration control.  Accordingly I  conclude  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate to return the appellants to Sri Lanka.  I have also taken
    into account that the children are two months  off  from  reaching  the
    seven year residence requirement such that they would meet the criteria
    to be qualifying children.

Decision

25.  The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.


Signed   Date 01.08.2019

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 01.08.2019

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

