

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/00473/2015

                                                   HU/00476/2015

                                                   HU/00477/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 October 2018                         |On 1 November 2018               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                       samina khalid (First Appellant)
                   mian khalid mahmood (Second Appellant)
                   muhammad waqar khalid (Third Appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Thornhill of Thornhills Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Siddiqi dated 22 September 2015,  dismissing  the  Appellants'
    appeals against the Respondent's decision of 23 May 2015 refusing  them
    leave to remain and refusing their human rights claims.  The Appellants
    are related as  wife,  husband,  and  son  respectively.  Within  these
    proceedings, there  was  previously  also  a  fourth  appellant,  Arooj
    Khalid, appeal reference HU/00478/2015, who for reasons set  out  below
    is no longer a party to these appeals. However, I shall  refer  to  her
    for convenience as 'the Fourth Appellant'. She is the daughter  of  the
    First and Second Appellants and sister to the Third.
2.   The Appellants arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  30  October  2006.
    There was an issue before the judge as to whether or  not  the  husband
    might have  arrived  slightly  earlier  than  that,  but  that  is  not
    material.   They  arrived  as  visitors  to  the  United  Kingdom   and
    overstayed their leave to remain.

3.   An application for leave  to  remain  was  made  on  31  January  2014,
    resulting in an initial set of decisions made in  March  2014  refusing
    the applications and granting the Appellants no right of appeal.  There
    was a judicial review brought by the Appellants against those decisions
    resulting in the Respondent  accepting  that  the  decision  should  be
    withdrawn and remade granting them a right of appeal. This resulted  in
    the decisions dated 23 May 2015.

4.   The time  spent  by  the  family  members  in  the  UK  is  a  relevant
    consideration and so I set out certain details here.  At  the  time  of
    arrival the Third Appellant was 12 and the Fourth Appellant was 10.  By
    the time of the application for leave to remain on 31 January 2014  the
    Third Appellant was 19 years old and the Fourth Appellant 17.   At  the
    date of decision on 20 May 2015 the Third  Appellant  was  20  and  the
    Fourth Appellant 18.

5.   In the Respondent's decision of 23 May 2015 the  Respondent  considered
    the potential entitlement of the Appellants to leave  to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules finding that the First and Second Appellants were
    not entitled to leave to remain either as spouses or parents  of  minor
    children.   The  Third  Appellant  would  not  have  very   significant
    obstacles in integrating into  Pakistan  upon  return  and  the  Fourth
    Appellant, although the Respondent accepted that she had  been  present
    in the United Kingdom for seven years at the date of application, found
    that it would not be unreasonable for her to leave the United  Kingdom,
    considering her position under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

6.   On appeal to the judge, the judge held that in relation to  the  Fourth
    Appellant in particular it would be reasonable to expect her  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  I do not need for the purposes of this decision to
    set out the judge's reasoning in very  much  further  detail,  but  the
    appeals were dismissed.

7.   An application for permission to appeal was  made  on  5  October  2015
    arguing that the judge had erred in  law  in  failing  to  have  proper
    regard to  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  approaching  the
    question of proportionality under Article 8 in a legally flawed manner,
    and failing to have regard to Section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  Permission to appeal was  initially  refused
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson in a  decision  dated  15
    February 2016 stating that the judge's decision had been  detailed  and
    disclosed no arguable errors.

8.   A renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  made  by  the
    Appellants in an application dated 9 March 2016 relying on  principally
    the same grounds.  That resulted in a decision  of  18  March  2016  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Craig refusing permission to appeal.

9.   What then happened I have had to deduce to an extent.   It  seems  that
    there  was  an  application  for  a  'Cart'  judicial  review  to   the
    Administrative Court against the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
    refusing permission to appeal, which  resulted  in  a  decision  by  Mr
    Justice Silber dated 25 May  2016  refusing  permission  to  apply  for
    judicial review on Cart grounds.

10.  The Appellants appealed against that decision to the Court  of  Appeal.
    Lord Justice McCombe had granted permission to appeal to the Appellants
    in a decision dated 28 March 2017 in the following terms:-

     "With some hesitation I  grant  permission  to  appeal.   But  for  the
         decision in MA [2016] EWCA Civ 705 I would unhesitatingly have said
         that the decision of the FTT was correct, largely for  the  reasons
         given (even allowing for the error as to the relevant date  ...  ).
         The FTT Judge fully and persuasively applied the factors identified
         in EV [2014] EWCA Civ 87.  Equally therefore I would have found the
         UT's decision was correct and the High Court decision  was  correct
         because  the  case  did  not  raise  any  point  of  importance  or
         principle, nor did it give rise to any compelling reason to  permit
         a second appeal.  However, in view of the MA  case  I  do  consider
         that there is a compelling  reason  to  permit  an  appeal:  namely
         because it may be that MA requires  the  case  of  the  applicant's
         daughter to  be  assessed  somewhat  differently  from  the  manner
         adopted by the FTT."

11.  The proceedings before the Court of Appeal were  ultimately  determined
    by way of a consent order dated 4 September 2017, which  recorded  that
    in fact the Fourth Appellant had in fact been granted leave  to  remain
    by the Respondent on 15 March 2017. The consent order orders  that  the
    Appellants' appeal be allowed, that the  order  of  the  Administrative
    Court dated 25 May 2016 be set aside and the determination of the Upper
    Tribunal refusing permission to appeal  dated  24  March  2016  be  set
    aside.  (That date is probably the date  that  the  decision  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Craig which bears the date 18 March 2016 on its face was
    sent out to the parties.)

12.  The court further ordered that the First, Second and  Third  Appellants
    applications for permission to appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision be remitted to the Upper Tribunal for a  fresh  determination,
    in  the  light  of  the  decision  of  Lord  Justice  McCombe  granting
    permission to appeal and the reasons set out in an  attached  Statement
    of Reasons. It  was  also  recorded  that  the  appeal  of  the  Fourth
    Appellant  be  treated  as  abandoned  under  Section  104(4A)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

13.  The accompanying Statement of Reasons, in addition to  setting  out  in
    full the grant of permission to appeal by Lord Justice McCombe which  I
    have set out above, also records at paragraph 6 that the Appellants now
    rely on one ground of appeal - that the  FTT's  approach  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules and to Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was flawed.  They rely  on
    the judgment in MA (Pakistan) & Ors  v  The  Upper  Tribunal  and  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (MA (Pakistan)), which postdated the decision of Mr
    Justice Silber.  It was recorded that the Appellants no longer  pursued
    the grounds pleaded before  Mr  Justice  Silber  or  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The statement of reasons states:

         "7.  The parties agree that the approach of the  FTT  was  arguably
             not  consistent  with  the  approach  now  laid  down  in   MA
             (Pakistan)".

14.  The next judicial decision to be taken in these  proceedings  therefore
    was a decision by  Vice-President  Mr  Ockelton  dated  9  August  2018
    granting permission to appeal to the three remaining Appellants in  the
    following terms:-

     "Permission is granted in the light  of  the  Order  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal in these cases.  The parties are  reminded  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal's task is that set out in s. 12 of the 2007 Act".

15.  I heard from Mr Thornhill today who was not  acting  at  the  time  the
    Appellants  made  their  application  for  judicial   review   to   the
    Administrative Court and brought their subsequent appeal to  the  Court
    of Appeal.  Those acting at  that  time,  Malik  Law  Associates,  have
    ceased trading and Mr Thornhill has had some difficulty  obtaining  the
    files from that firm.  Regrettably, but understandably,  Mr  Bates  was
    also not in a position to assist with some of the missing documentation
    about the judicial review application  and  subsequent  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.

16.  It is therefore not entirely clear to either of the parties or to  this
    Tribunal exactly what  the  point  of  law  was  which  the  Appellants
    advanced before the Court of Appeal resulting in the decision  of  Lord
    Justice McCombe granting permission  to  appeal  and  which  ultimately
    resulted in the consent order which I have referred to above.

17.  However, I anticipate that the argument  that  had  been  advanced  was
    that the judge in her decision of 22  September  2015  did  not  direct
    herself in law in the way which the Court of Appeal's  judgment  in  MA
    (Pakistan) would now require, that being by reference to paragraph  49,
    that for a qualifying child who has  spent  7  years  in  the  UK,  the
    starting point is that leave to remain should be granted  unless  there
    are powerful reasons to the contrary.

18.  As I say, we have anticipated that  that  was  the  argument  that  was
    being advanced before the Court of Appeal and Mr Thornhill advanced his
    case before me that that  was  the  relevant  error  of  law  in  Judge
    Siddiqi's approach when she decided the appeal in September 2015.   For
    his part, Mr Bates puts  up  no  strong  objection  to  that  argument.
    Although MA (Pakistan) was not an authority at the  relevant  time,  it
    represents a statement of law and insofar as Judge  Siddiqi  failed  to
    identify powerful reasons as to why the Fourth Appellant would not have
    been granted leave to remain, and I find that she did not, she erred in
    law.

19.  The consequence of  those  matters  needs  to  be  considered  by  this
    Tribunal.  The Fourth Appellant is no longer an Appellant  before  this
    Tribunal. However the appeals of the three remaining family members are
    extant.  Mr Thornhill argues  that  however  detailed  Judge  Siddiqi's
    decision may have been, if she was wrong in law in having dismissed the
    appeal of the Fourth Appellant, and if indeed the Fourth Appellant  was
    entitled as a matter of law to be granted leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom, then Judge Siddiqi approached  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise of the proposed removal of the three remaining  Appellants  in
    an erroneous fashion, having left out of  account  the  fact  that  the
    Fourth Appellant was to remain in the United Kingdom.

20.  For his part Mr Bates accepts that that was an  error  of  law  in  the
    light of how this appeal subsequently proceeded to the Court of Appeal.
     He does not argue that Judge Siddiqi would inevitably have reached the
    same decision on the outcome of the  appeals  of  the  First  to  Third
    Appellants, even if she  erred  in  the  determination  of  the  Fourth
    Appellant's appeal.  I therefore find that Judge Siddiqi erred  in  law
    in the manner described above  and  I  set  aside  her  decision.   The
    remaining three Appellants' appeals may be reheard and  decided  before
    this Tribunal or the First-tier Tribunal.

21.  I find that given the extent of the findings of fact which  would  need
    to be made in this appeal, it is appropriate to remit the matter to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

22.  Mr Thornhill also informs me that within a  short  space  of  time  the
    Third Appellant by reason of his age and the period of time that he has
    spent in the United Kingdom is likely to satisfy the  requirements  set
    out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) that he is a person aged between  18  and
    25 years of age and has spent at least half  his  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is a matter for the Third Appellant as to whether he makes
    such an application.  The First-tier Tribunal will  be  seized  of  the
    appeals, will make whatever case management decisions  it  thinks  fit,
    and will determine the appeals based on  whatever  evidence  is  placed
    before it at that time.


    Decision

     I find that the judge's decision involved  the  making  of  a  material
    error of law.

     I set aside the decision.

     I remit the appeals of the First to Third Appellants to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

     The appeal of the Fourth Appellant has already, in  the  order  of  the
    Court of Appeal dated 4 September 3017, been treated as abandoned under
    Section 104(4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002


    No anonymity direction is made.



    Signed                     Date 24.10.18
    [pic]

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


