
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 2nd  August 2016                          |On: 3rd August, 2016         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     GJ
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms K.Jones, Counsel instructed by Arlington Crown
                       Sols
For the Respondent:     Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Angola born in 1967.




    Anonymity Order

 2. The Appellant is subject to a deportation order and as such  would  not
    ordinarily merit protection of his identity.  This  case  does  however
    turn, in large measure, on  the  involvement  of  his  minor  children,
    resident in the United Kingdom. Having had regard to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background

 3. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2000.  He  claimed  asylum.
    This was refused and by 2003 he had exhausted all  his  appeal  rights.
    In 2010 he was convicted of four counts of possessing false  documents,
    one count of acquiring criminal property and  one  count  of  making  a
    false statement contrary to  the  Social  Security  Administration  Act
    1992. He received a concurrent sentence of 2 years in prison.


 4. On the 16th August 2011 the Respondent granted him Discretionary  Leave
    (DL) until the 8th August 2014. The reason for this grant  is  said  to
    have been his "Article 8 rights". Before me Mr  Tufan  agreed  that  it
    would likely have been based on a combination of factors including  the
    fact that the Appellant had at that time three young children in the UK
    and the fact that he is HIV+.

 5. On the 29th  May  2012  the  Appellant  was  convicted,  at  Birmingham
    Magistrates, of driving without a licence, without insurance  and  with
    excess alcohol. He received a suspended sentence of 16 weeks in prison,
    and an unpaid work order.   A  further  offence  occurred  on  the  2nd
    December 2014 when the Appellant was again convicted of driving  whilst
    disqualified.

 6. On the 29th July 2014 the Appellant applied to vary his  DL  so  as  to
    extend it. The Respondent refused this application,  instead  notifying
    the Appellant of his automatic liability to deportation because of  the
    convictions in 2010. The decision to deport was taken on the 10th April
    2015.

 7. The appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  concerned  the  Appellant's
    human rights. He submitted that his removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
    would have an unduly harsh impact on his three sons, whether they  were
    brought with him to Angola or left behind with their mother:  paragraph
    399 of the Immigration Rules applied.    The Respondent contested  only
    the second limb of that test.

 8. The Tribunal dismissed the appeal on Article 8  grounds.  Applying  the
    approach in MAB v Secretary of State for the Home Department (paragraph
    399 'unduly harsh') USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC) the Tribunal found:

         . All things being equal, it  would  be  in  the  children's  best
           interests to live with both parents


         . The children could live in the UK without the  Appellant,  since
           they had lived with their mother  alone  during  his  period  of
           incarceration

         . There was no evidence to support the  mother's  claim  that  her
           health  had  deteriorated  at  that  time,  or   that   it   had
           deteriorated to the  extent  that  social  services  had  to  be
           involved

         . The Appellant has in the past acted  to  the  detriment  of  his
           children (in respect of his offending behaviour)

         . The children would miss their  father  and  the  change  to  the
           domestic arrangements would be disruptive, but they would adapt,
           just as they did whilst he was in prison

    Assessing these factors cumulatively the  Tribunal  did  not  find  the
    Appellant's removal would have an unduly harsh impact on the children.


      The Appeal


 9. Ms Jones, who put her case in an admirably clear and comprehensive way,
    submitted before me that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    flawed for three distinct errors of law.  Although Mr Tufan  made  some
    very good points in response I am quite satisfied  that  this  decision
    must be set aside to be remade. The submissions  and  my  findings  are
    most conveniently set out thematically.




    Ground 1:  Failure to take the children's views into account


10. The Tribunal had before it a detailed report by an  independent  social
    worker, a Ms Claudette Wynter. Ms Wynter had seen this family  on  four
    separate occasions in visits lasting between one and  four  hours.  She
    had observed the children at home, visited their school to  speak  with
    their teacher and see them there, and had interviewed both parents.  Ms
    Jones took me to numerous passages in the report where Ms  Wynter  sets
    out what the boys themselves told her about their fears and feelings in
    respect of their father's deportation.  I need not  set  all  of  these
    passages out, but in brief summary the boys reported that they would be
    "angry",  "terrified"  and  "inconsolable"  should  their   father   be
    deported. The boys told her that they regard him as their primary  care
    giver because their mum is often working.


11. The First-tier Tribunal nowhere takes those views into account.   In ZH
    (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC  4
    Baroness Hale held that "an  important  part"  of  the  best  interests
    assessment would be discovering the child's own views. In  the  context
    of paragraph 399 it is perhaps axiomatic that this guidance  should  be
    applied. These boys were old enough to speak for  themselves,  and  who
    better to assess  the  impact  on  them  of  their  father's  potential
    deportation?   Mr Tufan submits that all children will  say  that  they
    will miss  their  father.  This  perhaps  illustrates  the  point.  The
    evidence that the children gave to Ms Wynter  went  much  further  than
    saying that they would miss him. Such evidence is not always available;
    in this case it was and it should have been considered.


    Ground 2: the Impact of Child A's autism

12. The Appellant has twin boys, born in 2003.  One of the  twins,  whom  I
    shall refer to as A, has autism. This was referred to quite extensively
    in Ms Wynter's report. It is a fact recognised in the determination  in
    the Judge's summary of the evidence. It is not  however  considered  in
    anything like an appropriate level of detail when  considering  whether
    removal would have an unduly harsh impact. The report noted inter  alia
    that A becomes agitated and upset  and  that  his  father  is  able  to
    effectively calm him down and reassure him in a way that his mother  is
    not.   Ms Wynter further recorded the evidence of both parents  that  A
    had been very challenging in his behaviour towards his mother and  that
    this has caused his mother a lot of stress and  anxiety.    She  relies
    heavily on the Appellant to manage A's behaviour and enable her to care
    for the other two children.  Ms  Wynter,  and  indeed  a  Dr  Sukhpreet
    Baidwan (Specialist Trainee  in  Community  Paediatrics,  whose  report
    appears in the  Appellant's  bundle)   emphasise  how  any  changes  to
    routine for A would cause stress and anxiety.

13. This evidence is  dealt  with  in  the  'unduly  harsh'  assessment  at
    paragraph 49:


         "Undoubtedly the children would miss their father and the change to
         domestic arrangements would be disruptive, even more  so  for  [A].
         The children would adapt, as they appear to have  done  during  the
         Appellant's absence in prison"


14.  I am not satisfied that this was an adequate means of  addressing  the
    issue of A's autism. It may be, as Mr Tufan submits, that the  Tribunal
    considered the evidence to be lacking (paragraph 29 suggests this to be
    so) but the Respondent had not challenged  the  diagnosis  and  it  was
    plainly evidence that merited some careful analysis in the  context  of
    the test in paragraph 399.




    Ground 3: the Passage of Time


15. As is evident from the foregoing extract from  the  determination  that
    central to the Tribunal's ratio was the fact that the boys' mother  had
    coped whilst her husband was in prison, and they too had coped  without
    him. Ms Jones submits, and I accept, that this reasoning is flawed  for
    a failure to take into account the material fact that four  years  have
    elapsed since that time. The family  situation  is  much  changed.  The
    Appellant is described by his sons as being their main  carer,  because
    their mother is working long hours. He takes them to  and  from  school
    and is there in the evening when they get home. He helps A with washing
    and dressing. The boys have got used to having him around.  It  further
    overlooks that for the duration of his imprisonment they saw him  every
    week, and they always understood that he would be coming home. That  is
    a quite different proposition from having him removed with little or no
    prospect of seeing him for ten years.


    Conclusion

16. For these reasons I  am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    approach. In short, the analysis at paragraphs 46-50 failed to  address
    material evidence and for this reason it must be set aside.


17. Upon taking instructions Ms Jones requested that the matter be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham. In  light  of  the  extensive
    fact finding required, I agree.



      Decisions


18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    such that must be set aside in  its  entirety.   The  decision  in  the
    appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


19. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    2nd
                                 August 2016
