
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00064/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated            |
|On 1 October 2018                 |On 19 October 2018                        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  mrs I. I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Iris Law Firm
(Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.Folloowing a hearing in North Shields on 19 March 2018  I  set  aside  the
decision of Judge Head-Rapson of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  sent  on  19
December 2016 dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  made
by the respondent on 17 February 2015 to refuse her human rights  claim  and
to refuse to revoke a deportation order  made  against  her.   I  stated  at
paras 14-17 that:

         "14. Nonetheless I see  no  valid  reason  for  not  accepting  the
             judge's adverse credibility findings set out at paragraph 127:




             "127.    Throughout the hearing the Appellant was inconsistent
                  in her evidence:


                  (i)  The Appellant provided the names of  her  parents  in
                      the Screening Interview yet when asked to  name  them
                      in cross examination, she claimed she  did  not  know
                      their names.


                  (ii) She denied that her family or parents assisted her in
                      any way and denied that she had any contact with  her
                      parents since she was four years old,  yet  it  would
                      appear, from the information provided on page  B5  of
                      the Respondent's bundle, that she knew that they were
                      still alive in 2008.


                  (iii)    In the Screening Interview the  Appellant  stated
                      that her brother was 2 years her junior  and  was  14
                      years old. However, the Appellant  was  around  32-33
                      years old at that time, and  that  simply  could  not
                      have been the case.


                  (iv) The Appellant made no mention of her 4 sisters during
                      the Screening Interview and yet in her oral  evidence
                      she was able to name them. She explained  the  reason
                      for that was because she had not grown up  with  them
                      or seen them in years. Mr Whatcott asserted that  the
                      Appellant does not deserve the benefit of  the  doubt
                      as she clearly has close family in Nigeria.


                  (v)  She stated that her aunt who raised her has no spoken
                      to her since she married her ex-husband  in  Nigeria.
                      The Appellant has been estranged from  him  for  many
                      years and I simply do not accept that  the  Appellant
                      or her aunt would not have tried  to  establish  some
                      contact. It simply does not stack up in my view.


                  (vi) She stated that M often stayed overnight with her  at
                      her home but Mabel completely denied this in her oral
                      evidence. She stated that Ml often  stayed  overnight
                      with her at her home but Mabel completely denied this
                      in her oral evidence.


                  (vii)    The Appellant stated that she had left university
                      before the completion of  her  course,  in  order  to
                      study  nursing,  but  that  is  at  odds   with   the
                      suggestion  on  the  Screening  Interview  that   she
                      obtained a diploma in journalism.


                  (vii)    She informed the Tribunal that Mrs C often looked
                      after the children when she felt overwhelmed.  Mrs  C
                      was clear in her evidence that her own  health  issue
                      precluded her  from  offering  this  support  to  the
                      Appellant.


                  (viii)   The Appellant explained that  she  moved  into  a
                      house and yet when Reverend C was  asked,  he  stated
                      that the Appellant lived in an upper  Tyneside  flat.
                      Mrs C and M confirmed that  she  lived  in  an  upper
                      flat, not a house as the Appellant claimed.


                  (ix) Dr Cheetham's comments that both of O's parents  were
                      said  to  be  well,  and  that  they  had  two  other
                      children. I also note that Reverend and  Mrs  C  were
                      under the distinct impression from information  given
                      by the Appellant that J's father was also the  father
                      of O and R, which is not the case. "


         15.  The points raised in  the  grounds  regarding  these  findings
             amount to no more than mere disagreements with these findings.
              These findings were ones that the judge was entitled to  make
             in light of identified discrepancies in her evidence.


         16.  Given that the Upper Tribunal has already  remitted  the  case
             once to the FtT, it would be inappropriate to remit it  again.
             It must be retained in the Upper Tribunal with  the  specified
             findings of fact preserved.


         17.  I consider that the case should next be set  down  for  a  CMR
             (before me if practicable) to  be  held  at  Field  House  not
             before end of April and timed for  one  hour.   I  adopt  this
             course because it is important that the Upper Tribunal has the
             benefit of the respondent's up-to-date views on  this  appeal,
             particularly in light of:


             1)   The fact that the oldest child has now  obtained  British
                  citizenship (since 4 September 2017).


             2)    The  fact  that  it  is  now  three  years   since   the
                  respondent's  refusal  to  revoke  the  deportation  order
                  decision and the time since commission of the  appellant's
                  offence is now over eleven years.


                The period of 1 hour  should  suffice  for  any  submissions
         relating to 1) and 2)."

2. There was a CMR held on 6 August 2018 which had  to  be  adjourned  until
today to afford the parties more time to finalise their  position  in  light
of the respondent stating that deportation of the appellant  was  no  longer
being pursued.

3. At the hearing before me on 1 October 2018 Mr Bramble  informed  me  that
the respondent had reviewed matters and he produced a  letter  addressed  to
the appellant dated 26 September  2018  in  which  it  is  stated  that  the
Secretary of State "will not be taking steps to deport you  at  the  present
time. This is because there is currently a legal barrier that  prevents  you
from being deported. The Secretary of  State  considers  that  your  removal
would be disproportionate under the requirements of  the  European  Economic
Area (EEA) Regulations because your  British  child  would  be  required  to
leave the territory of the EEA."

4. Mr Lee said that he was reluctant to withdraw the appellant's  appeal  in
view of the fact that the respondent's letter of 26 September 2018  did  not
in terms withdraw the decision under appeal, namely a refusal  to  revoke  a
deportation order.

5. In light of the respondent's letter, even though it  does  not  in  terms
state that the decision to revoke the deportation order is withdrawn,  I  am
satisfied that the respondent has made  clear  that  it  is  no  longer  her
intention to deport the appellant  since  to  do  so  would  contravene  her
rights as the parent of a British  citizen  child  who  would  otherwise  be
required to leave the EEA. In such circumstances, there  is  no  longer  any
public interest  in  deportation  to  be  weighed  against  the  appellant's
Article 8 rights and she is entitled to succeed in her human  rights  appeal
on that basis.

6. The appellant should note however that  the  respondent  still  maintains
that her presence is not conducive to the public  good  and  that  her  case
will be reviewed if: she comes to adverse notice, for example by  committing
further offences; the EU law barrier that prevents her from  being  deported
is removed; or there is a change in her family or personal circumstances.

7. To summarise:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material legal error;
    The decision I re-make is to allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed:                                 Date: 8 October  2018

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
