
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00495/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2017                   |On 23 October 2017                   |
|Extempore judgement                  |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MS Sabitri ALE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the Respondent as "the Appellant" as  she  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal and her date of  birth  is  10  May
    1986.  She made an application for entry clearance  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom as an  adult  dependent  relative  of  her  father  (the
    Sponsor), Mr Dabilal Ale, an ex-Ghurkha soldier. He was discharged from
    the British Army in 1984 after 24 years service.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refused the application on 5 May 2015 (the application was made
    on 9 April 2015).  The Sponsor was granted indefinite leave  to  remain
    in 2009 and he was joined in the UK by the Appellant's mother in  2010.



3.   The Appellant appealed and her appeal  was  allowed  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Robison in a decision that was  promulgated  on  19
    January 2017, following a hearing on 10 January 2017.   Permission  was
    granted to the Secretary of State by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Brunnen on 18 August 2017.

4.    Judge Robison heard evidence from the Sponsor.  His evidence was  that
    the Appellant is unemployed, unmarried and wholly dependent  upon  him.
    When he came to the UK she was aged 24 and therefore could not  benefit
    from the policy then in place.  The Sponsor has been to Nepal on  three
    occasions since coming to the UK to visit his daughter and she  remains
    a part of the family unit and will do so until she is married.  This is
    part of Nepalese culture.  She is emotionally, financially and  morally
    dependent  upon  her  parents.   She  lives  in  Kathmandu  in   rented
    accommodation and has done so since 10  October  2011,  but  she  finds
    living on her own difficult. She has  lost  weight  and  is  physically
    weak.

5.   The Respondent's case was that Article 8 is not engaged  because  there
    was no dependency beyond normal emotional ties, there was an absence of
    bank records and evidence to establish  financial  dependence  and  the
    Respondent attached weight to the  Appellant  living  independently  in
    Kathmandu. The Respondent's case was advanced on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant had chosen not to marry and that she had lived apart from the
    family unit in excess of two years.

6.   The Appellant at the hearing before the judge relied  on  the  case  of
    Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT
    00567 (IAC) and her case was advanced  on  the  basis  that  there  was
    family life and she had lived with her parents prior to settlement. Her
    father had faced a difficult choice of either taking up  settlement  in
    the UK or losing it after two years if  he  had  chosen  to  remain  in
    Nepal.  It was accepted that the Appellant's appeal could  not  succeed
    under the Rules or the relevant policy.

7.   The judge made  extensive  findings  and  those  are  set  out  in  his
    decision at paragraphs 32 to 45:-

         "32. In this case, I accepted Mr  Witford's  submission  that  that
             (sic) the question whether the appellant can meet the terms of
             the  rules  is  irrelevant.   I  also  accepted  Mr  Witford's
             submission that this is a  (sic)  'extremely  straightforward'
             case to be decided under Article 8, because in  light  of  the
             Ghising case the 'heavy lifting has been taken out'.

         33.  Following Ghising (sic), I considered then that the  focus  of
             scrutiny in this case was the question  whether  Article  8(1)
             was engaged at all.  The refusal is  an  interference  by  the
             state, and so the question is, following Razgar, whether  that
             interference  will  have  consequences  of  such  gravity   as
             potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         34.  Following the principles regarding the establishment of family
             life set out above, I considered first whether there was 'more
             than the normal emotional ties' between the  parents  and  the
             daughter in this case.  I took account of the fact that  there
             is no presumption of family life, but that the answer  depends
             on the particular factors operating in this case.

         35.  The appellant's case is that she is dependent on  her  parents
             for financial, emotional and moral support.  She is unmarried,
             and intends to remain so.  She has never worked,  and  has  no
             skills or experience which would enable  her  to  get  a  job.
             With regard to financial dependency, the appellant's  evidence
             and that of her father is that she relies entirely on him  for
             financial support as she has no income.  She now  lives  in  a
             rented flat, as I understood it, paid for by her father.   Her
             evidence is that her  father  sends  her  money  transfers  as
             evidenced by the transfer  receipts.   Although  these  relate
             only to 2015 and beyond they do predate the  refusal  and  the
             appellant's father explained that he had not retained receipts
             prior to that.  The appellant also withdraws money through  an
             ATM, as evidenced by receipts which she  had  lodged,  and  by
             statements of account from November 2010.  Although this is in
             joint names, his first wife died in October and  the  patterns
             of withdrawals apparently continued  after  October  2016.   I
             therefore accepted that the appellant was wholly dependent  on
             her father for financial support.

         36.  With regard to emotional and moral support, in  this  case,  I
             considered that  the  forms  and  frequency  of  contact  were
             relevant to the assessment.  The appellant has  lodged  almost
             100 pages of telephone records showing very regular  telephone
             calls from the appellant to the UK.  Since coming to  the  UK,
             the appellant has been visited by one or other of her  parents
             from 9 August 2009 to 28 October 2010, from 12 September to  6
             December 2012 5 to 17 August 2013 (sic), and from 8 July to 12
             September 2014.  I accepted the appellant's evidence that  she
             had continuous and frequent contact with her parents over  the
             years since their separation.

         37.  I considered that it was appropriate to take  account  of  the
             prevailing cultural traditions which vary between the  UK  and
             Nepal (following Huang v SSHD [2007] 2 AC 167 per Bingham L at
             [18]).  While in the UK an  unmarried  daughter  living  apart
             from her parents for over four years between the  ages  of  24
             and 28 may well be considered to be  independent,  I  accepted
             the appellant's  evidence  that  unlike  western  culture,  in
             Nepalese culture a daughter remains part of the  family  until
             she is married.

         38.  Ms Ellis relied on Annex K of the guidance, relating to  adult
             children of Former Ghurkas, which she said  was  developed  in
             response to the decision in Ghising.  She relied in particular
             on paragraph 9.8 of the policy that the appellant  should  not
             have been living apart from the former Ghurka  for  more  than
             two years,  and  paragraph  15  that  the  appellant  must  be
             financially and emotionally dependent  on  the  former  Ghurka
             spouse.  She stressed that any such financial  support  should
             be 'out of necessity' and submitted  that  in  this  case  the
             evidence confirms that the appellant has chosen her lifestyle,
             in the same way that her sister has chosen to be  educated  in
             Japan and therefore this was not 'out of necessity'.

         39.  This of course is a policy  direction,  and  as  far  as  both
             representatives were aware, there is no case  law  considering
             the implementation of the policy or the  extent  to  which  it
             might in fact comply with Article 8 considerations.  I did not
             consider on the facts of this particular case  that  the  fact
             that she had been separated from her parents for more than two
             years meant that Article 8 was not engaged.  Nor did I accept,
             in regard to the reference about necessity,  that  that  meant
             that the appellant was forced  to  rely  on  her  parents  for
             financial support.  Rather that appellant was  unmarried,  was
             not working, stated that she had little prospects of obtaining
             a job, and therefore having no income she  necessarily  relied
             on her parents for financial  support.   I  did  not  consider
             therefore that these factors, taken with the  other  evidence,
             could be relied on to support an argument that Article  8  was
             not engaged in this case.  I  accepted  that  the  appellant's
             continued reliance on her parents' support even though she had
             not lived with them for  some  time  meant  that  family  life
             continued in this case.

         40.  The appellant's  father's  evidence  is  that  he  would  have
             brought his daughter to the UK but he  was  initially  himself
             prevented from settling in the UK and then when he did take up
             the (time limited) offer for doing, he was not  able,  because
             of the respondent's policy at the time, to do so.  I  accepted
             that would have been his intention but for  the  policy  which
             requires to be viewed in light of  Article  8  considerations.
             So I also  accepted  that  but  for  the  historic  wrong  the
             appellant would have settled witnesses her parents in the  UK.
             Ms Ellis submitted that he knew at that time that his daughter
             would not be able to come with him, but I did not accept  that
             meant that she was not otherwise dependent on her  father,  or
             that he did not intend that they should live together.

         41.  I therefore concluded that this is a case where Article  8  is
             engaged.  Following Ghising, where I find that  Article  8  is
             engaged and that the appellant would have settled  in  the  UK
             long ago but for the  historic  wrong,  this  will  ordinarily
             determine  the  outcome  of  the  Article  8   proportionality
             assessment in the appellant's favour, where the matters relied
             on by the  ECO  consist  solely  of  the  public  interest  in
             maintaining firm immigration policy.

         42.   The  proportionality  argument  will  not  automatically   be
             determined in the appellant's favour (there being no  reversal
             of the burden of proof as such).  However in this  case  there
             was no suggestion of behaviour of the  kind  which  the  Upper
             Tribunal indicated would argue in favour of refusal, such as a
             bad immigration history or criminal behaviour.

         43.  Although Ms Ellis confirmed that the focus of her argument was
             that Article 8(1) was not engaged at all, she argued  that  in
             any event refusal was not disproportionate.  However, in  that
             regard, I understood her only to rely on  the  fact  that  the
             appellant  was,  in  her  submission,  by  choice  leading  an
             independent life.  I did  not  consider  that  these  factors,
             discussed above, were in any way analogous  to  the  types  of
             behaviour which the Upper Tribunal had in mind or  which  were
             in any way sufficient to conclude that refusal  in  this  case
             was proportionate.

         44.  I was aware that, in  assessing  the  public  interest,  I  am
             directed by Parliament to take account of the  factors  listed
             in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002,  however  in  light  of  the  guidance  in  Ghising,   I
             considered that they were  not  relevant  in  this  particular
             case.

         45.  In all the circumstances of this  case,  and  considering  the
             evidence in the round, I concluded that Article 8 is  engaged,
             and that there are no additional factors which the  respondent
             can rely upon, beyond the need for firm immigration  controls,
             which make refusal proportionate.  The appeal  therefore  must
             succeed."

8.   Permission was granted to the Secretary of State in respect  of  ground
    3 only.  Ground 3 challenges the judge's proportionality assessment and
    makes specific reference to paragraph 44 of the judge's  decision.   It
    is asserted that the approach of the judge was erroneous in respect  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act. The judge failed to address the  evidence
    concerning the ability of the Appellant to integrate  into  UK  society
    and  lack  of  financially  independence  and  language  skills.    The
    proportionality assessment is incomplete  and  the  historic  injustice
    argument is just one of many aspects that should have been considered.

9.   I heard brief submissions from Mr Melvin.  Mr  Wilford  relied  on  the
    Rule 24 notice and brought to my attention the  case  of  Jitendra  Rai
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320.  Mr Melvin in his submissions  indicated  that  in
    the light of the decision of Rai he would "not  labour  the  point  too
    much."

10.  In the Appellant's case, as a matter of fact, there  was  no  challenge
    to the  finding  that  there  has  been  historic  injustice.   I  have
    considered the decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Ghising  and  others,
    specifically paragraphs 59 and 60;

         "59. That said, we accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where  Article
         8 is held to be engaged and the fact  that  but  for  the  historic
         wrong the Appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago  is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality assessment; and  determine  it  in  an  Appellant's
         favour. The explanation for this is to be found, not in any concept
         of new or additional 'burdens' but, rather, in  the  weight  to  be
         afforded   to   the   historic   wrong/settlement   issue   in    a
         proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,  we  consider,  is  the
         proper interpretation of what the Court of Appeal were saying  when
         they referred to the historic injustice as being such an  important
         factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise. What was
         crucial, the Court  said,  was  the  consequence  of  the  historic
         injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOCs:

             'were prevented from settling in the  U.K.  That  is  why  the
             historic injustice is such an important  factor  to  be  taken
             into account in the balancing exercise and why  the  applicant
             dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the UK has  such
             a strong claim to have  his  article  8(1)  right  vindicated,
             notwithstanding  the  potency  of  the  countervailing  public
             interest in maintaining of a firm immigration policy'.

         In other words, the historic injustice issue will carry significant
         weight, on the Appellant's side of the balance, and  is  likely  to
         outweigh the matters relied  on  by  the  Respondent,  where  these
         consist solely of the public interest just described.

         60.  Once this point is grasped, it can immediately be  appreciated
         that there may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will  not
         succeed, even though their family life engages Article 8(1) and the
         evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their father, but for the injustice that prevented the latter  from
         settling here on  completion  of  his  military  service.   If  the
         Respondent can point to matters over and above the 'public interest
         in maintaining of a firm immigration policy', which argue in favour
         of removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these  must  be  given
         appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus,
         a bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour  may  still  be
         sufficient  to  outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on   the
         Appellant's side.  Being an adult child of a UK settled Gurkha  ex-
         serviceman is, therefore, not a 'trump card', in the sense that not
         every application by such a person will inevitably succeed.    But,
         if  the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public  interest
         described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  of  Gurung,  then
         the weight to be given to  the  historic  injustice  will  normally
         require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

11.  Mr Wilford directed my attention to the case  of  Rai  which  postdates
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  He specifically  referred  me
    to paragraphs 55 and 56 which state as follows:-

         "55.  With  effect  from  28  July  2014,  section  117A   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, requires that where a
         court or tribunal is considering the public interest,  and  whether
         an interference with article 8 rights is justified,  it  must  have
         regard, in cases not involving deportation, to the matters set  out
         in section  117B,  including  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration control is in the public  interest  (section  117B(1)),
         that it is in the public interest that those seeking entry into the
         United Kingdom speak English (section 117B(2)), and that it  is  in
         the  public  interest  that  those  seeking  entry  be  financially
         independent (section 117B(3)).

         56.  Mr Jesurum pointed out that the Upper Tribunal judge  did  not
         consider the matters arising under those  provisions  of  the  2002
         Act.   He  submitted,  however,  that  in  view  of  the  'historic
         injustice' underlying the  Appellant's  case,  such  considerations
         would have made no difference to  the  outcome,  and  certainly  no
         difference adverse to him. Ms Patry submitted  that  if  the  Upper
         Tribunal's decision was otherwise lawfully made, the considerations
         arising under section 117A and B could not have made  a  difference
         in his favour."

12.  In this case the judge found family life between the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor. Article 8(1) is engaged and that decision cannot be interfered
    with because the grant of permission was limited to the proportionality
    assessment. The judge found historic injustice, but  properly  directed
    himself that this was not determinative of the  outcome.  On  a  proper
    reading of the decision, I am not persuaded the  judge  did  not  apply
    section 117B. In my view, his conclusions at [44] are poorly expressed,
    but read together with [43], it is more likely the judge, in the  light
    of the Respondent's limited submissions in respect of  proportionality,
    properly considered the factors in section 117B, but concluded that the
    balance weighed in favour of the Appellant. There were  no  submissions
    made in respect of language, integration and financial independence and
    therefore it is likely that  the  judge  considered  that  it  was  not
    necessary to engage with these issues in any  detail.   In  any  event,
    whether the judge made an error in respect of section 117B of the  2002
    Act is not material in this case in the light of the historic injustice
    and the lawful and sustainable findings made by the judge in respect of
    family life. There is no material error of law.  The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal is maintained.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 20 October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

