
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00351/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 June 2021                               |On 8 July 2021                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                      TN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Counsel, instructed on direct access
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is a remaking of TN's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
    dated 2 December 2017 which refused to grant leave on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.

 2. The appellant is a national of Vietnam born in 1972.  He came to the UK
    in 2003 illegally and has  remained  here  illegally  ever  since.   He
    claimed  asylum  on  19  December  2003.  He  absconded  following  his
    screening interview which was conducted on 5 January 2004.  The  asylum
    claim was refused on non-compliance  grounds  on  15  March  2004.  The
    appellant did not appeal that refusal.

 3. The appellant made further representations on protection grounds  on  4
    April 2011. Those submissions were rejected in a decision dated 26 June
    2014.

 4. The appellant maintains he formed a relationship  with  HN,  a  British
    national, who came to the UK from Vietnam as a child. On 31 March  2015
    the appellant applied for leave to remain as the partner of  HN.   This
    was refused on 30 September 2015.

 5. The appellant's  appeal  against  that  refusal  was  dismissed  on  25
    November 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Black.  Judge  Black  found
    that as of 23 November 2016  the  appellant  had  lived  with  HN  from
    January 2015 at the earliest and did not meet the  requirement  in  the
    Immigration Rules for  cohabitation  for  a  period  of  2  years;  see
    paragraph 8 of her decision. She also found that, in any  event,  there
    would be no interference to any family life with HN  who  was  born  in
    Vietnam and spoke Vietnamese and that the couple could  exercise  their
    family life in Vietnam; see paragraph 11 of Judge Black's decision. She
    also found that there were no close ties between the appellant and  his
    partner's youngest daughter, TT (born on 12 March 2000); see  paragraph
    11 of the decision.

 6. On 2 December 2017 the appellant made a further application  for  leave
    to remain on form FLR(FP). This application was again made on the basis
    of his relationship with HN and  her  children.   The  application  was
    refused on 2 December 2017.  The appellant appealed on Article  8  ECHR
    grounds only.

 7. The appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Aujla  in  a
    decision dated 12 February 2019.  The Upper Tribunal granted permission
    to appeal against that decision on 20 August 2019.

 8. In a decision issued on 1 October 2019,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Farrelly found a material error of law in the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Aujla such that it should be set aside and remade de  novo  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge  Farrelly  found  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not addressed correctly  the  appellant's  claim  that  he
    would face mistreatment on return to Vietnam  because  of  his  history
    there and had also taken an incorrect approach to the  evidence  on  HN
    caring for her mother  and  the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    relationship with HN's children.

 9. The appeal then came before the First-tier Tribunal for a  second  time
    on 24 December 2019. First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision issued on 16 January 2020. Judge McIntosh did  not
    find that there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  TN  and  HN  living
    together in Vietnam or very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant
    reintegrating there; see  paragraph  41.  Even  though  Judge  McIntosh
    accepted that the appellant had lived with HN  since  2015  and  had  a
    family life with HN and with her  adult  daughter,  TT,  those  matters
    could not show that the decision amounted to a disproportionate  breach
    of Article 8 ECHR; see paragraph 46.

10. The appellant appealed against the decision of Judge McIntosh  and  was
    granted permission by the First-tier Tribunal on 28 April 2020.

11. The matter then came before me in the Upper Tribunal  on  17  September
    2020 for an error of law hearing.  In a decision issued  on  2  October
    2020 I found an error of law on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to take into account a medical report relied on by the appellant
    as showing that he had been mistreated in  Vietnam  in  the  past;  see
    paragraph 11 of the error of law decision.

12. It is expedient to set out at this point that although the grounds also
    challenged the approach taken by First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh  to
    the appellant's family life claim with TT, I did not find an  error  in
    that part of the decision;  see  paragraph  12  of  the  error  of  law
    decision. The re-making of the appeal was therefore limited  to  a  re-
    assessment of the appellant's claim that he had been mistreated in  the
    past and would face adverse treatment on return such that  there  would
    be insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and HN returning  together
    or  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant  reintegrating  in
    Vietnam. The findings of Judge McIntosh regarding the other aspects  of
    the appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim remained extant,  the  appellant's
    relationships with HN, TT and HN's other adult children, the care needs
    of HN's elderly mother and the appellant's length of residence and  any
    private life in the UK being insufficient to show that the  Immigration
    Rules were met or that there were exceptional circumstances capable  of
    outweighing  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control.

13. In paragraphs 14 and 15 of the error of law decision I raised with  the
    parties the issue  of  the  grounds  of  the  appeal  shifting  from  a
    conventional family and private life claim to  one  concerning  whether
    the appellant was mistreated in the past  and  whether  he  would  face
    mistreatment in the future. The respondent  maintained  in  submissions
    dated 26 November 2020  that  the  "protection"  evidence  was  a  "new
    matter" and that the case of Birch  (Precariousness  and  mistake;  new
    matters) [2020] UKUT 00086 (IAC) was decided in error where  it  stated
    that the provisions of Section 85(5) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 did not apply to appeals in the Upper Tribunal. The
    appellant maintained in submissions dated 27 November 2020  that  Birch
    was correctly decided and that it was open to the appellant to rely  on
    his evidence of past and future mistreatment.

14. In a direction dated 14 December 2020 I gave a  preliminary  view  that
    the appellant should be  permitted  to  rely  on  his  claim  regarding
    mistreatment in Vietnam. I confirmed this decision at the hearing on 24
    June 2021.  As well as relying on Birch, it was also my view that  this
    was arguably not a "new matter" where the appellant had  relied  on  it
    before the First-tier Tribunal twice and there had  been  no  objection
    from the  respondent.  I  also  noted  the  guidance  provided  by  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal in  JA  (human  rights  claim;  serious
    harm) Nigeria [2021] UKUT 0097 (IAC) on permitting a claim  of  serious
    harm to be raised within the context of an Article 8 ECHR claim.

15. In paragraphs 8 to 22 of written submissions dated  17  June  2021,  Ms
    Record raised a further jurisdictional issue, seeking  to  re-open  the
    Article 8 ECHR assessment concerning the appellant's relationship  with
    TT. As above, my conclusion in the error of law decision was that there
    was no error in that regard in the decision of Judge McIntosh, that her
    findings on the relationship with TT stood and that this  part  of  the
    Article 8 ECHR assessment was finally determined.

16. Ms Record set out, correctly, that at the time of the application   and
    date of decision (2 December 2017), TT was a minor, aged 17 years' old.
    The respondent addressed her circumstances as a minor on pages 4 and  5
    the refusal decision. It was found that if the appellant left  the  UK,
    no undue hardship would arise for TT given the limited period they  had
    lived together and given that she was an older child during any  period
    of cohabitation.  On page 6 of the decision the respondent  found  that
    there were no  exceptional  circumstances  amounting  to  a  breach  of
    Article 8 ECHR. That assessment included "any relevant child"  and  the
    best interests of that child "as a primary consideration".

17. Ms Record submitted that the findings of Judge McIntosh showed that the
    respondent had been incorrect to find no  undue  hardship  for  TT  and
    showed that there were, as of the date  of  the  decision,  exceptional
    circumstances amounting to a breach  of  Article  8  ECHR.  She  sought
    support for this proposition from  paragraph  46  of  Judge  McIntosh's
    decision which found that the appellant had "established a family  life
    with his partner and her daughter TT". This, in turn,  meant  that  the
    appellant  could  show  that  as  of  the  date  of  the  decision  the
    Immigration Rules were met and he was  entitled  to  have  that  factor
    weighed in his favour in the Article 8 ECHR assessment that  I  had  to
    conduct.

18. I did not find that  the  main  proposition  underpinning  Ms  Record's
    argument was made out. Judge McIntosh assessed the evidence before  her
    as of January 2020, the correct approach in law in an  Article  8  ECHR
    claim. She was not asked to and did not assess whether there were close
    ties or a family life or anything exceptional in the relationship  with
    TT as of December 2017. Her findings on the relationship with TT as  of
    January 2020 cannot be "read back" to the date of  the  decision,  some
    three years earlier, and relied upon as determinative of  there  having
    been exceptional circumstances amounting to a breach of Article 8  ECHR
    such that the Immigration Rules were shown to have bene met as  of  the
    date of the decision.

19. That is additionally so where, as Mr Lindsay identified,  only  a  year
    before the date of the decision of 2 December  2017,  Judge  Black  had
    found no relationship for the purposes of Article 8  ECHR  between  the
    appellant and TT and those findings are  undisturbed.  Mr  Lindsay  was
    also correct to highlight that it was far from clear that  there  could
    be a finding of  exceptional  circumstances  as  of  the  date  of  the
    decision for other reasons. As in the refusal  letter,  the  period  of
    cohabitation had not been extensive. TT was an older child, very nearly
    an adult. Her mother was her primary carer and she had  adult  siblings
    and other adult relatives in the UK in  addition  to  any  relationship
    with the appellant.

20. In so far as Ms Record's submission sought to rely on paragraph  12  of
    my error of law decision referring to a "strong  relationship"  between
    the appellant and TT, it was misconceived. That statement was  made  as
    part of a theoretical  assessment  of  the  appellant's  claim  at  its
    highest, conducted in order to show that, even then,  the  family  life
    claim with TT could not succeed and there was  therefore  no  error  in
    Judge McIntosh's decision in that regard.

21. I also did not accept that the Article 8 ECHR re-assessment  should  be
    widened as argued by Ms Record  even  if  it  was  accepted  that  TT's
    circumstances as of the date of the decision were exceptional and  that
    the Immigration Rules were met at that time.  As  Ms  Record  accepted,
    that would have afforded the appellant, at best,  a  grant  of  limited
    leave. By the time of any further application, TT would  have  been  an
    adult. It is entirely  speculative  that  the  appellant,  having  been
    granted a period of limited leave on the basis of his relationship with
    TT, would have been successful in any subsequent application for leave,
    whether under Article 8 ECHR or on any other  basis.  This  was  not  a
    factor that could add material weight to his Article 8 ECHR claim  now,
    therefore.

22. For these reasons, I did not accept that it was appropriate to  re-open
    the Article 8 ECHR assessment further than already provided for in  the
    error of law decision.

23. What must be re-assessed, however, is the appellant's claim  concerning
    past and future mistreatment in Vietnam and whether this can show  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant being  able  to  reintegrate  or
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant  and  HN  exercising  their
    family life in Vietnam.

24.  There  being  no  objection  from  the  respondent,  I  admitted   the
    appellant's additional materials provided on 17 June 2021 and took them
    into account  with  the  materials  that  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

25. The appellant's claim that he was mistreated in Vietnam is set  out  in
    in his witness statements dated 23 January 2019 and 14  June  2021.  He
    maintains that he was working in the accounts department as a clerk  in
    a timber company. He claims  that  in  2005  he  was  detained  by  the
    authorities on two occasions as part of an investigation of whether the
    company was involved in improper financial practices. The appellant was
    mistreated during the two detentions. When he was called  for  a  third
    interview, he went into hiding.   The  head  of  the  company,  X,  was
    arrested, convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison.  The appellant
    remained living in  hiding  for  8  years  until  he  left  Vietnam  in
    September 2003 and came to the  UK  in  December  2003.  The  appellant
    maintains that he will be of ongoing adverse interest  now  because  of
    these matters.

26. There are numerous reasons why I do not find the appellant's  claim  to
    have been of adverse interest in Vietnam in  the  past  to  be  at  all
    credible.

27. After  his  screening  interview  conducted  on  5  January  2004,  the
    appellant did not pursue his asylum claim for the  next  7  years.  His
    claim was refused for non-compliance on  15  March  2004.  He  did  not
    appeal that refusal. He claims to have come to the UK  to  seek  asylum
    after having been mistreated and having to live in hiding for 8  years.
    If that were so he could be expected to pursue  his  protection  claim.
    The fact that he  disengaged  for  so  many  years  after  the  initial
    interview indicated strongly to me that  he  did  not  have  a  genuine
    belief that he was in need of international protection. I did not  find
    it credible that not having a fixed address  and  being  without  legal
    advice would prevent him from pursuing  his  protection  claim,  as  he
    maintains in paragraph 8 of his  witness  statement  dated  23  January
    2019. I did not find it credible that he would  not  pursue  his  claim
    because he feared return to Vietnam as maintained in paragraph 4 of his
    witness statement dated 14 June  2021.  This  is  not  consistent  with
    coming to the UK to claim asylum and choosing to claim here as  the  UK
    is "a developed country"  and  "  better"  than  other  countries;  see
    question 1.37 of the screening interview.

28. Further, at question 1.71 on page 8 of  the  screening  interview,  the
    appellant was offered an opportunity to explain the delay  in  applying
    for asylum. His response was that he loved his country but that it  was
    difficult in Vietnam and:

          "therefore I would like to come here to work, to help  my  family.
    That is asylum".

    That response is not consistent with his current  claim  to  have  left
    Vietnam  in  fear  of  an  unfair  prosecution  because  of   financial
    wrongdoing and mistreatment in detention. It suggests strongly that  he
    came to the UK as an economic migrant.

29. On page 14 of the screening interview the interviewing  officer  sought
    clarification of the appellant's response to question 1.71.  It was put
    to him that what he had said about working in the UK "is  not  asylum".
    The appellant responded that "I thought that coming here  to  work  was
    claiming asylum".  That response also suggests that the appellant  came
    to the UK as an economic migrant and not in connection with any history
    of adverse interest in Vietnam.

30. The appellant was then asked in the screening interview if his life was
    in danger in Vietnam.  He responded:

         "Yes, I have done some business before and then I was  investigated
         by the police in Vietnam.  Something to do with small company, that
         is why I had to leave."

    The appellant was then asked if he had ever been arrested.  He  replied
    "Once for a month".  Those responses might, on one view,  be  taken  as
    support for  the  appellant   indicating,  finally,  in  his  screening
    interview that was in need of protection.  What  he  said  about  being
    detained once for a month, however, is entirely inconsistent  with  his
    witness statements in which he maintains clearly that he  was  detained
    twice.  It is also entirely inconsistent with the information given  to
    Dr Al-Wakeel who produced a medical report  dated 29 September 2018  in
    support of the appellant's claim, as on the third page of  that  report
    under the heading "History" the appellant stated that during the  first
    interrogation he was detained  for  two  days  and  during  the  second
    interrogation was detained for three days.  The appellant has therefore
    given highly inconsistent accounts of his alleged detentions in Vietnam
    and his claim is significantly undermined as a result.

31. Further, the appellant indicated in the  screening  interview  that  he
    last saw his mother in October 2003, again, more or less when  he  left
    Vietnam. He stated in response to question 1.94 that his father died in
    1999. However, in his witness  statement  dated  23  January  2019  the
    appellant stated in paragraph 2 that when he left Vietnam he was living
    with his "parents and one elder brother". His claim to have been living
    with close family members when he left Vietnam is not  consistent  with
    his claim to have had to live  in  hiding  to  avoid  the  authorities.
    Further, his evidence about living with  his  father  in  2003  is  not
    consistent with his father having died in 1999. The appellant was asked
    about this discrepancy  at  the  hearing  before  Judge  McIntosh.  His
    evidence, recorded in paragraph 22 of Judge  McIntosh's  decision,  was
    that he lived with "acquaintances who accommodated him". This fails  to
    explain how he had to be in hiding for 8 years but was also living with
    family members when he left the country in 2003.

32. There is also no more detail than already set out above in any  of  the
    appellant's accounts as to how he managed to live in hiding in  Vietnam
    for 8 years.  Given the amount of time  that  he  claims  he  lived  in
    hiding, his account of this period is  so  vague  and  unparticularised
    that it lacks credibility.

33. There are  further  significant  matters  undermining  the  appellant's
    credibility.  When  he  did  engage  again   substantively   with   the
    respondent, making further submissions on protection grounds on 4 April
    2011, those submissions bore no resemblance to the claim  on  which  he
    relies now. The refusal letter  dated  26  June  2014  shows  that  the
    appellant's submissions in 2011 put forward a claim based on  religious
    persecution with no mention of the financial matter or  any  detentions
    or mistreatment or living in hiding  for  8  years.  The  materials  he
    relied on asserted a fear of mistreatment on the basis of the appellant
    being Catholic but he provided no evidence to show that he was Catholic
    or followed any form of Christian religion. Nothing of this nature  was
    mentioned in the screening interview in  2003.  The  starkly  different
    claim made by the appellant in 2011 undermines his credibility now  and
    suggests strongly that he is someone prepared to make wholly  unfounded
    applications for protection in order to try to remain in the UK.

34. Further, the appellant made no mention of being in need  of  protection
    because of the financial misconduct matter or on religious grounds when
    his case came before Judge Black in 2018. He made  no  mention  of  any
    concerns about any kind mistreatment on return in that  appeal.  If  he
    had a genuine subjective fear of mistreatment on  return  he  could  be
    expected to say so to Judge Black. The  fact  that  he  did  not  still
    further undermines his claim to have been mistreated in the past and to
    be in fear of mistreatment on return now. That is additionally so where
    he also did not raise any protection evidence in  the  application  for
    leave made in 2017 that forms the  basis  of  these  proceedings,  only
    doing so in the materials put before Judge Aujla in 2019.

35. The appellant relies on a medical report dated 29 September  2018  from
    Dr Baha Al-Wakeel. As above, the  evidence  provided  to  Dr  Al-Wakeel
    about the claimed detentions is not  consistent  with  the  appellant's
    screening interview. Further, in paragraph 3 of the  witness  statement
    dated 23 January 2019 the appellant maintained that a bump on the  left
    side of his forehead was caused by being hit with the butt  of  a  gun.
    There is no specific reference to being hit on the head  with  a  rifle
    butt in Dr Al-Wakeel's report, the "main"  injury  to  the  appellant's
    head being stated to have been caused by his being  hit  with  a  metal
    bar.  In any event, Dr Al-Wakeel's report indicates at its highest that
    the marks on the appellant's body are "typical of the events  described
    by him of being intentionally caused". As identified on the fifth  page
    of Dr Al-Wakeel's report, under the Istanbul Protocol  "typical"  means
    "this is an appearance that is usually found with this type of  trauma,
    but  there  are  other  possible  causes".    Given   the   significant
    credibility issues raised above and below  across  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, the most that  the  medical  report  can  confirm  is  that  the
    appellant has been involved in a violent incident at  some  unspecified
    time in the past. It is not sufficient to bring  any  credence  to  his
    claim to have been mistreated by the authorities in Vietnam.

36. The appellant also seeks to rely on an undated letter from  his  former
    employer who was convicted of financial  misconduct  and  sentenced  to
    prison for 20 years. He also relies on a document describing her trial.
    These documents were provided for the first time for the hearing before
    Judge Aujla in February 2019. At that time there was no explanation  as
    to how the appellant obtained these  documents  from  Vietnam  some  16
    years after he left the country.

37. In his most recent statement prepared for the re-making hearing  before
    me, in paragraphs 13 to 23, the appellant maintained for the first time
    that a friend in Vietnam contacted him in 2018 and sent these documents
    to him. This friend had also worked for the same company but  had  been
    able to protect himself from adverse interest by paying a  bribe  after
    his first detention. When their former employer had  been  released  in
    2018, his friend had contacted her and obtained the documents from her.
    The appellant also indicated in paragraph 28 of the statement dated  14
    June 2021 that his friend in Vietnam had since died of Covid-19.

38. I found that the timing of  this  evidence  significantly  reduced  the
    weight that could be attached to  it.  The  appellant  claims  to  have
    received these potentially important materials in 2018 at a  time  when
    he had legal representation. I did not find it credible that  he  would
    not have provided any of the details of how he obtained these materials
    until three years later and after two First-tier Tribunal hearings  and
    two Upper Tribunal error of law hearings. He has still not provided any
    documentation or other materials demonstrating how these materials were
    physically sent to him, by way of an envelope or email, for example  or
    event described how these documents were given to him.   It  would  not
    have been difficult to provide a witness statement from his  friend  in
    Vietnam explaining how he obtained the materials and sent them  to  the
    appellant and setting out his knowledge of  the  investigation  by  the
    authorities into the company he and the appellant worked  for.  If  the
    appellant could obtain a statement from his former employer,  he  could
    obtain one  from  his  friend  who  had  been  prepared  to  take  this
    significant action to assist him. When considered against the  numerous
    aspects of the evidence showing the appellant to  lack  credibility,  I
    found the appellant's statement that this friend had  died  during  the
    Covid-19 pandemic, thus being unable to provide a statement  supporting
    his new evidence as to how he obtained the documents, to be  convenient
    to the point of incredibility.

39. I also found that aspects of the documents themselves meant  that  they
    attracted  little  weight.  The  appellant  relies  on  a  "letter   of
    confirmation" from his former employer at  page  14  of  the  292  page
    bundle provided for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  It states:

         "I established a  private  enterprise  specialising  in  processing
         forest products in 1995.  After a period of operation, the business
         went bankrupt.  I myself had to serve a  twenty  year  sentence  in
         prison and Mr [TN] was a cashier who was  also  arrested  but  then
         fled.

         Therefore, I write this letter to hereby confirm:

         Mr [TN], born on February 27, 1972 previously was  a  cashier.   He
         was arrested but then fled."

    The document is then signed and has a stamp on it  from  the  "People's
    Committee of Duc Tho Town - Ha Tinh Chairman".  There  is  no  original
    copy of this document. It is undated. I did not find it  credible  that
    someone imprisoned for 20 years for a crime which they did  not  commit
    would be prepared to provide such a statement in support of a  fugitive
    allegedly still wanted by the Vietnamese authorities in connection with
    the same false case. I found it  additionally  lacking  in  credibility
    that she would show her statement supporting a fugitive in order for it
    to be endorsed by a public official.

40. The appellant also relies on the court document contained at paragraphs
    16 to 27 of the bundle that was before the First-tier  Tribunal.   This
    document purports to be a record of the trial of  the  appellant's  ex-
    employer. There is no mention of the appellant  in  this  document.  It
    does refer to his former employer's son and a member of staff  as  also
    having been charged. The document also refers on pages 2 and 3  of  the
    translation to other individuals involved in the matter  but  who  were
    not prosecuted for various reasons.  The  appellant  maintained  before
    Judge McIntosh that his details were not included in these documents as
    "he had gone into hiding and  he  could  not  be  named  on  the  court
    documents in  his  absence";  see  paragraph  25  of  Judge  McIntosh's
    decision.  Where  the  court  document  refers  specifically  to  other
    individuals who were not charged but were involved in the case,  I  did
    not find the appellant's explanation of why he was not referred  to  in
    this document (or any other   document  from  the  authorities)  to  be
    credible.

41. The appellant also relies on a country expert report from Mr  Christoph
    Bluth dated 14 June 2021. The respondent  accepted  that  Mr  Bluth  is
    qualified to give an opinion on the  political  situation  in  Vietnam.
    Section 5 of the report sets out details of  how  financial  corruption
    has become a feature of life  in  Vietnam  during  a  period  of  rapid
    economic  growth.  Mr  Bluth  sets  out  that  investigations  by   the
    authorities into these  matters  do  not  follow  basic  principles  of
    justice and can include  physical  mistreatment.  Mr  Bluth  states  in
    paragraph  5.3.5  that  the  appellant's  account  is  plausible   when
    considered against that background. I have considered carefully whether
    that statement could assist in showing that the appellant's  claim  was
    credible. In the context of all of the feature set  out  above  showing
    that his claim is not credible, I did not  find  Mr  Bluth's  statement
    could provide material support. Mr Bluth  finds  that  the  appellant's
    claim is generally consistent with what  can  happen  in  Vietnam.  His
    assessment that the appellant's claim is  plausible  does  not  include
    consideration of the very significant issues I have identified  in  the
    wider evidence. In my judgment the shortcomings in the appellant's case
    are too numerous and serious for  the  appellant  to  be  found  to  be
    credible even after consideration of Mr Bluth's comment.

42. Dr Bluth also indicates  in  paragraph  5.4  of  his  report  that  the
    appellant and HN could be  stigmatised  if  they  returned  to  Vietnam
    together as they are not married and  she  has  children  from  another
    relationship. I did not find that this part of the report assisted  the
    appellant's case.  Firstly,  nothing  in  the  details  of  Mr  Bluth's
    expertise set out at the beginning  of  the  report  refers  to  social
    issues as opposed to his knowledge of political and  religious  issues.
    None of HN's adult children are expected to  go  to  Vietnam  with  the
    appellant  and  HN,  there  is  no  issue  of  "child  abandonment"  or
    difficulties for children of single parent families as referred  to  in
    paragraphs 5.4.1 to 5.4.5 of the report. The appellant and HN have  not
    provided any evidence as to whether they are formally divorced from any
    previous partners. Nothing in the evidence suggests that they would not
    be able to divorce and then marry if this is a requirement  for  HN  to
    relocate to Vietnam as the appellant's British partner.

43. Mr Bluth also comments in paragraph 5.5.1 on difficulties on return  to
    Vietnam if the appellant is  deported.  The  appellant  is  not  facing
    deportation. He can be expected to return to Vietnam voluntarily  using
    regular documentation where he has no basis of stay in the UK.  He  has
    no  political  activities  or  other  potentially  adverse  profile  to
    conceal. He is returning after being unable  to  obtain  leave  on  the
    basis of his Article 8 ECHR rights. If specifically  asked  he  can  be
    expected to state that he claimed asylum on a false basis in  order  to
    try to remain in the UK to work and tried to  remain  to  be  with  his
    partner. Applying Mr Bluth's  comments  on  returns  to  Vietnam,  that
    profile would not lead to a  more  extensive  form  of  questioning  on
    return and that would be so even if the appellant  was  removed  rather
    than returning voluntarily.

44. I therefore did not find that Mr Bluth's report could add weight to the
    appellant's protection evidence or to his Article 8 ECHR claim.

45. For all of these reasons, it is also my conclusion that  the  appellant
    has not shown that he has ever faced adverse interest on any  basis  in
    Vietnam or that he would do so if he returns now.

46. It must follow that he has not  shown  that  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to the appellant returning with HN or very serious  obstacles
    to the appellant's reintegration in Vietnam. Their  relationships  with
    TT, HN's other adult children  and  HN's  mother  and  the  appellant's
    private life have not been found capable of making  out  an  Article  8
    ECHR claim under the Immigration Rules or in a wider assessment of  any
    family and private life outside the provision of the Rules. All of  the
    s.117B factors weigh against him where he does not speak English,  does
    not support himself, and he formed any family and private  life  whilst
    here  illegally.  There  is  nothing  here  that  shows  a   level   of
    exceptionality capable  of  outweighing  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control.


Notice of Decision

47. The appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is refused.


Signed: S Pitt                                   Date: 29 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

