
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00064/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 October 2016                         |On 24 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     I I
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Presenting Officer

                    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fisher, promulgated on 29 September, dismissing her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 17 February  2015
    to refuse her human rights claim and to refuse to revoke a  deportation
    order made against her.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  who  has  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2006, initially claiming asylum. She has  three  children
    all born here who are Nigerian nationals. The oldest was born in  2007,
    2008 and 2011.  The middle child has a serious but  very  rare  medical
    condition, familial hyperphosphatemia tumoral calcinosis.

 3. On  14  November  2006,  the  appellant  was  convicted  upon  her  own
    confession of possession of a false British passport and was  sentenced
    to 9 months' imprisonment.     The sentencing  judge  also  recommended
    her deportation. The deportation order was singed on 29  January  2008,
    after her unsuccessful appeal against a decision to refuse  her  asylum
    claim.

 4. There  then  followed  submissions  and  representations  made  to  the
    respondent who ultimately treated them as a  fresh  claim  but  refused
    them for the reasons set out in her letter of 17 February 2015.

 5. The letter proceeds on that basis [44]  that  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of  an  offence  which  has  causes  serious  harm  and  that
    accordingly paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applied.   The
    respondent concluded that the appellant did not meet  the  requirements
    of paragraphs 399 (a) or 399A of the Immigration  Rules  and  that  her
    deportation was in the public interest, notwithstanding the position of
    her children.

 6. The judge found:

      a) That the removal of the middle child would  not  engage  article  3
         [32];

      b) That paragraph 398 had been met

      c) That, following MAB (para 399;  "unduly  harsh")  USA  [2015]  UKUT
         00435, it would not be unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  children  to
         relocate to Nigeria;

      d) That neither section 117C (4) or (5) applied to this case;

      e) The interests of the appellant and her children did not  amount  to
         very compelling circumstances;

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    erred:

      a) In failing to consider the risk to the children and her ability  to
         care for them flowing from the appellant's mental ill-health [9];

      b) In failing to consider the  effect  of  removal  from  the  current
         environment on the children [10];

      c) In failing to consider medical issues in the context of the  effect
         of removal on the children, and the mother's likely inability to be
         able to care for the children given her mental health  [14],  there
         being no evidence that there would be family support;

      d) That a  previous  appeal  by  the  appellant  had  been  heard  and
         dismissed by the same judge;

 8. On 18 March 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes  granted  permission
    on all grounds, save for those raising article 3 of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

 9. I heard submissions from both parties, Mr Diwnycz seeking to rely  only
    on the rule 24 letter.

10. I consider that the judge did err in his assessment of the  appellant's
    mental health. At [24], it is considered in the context of  articles  3
    and 8, and also at [26], but not in the context of her ability to  cope
    if returning to Nigeria having to care for a young child with a serious
    and debilitating illness. It is not clear either why at [36] the  judge
    found he was not satisfied there would be no family support in Nigeria,
    given what the children had said to professionals. This is, I consider,
    a material error, in that he failed to take  into  account  a  material
    matter, and on that basis alone,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision
    involved the making of an error of law.

11. In addition, with regard to the middle child, the  judge  appears  from
    [34] not to have considered whether her removal would be  unduly  harsh
    within the context of the Immigration Rules, given  the  provisions  of
    the Immigration Rules requiring her to have been resident  here  for  7
    years before the date of decision. Yet section 117C  of  the  2002  Act
    which does not restrict the definition of qualifying child  in  section
    117D to those who had resided 7 years before the date  of  application.
    He  considered  undue  harshness  only  within  the  context  of  "very
    compelling  circumstances"  which  involves  a  greater  weight  to  be
    attached to the public interest.  That must be viewed in the  light  of
    NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662 at [31]- [37]  in  particular.



12. Further, in considering whether the appellant is a foreign criminal  as
    defined in section 117D; the refusal letter is  in  error  in  that  it
    makes reference to the earlier version of paragraph 398.  The  relevant
    version refers only to foreign criminal as defined in section 117D. The
    judge, too, appears to have followed the rules, given  his  formulation
    of the test at [33]; there appears to have been no proper consideration
    of the issue beyond what the respondent thought, and the fact that  the
    judge considered the crime serious does not equate to  a  finding  that
    the offence had cause serious harm.

13. In conclusion, the judge's determination  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law which make the findings  as  to  family  life  unsafe  and
    unsustainable. It therefore follows that it must be set aside.

14. Given the lapse of time, I consider that the matter must be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on
    all issues. The hearing must not be before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fisher


Signed                                  Date:  17 October 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

