
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00463/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th December 2017                          |On 18th January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr gurvindra singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma, instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO)  made  on  15th
    May 2015 to refuse his application for entry clearance  as  a  partner.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies allowed  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 20th February 2017.  The Secretary of State now
    appeals with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Robertson
    on 11th September 2017.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant had leave in the UK
    as a Tier 4 Student from  October  2009  until  19th  April  2011.   He
    applied for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  in  March  2011  and  that
    application was refused on 3rd July 2012.  He claimed that he  met  his
    partner in Birmingham shopping centre in April 2011 and that they lived
    together from 21st January 2013 until the Appellant left for  India  in
    February 2015.  The couple married in India on 9th  February  2015  and
    the  Appellant's  partner  remained  there  for  over  a  month.    The
    Appellant's partner visited the Appellant in India  from  8th  to  26th
    February 2016.  She is employed as an assistant Management  Accountant.



 4. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application for entry clearance
    because  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor is genuine or subsisting.  The ECO considered
    the evidence about the background, photographs and the evidence of  the
    wedding.  The ECO noted that the Appellant was illegally present in the
    UK from 19th April 2011 until he made  a  voluntary  departure  on  7th
    February 2015.  The ECO applied discretion and decided  not  to  refuse
    the application under paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules as the
    ECO was "minded that there were not sufficient aggravating  factors  in
    this case."  The ECO went on to say that the Appellant's  behaviour  is
    indicative of someone who would do anything to stay in the UK  and  the
    ECO therefore placed  little  weight  on  any  statement  made  by  the
    Appellant that had not been corroborated with documentary evidence.

 5. It is not in dispute that, as the decision was made on 15th  May  2015,
    the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  limited  to  human  rights
    grounds.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  documentary
    evidence and oral evidence of the Appellant's Sponsor.  The judge found
    that the Sponsor was open and straightforward and  the  judge  did  not
    doubt her credibility [15].  The judge also accepted that  the  Sponsor
    was estranged from her family.  The judge took into  account  that  the
    legality of the marriage was not doubted and that the Sponsor was  born
    in the UK, had a responsible job and was able  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements. The judge considered that it was not reasonable to expect
    that the Sponsor would wish to live in India.  The judge considered the
    Appellant's intentions and took into account the oral  and  documentary
    evidence including the evidence of the Appellant's father, the duration
    of the relationship, the photographs, and the records of  communication
    between the couple.  The  judge  said  at  paragraph  20;  "Though  his
    immigration  history  is  poor  it  was  not  enough  to  persuade  the
    Respondent to exercise his discretion to refuse it under 320(11)".  The
    judge noted that the Appellant left the UK voluntarily  in  2005.   The
    judge  concluded  that  the  couple's  relationship  was  genuine   and
    subsisting and that they intend to live together permanently in the UK.
     The  judge  concluded  at  paragraph  22;  "The  Appellant  had  dealt
    substantively with the Respondent's concerns.  He meets the  Rules  for
    entry clearance to join his British citizen wife  in  the  UK.   It  is
    otiose to consider Article 8.  The appeal succeeded."  The  judge  went
    on to allow the appeal.

 6. The Secretary of State appealed against that decision on the basis that
    the judge had made a material misdirection of law.   The  Secretary  of
    State  contends  that,  as  the  appeal  is  under   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  by  the  2014  Act,  (as
    recognised by the judge at [8]), the judge was required to consider the
    appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR and it is contended that  the  judge
    erred in appearing to determine  the  decision  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is contended that, had the judge considered the  case  under
    Article 8, she may have come to the opposite conclusion  and  dismissed
    the appeal on the basis that the Appellant had been an  overstayer  and
    had a poor immigration history and that these factors would  have  been
    taken into account under Section 117B and would  have  weighed  against
    the Appellant in the balancing exercise of proportionality.

 7. In granting permission to appeal Judge Robertson considered it arguable
    that the judge erred in law in failing to  consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8, the only ground available to the Appellant.

The hearing

 8. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal Mr Tarlow submitted that the judge
    erred in saying at paragraph 22 that it was otiose to consider  Article
    8 when that was the very basis on which  the  appeal  had  been  taken.
    Accordingly, in  his  submission,  the  judge  failed  to  undertake  a
    proportionality assessment.  He argues that the  judge  had  failed  to
    take adequate consideration of the reasons for  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance together with the public interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control.

 9. Mr Sharma adopted his skeleton argument where he relied on Appendix  FM
    of the Rules and the stated purpose  contained  in  Section  GEN  which
    states that Appendix FM:

         "sets  out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and,   in   considering
         applications under this route, it reflects how, under Article 8  of
         the Human Rights Convention the balance will be struck between  the
         right to respect for private and family  life  and  the  legitimate
         aims  of  protecting  national  security,  public  safety  and  the
         economic wellbeing of the UK".

10. Mr Sharma relied also on the explanatory memorandum which  also  states
    that the Rules set out proportionate requirements reflecting  the  view
    of government and Parliament as to how an individual's Article 8 rights
    should be qualified in the public interest to  safeguard  the  economic
    wellbeing of the UK by  controlling  immigration  and  to  protect  the
    public from foreign criminals.   He  referred  to  a  number  of  other
    sources  saying  the  same  thing.   He  also  referred  to  case   law
    emphasising the importance of the Immigration Rules in an assessment as
    to Article 8.  At the hearing Mr Sharma contended that it must  be  the
    Secretary  of  State's  position  that,  if  the  Appellant   met   the
    requirements of the Rules, he would be entitled to entry  clearance  as
    the Rules take into account a proportionality assessment.  He  referred
    also to the fact that the Entry Clearance Officer had  not  taken  this
    point under paragraph 320(11) of the Rules in reaching the decision  to
    refuse entry clearance.

11. Mr Sharma accepted that the judge's  comment  that  it  was  otiose  to
    consider Article 8 was an error given that this was the  judge's  task,
    however he contended that that was not a  material  error  as  that  is
    exactly what the judge had already done in  her  consideration  of  the
    Rules.  In the alternative he submitted that the Rules would have  been
    a starting point in assessment of the appeal on human  rights  grounds.
    Had the judge gone on to consider freestanding Article 8 assessment she
    would have done so on the context of the guidance in R v SSHD ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  In his submission it is clear that if the judge
    had reached the third question in Razgar that is whether  the  decision
    was in accordance with  the  law  given  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules then the assessment under the Razgar guidance
    would have stopped there.  In these circumstances it was his submission
    that the judge had no need to engage with  the  provisions  of  Section
    117B.

Discussion

12. It is clear from reading the  decision  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge took into account all of the evidence before her.  The judge  was
    aware of the Appellant's background noting it in  the  context  of  the
    refusal notice at paragraphs 2 and 3 of the decision.  The  judge  also
    noted the submissions by the Presenting  Officer  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's poor immigration history [6].  The judge was aware  of  the
    background to the Appellant and the Sponsor's relationship as noted  at
    paragraphs 9 to 14.  The judge found that the Sponsor was credible  and
    accepted that the relationship was genuine and that the  couple  intend
    to live together permanently.  The judge therefore dealt squarely  with
    the only issue raised in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.   In  those
    circumstances the judge was able to conclude  that  the  Appellant  had
    demonstrated that he met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

13. I attach particular weight to Mr Sharma's contention that it  is  clear
    that the Entry Clearance Officer considered that Appendix FM  would  be
    sufficient to meet the requirements of  Article  8  in  that,  had  the
    Appellant demonstrated that he met those requirements, entry  clearance
    would have been granted.

14. It would have been preferable had the  judge  approached  the  decision
    through the prism of Article 8 attaching appropriate weight to the fact
    that the Appellant met the Immigration Rules.  In any event this is not
    a material error because, in considering all of the  issues  raised  in
    the judge's consideration of the Immigration Rules, the  judge  did  in
    fact consider all relevant evidence and all relevant  matters  relevant
    to the determination of this appeal.  So, at  paragraph  20  the  judge
    noted that the immigration history of the Appellant was poor  but  also
    took into account the fact that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  not
    exercised his discretion to  refuse  the  application  under  paragraph
    320(11) thus reducing the weight attached to this factor in the judge's
    mind.  Further, even had  the  judge  considered  this  appeal  in  the
    context of the five steps set out in the guidance provided in the  case
    of Razgar, I accept Mr  Sharma's  submission  that,  in  light  of  her
    decision that the Appellant met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, the judge would have come to the conclusion  that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law and could therefore have stopped the
    assessment under Article 8 at this point.

15. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the judge  considered
    all  relevant  evidence  in  concluding  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  In light of the  fact  that  all  matters
    were considered a free-standing Article 8  assessment  would  not  have
    reached any alternative conclusion.

16. In these circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  does  not
    disclose any error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

There is no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date: 16th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 16th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
