
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00034/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2018                            |On 10 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR RAJA IMRAN AZAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G O'Ceallaigh, Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in these  proceedings,
    I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 19th  December
    2016 to refuse his application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the partner of Elaine Mary Yorke, a British citizen  who  he
    married on 1st February 2014.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal  allowed
    the Appellant's appeal.  The Secretary of State  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes  on
    23rd January 2018.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    8th May 2011 with entry clearance as a student valid until 15th October
    2012.  His application for further leave to remain  as  a  student  was
    granted until 15th February 2015.  He married Ms Yorke on 1st  February
    2014 and applied for variation of his leave to  remain  to  that  of  a
    spouse on 19th February 2014.  His leave to remain  as  a  student  was
    curtailed on 23rd June 2014 and his application for leave to remain  as
    a spouse was refused on 30th June 2014.  He lodged  an  appeal  against
    that decision which was allowed on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was to reconsider the decision.  The application was reconsidered
    and he was refused leave to remain with no  right  of  appeal  but  the
    application was reconsidered again and he was again  refused  leave  to
    remain and appealed against the refusal of  that  application  and  his
    appeal was dismissed in November 2016.

 4. The Appellant made a further application for leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of his relationship.  The refusal  of  that  application  is  the
    subject of this  appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  decided  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements of Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules because it was alleged that he submitted a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS) with his application
    of 9th October 2012 for further leave  to  remain  as  a  student.  The
    Secretary of State was satisfied that the certificate was  fraudulently
    obtained and that the Appellant used deception in  his  application  of
    9th October 2012.  Accordingly, it was concluded that the Appellant did
    not meet the suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It was
    accepted (page 4 of the  decision  of  19th  December  2016)  that  the
    Appellant  met   the   eligibility   requirements   of   paragraph   R-
    LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii), however the Secretary of State did  not  accept  that
    the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of  R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(iii).    The
    application was refused on  the  basis  of  paragraph  D-LTRP.1.3  with
    reference to R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) and (iii) of the Immigration Rules.   As
    the Appellant did not have any dependent children under the age  of  18
    the Secretary of State decided that he did not meet the requirements of
    Appendix FM in relation to a parent.  Consideration was  given  to  the
    provisions of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    Secretary of State considered that the Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    provisions of 276ADE(1)(vi).

 5. The judge considered the Appellant's appeal at paragraphs 7  to  25  of
    the decision.  At paragraphs 7 to 10 the judge  set  out  the  evidence
    submitted by the Secretary of State.  At paragraphs 11 to 17 the  judge
    set out the evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant.   The  judge
    considered the evidence and made findings at paragraphs 18 to 25.   The
    judge concluded that it had been established that the Appellant did not
    fraudulently submit an ETS certificate and did not use  a  proxy  [19].
    The judge concluded that the Appellant met the suitability requirements
    of the Rules.  The judge went on to consider EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  and
    concluded that there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  Appellant's
    family life  with  his  wife  continuing  outside  the  UK.  The  judge
    considered proportionality at  paragraphs  22  to  24  concluding  that
    Appendix FM sets out the requirements to be met and reflects how, under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, the balance will be struck between the right  to
    respect for private  and  family  life  and  the  legitimate  aims  for
    protecting national security, public safety and the economic  wellbeing
    of the UK. The judge concluded at paragraph 24 that, as  the  Appellant
    met the requirements of Appendix FM, the human rights  appeal  succeeds
    as the decision to refuse the application is not proportionate  to  the
    Secretary of State's legitimate aim.

 6. The Secretary of State's grounds contend that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in failing to properly apply the burden of proof as set out
    in relevant case law including SM and Qadir (ETS - evidence - burden of
    proof) UTIAC 21st April 2016 and SSHD v Shehzad and Another [2016] EWCA
    Civ 615 as confirmed in the case of R (on the application of  Nawaz)  v
    Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home   Department   (ETS:   review
    standard/evidential basis) [2017] UKUT 00288 (IAC).   It  is  contended
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  give  adequate  reasoning
    why the Respondent had not met the legal burden and had failed  to  set
    out whether there was an innocent explanation.  It is further contended
    that the judge materially erred in failing to give adequate reasons for
    holding that a person who clearly speaks English would  therefore  have
    no reason to secure a test certificate by deception  in  light  of  the
    decision in MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450.  It  is  contended  that  the
    judge erred in finding that there would be insurmountable obstacles  to
    the family life continuing abroad as insurmountable obstacles is a high
    threshold and the judge failed to give adequate reasons  why  that  had
    been met.

The Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Duffy submitted  that  the  judge  had  not
    adopted the correct approach as to whether the Secretary of  State  had
    discharged the burden upon her.  In his submission  if  the  judge  had
    done so she could have reached a  different  conclusion.  He  contended
    that the judge failed to recognise that there was prima facie  evidence
    of fraud.  He submitted that the Article 8 consideration  was  infected
    by the same error in that the matter of fraud should have carried  some
    weight in the Article 8 assessment, in so submitting he  accepted  that
    the second ground was dependant upon the first.

 8. Mr O'Ceallaigh submitted that the judge had looked carefully at all  of
    the evidence. He contended that she set out the  Respondent's  case  in
    the witness statements before her and, as this was  sufficient  in  his
    view to  require  a  response,  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's own evidence before concluding that the Appellant  had  not
    committed any fraud.  In his view the judge's approach led either to  a
    conclusion  that  the  Respondent  had  not  made  out  her  case,   or
    alternatively it is implicit in the judge's findings that the Appellant
    had discharged the burden of proof upon him.  He contended that if  the
    decision as set out by the judge is looked at through the prism of  the
    shifting burden, then what the judge has done is  sufficient.   In  his
    submission it is unusual to have such a level of  documentary  evidence
    as there were in this case  including  documentary  evidence  from  the
    Appellant as to his attendance at the test centre on the  day  he  took
    the test.  He also referred to a 'GCID case record sheet' at page 55 of
    the Appellant's  bundle  dated  1st  December  2005  (and  followed  an
    interview with the Appellant) which states "there  is  no  evidence  to
    implicate him in the fraud occurring at the college  at  present".   Mr
    O'Ceallaigh acknowledged that this had not  been  referred  to  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He submitted that the  judge  accepted  the
    Appellant's evidence that he was at the test centre and concluded  that
    the Appellant was credible.  In these circumstances, in his submission,
    it is difficult to say  that  any  other  conclusion  could  have  been
    reached by the judge had she considered the case in the context of  the
    shifting burden. He accepted that the second ground is  dependent  upon
    the conclusion in relation to the  first  ground.   In  any  event,  he
    submitted that there was no error in the judge's consideration  of  the
    insurmountable  obstacles  test  set  out  in  Appendix  FM.   In   his
    submission there is no material error in the judge's decision.

 9. In response, Mr Duffy submitted  that  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    Secretary of State has weight and that it was not properly  taken  into
    account.

Error of Law

10. The proper approach to  cases  involving  an  allegation  of  fraud  in
    relation to the ETS English test was set out in  the  case  of  SM  and
    Qadir, considered by the Court of Appeal in  Shehzad  and  Another  and
    confirmed recently in the case of R (on the application of Nawaz).   It
    is clear from these cases that the burden is initially on the Secretary
    of State to provide evidence sufficient  to  discharge  the  evidential
    burden on the Secretary of State.  As pointed out at  paragraph  22  of
    the decision in Shehzad, if that evidential burden is satisfied, it  is
    then incumbent on the Appellant to provide evidence in response raising
    an innocent explanation.

11. In this case the judge set out all of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    Secretary of State at paragraphs 7 to 10 and the evidence  produced  by
    the Appellant at paragraphs 11 to 17.  Mr Duffy did not  point  to  any
    evidence that had not been considered by the judge.   At  paragraph  18
    the judge stated that she must consider the credibility "of  the  whole
    of the evidence".  It is  clear  therefore  that  the  judge  did  not,
    strictly speaking, approach the case following the approach set out  in
    the case law.

12. However, the judge  set  out  all  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    Secretary of State, acknowledging at  paragraph  9  that  there  was  a
    printout of the Appellant's test results with an indication  that  that
    result was invalid.  The judge also acknowledged the specific  evidence
    in relation to the English language test carried out at Colwell College
    [10].  The judge set out the Appellant's evidence in detail after that.
     I accept Mr O'Ceallaigh submission that it is implicit in the  judge's
    findings that she accepted  that  the  Respondent  had  discharged  the
    initial legal burden  before  going  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    evidence.

13. In my view it is therefore clear that before going on to  consider  the
    Appellant's evidence in detail the judge must have  accepted  that  the
    Respondent discharged the initial burden to raise the prospect  of  the
    Appellant having used deception in  his  English  language  test.   The
    judge considered the Appellant's evidence including the  oral  evidence
    set out at paragraphs 11 to 14  where  the  Appellant  is  recorded  as
    giving  details  of  his  attendance  at  the  test  centres  and   the
    documentary evidence (including train tickets and receipt from  a  bank
    machine opposite the test centre on the appropriate dates).  The  judge
    concluded on the basis of all of his evidence that  the  Appellant  was
    honest and credible [19]. This evidence was sufficient to  counter  the
    Secretary of State's evidence and to raise an innocent  explanation  as
    to his participation in the relevant test.

14. Accordingly, whilst the judge  failed  to  set  out  the  test  in  the
    appropriate format, I am satisfied that the judge did consider  all  of
    the evidence in the appropriate way and that there is no material error
    in the judge's consideration  of  the  evidence  of  alleged  fraud  in
    obtaining his TOEIC certificate. Accordingly, the judge made  no  error
    in her approach to the consideration of the suitability requirements.

15. Mr Duffy at the hearing that if there is no error in  relation  to  the
    assessment of the suitability requirements, then there is no  error  in
    relation to the  subsequent  consideration  of  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.



16. In light of my findings above I conclude  that  there  is  no  material
    error in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
