
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00079/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd August 2019                   |On 22nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Abdul Mukit
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D. Mills
For the Respondent:    Mr Rahman (Counsel)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Feeney, promulgated on 10th January 2019, following a hearing  at
    Taylor House on 27th November 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born on  28th
    June 1977.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    3rd November 2017, refusing his application for leave to enter  the  UK
    on the basis of his family life with his partner, Miss Bibi, a  British
    citizen, present and settled in the UK, who is his wife.

The Background

 3. This claim has  a  protracted  and  unfortunate  history.   The  facts,
    however, are not in dispute.  The Appellant came to the UK on 8th  June
    2006 as a work permit holder.  He had leave until 8th  June  2007.   He
    overstayed his leave.  He was encountered in  2011  working  illegally.
    He was given temporary admission by the Authorities but he absconded in
    March 2011.  Thereafter, on 7th November 2012,  the  Appellant  applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of his marriage to Miss Bibi, whom  he
    had married in an Islamic ceremony in Leicester on 17th July 2012.   On
    19th March 2013 the Respondent refused the application.   On  9th  June
    2013 the Appellant left the United Kingdom voluntarily to  return  back
    to Bangladesh, and Miss Bibi travelled with him.

 4. Significantly, on 17th June 2013 the Appellant and Miss  Bibi  lawfully
    married in accordance with Bangladeshi law, in Bangladesh and  on  21st
    August 2013 the Appellant then made an application to enter the UK  for
    entry clearance.  This application was  perhaps  a  little  too  early,
    given that the Appellant  had  an  immigration  history  that  was  not
    altogether an endearing one.  It was refused by the Secretary of  State
    on the basis of paragraph 320(11).  The Appellant had  contrived  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intentions of the  Immigration  Rules.
    He had overstayed, he had breached conditions of his leave,  and  there
    were "other aggravating circumstances".

 5. In coming to this conclusion, the Entry Clearance Officer had relied on
    two  significant  matters.   First,  that  when   the   Appellant   was
    encountered in January 2011, he had given his name as Abdul  Malik  and
    his date of birth as 16th June 1980 and he  had  told  the  Immigration
    Officers that he had entered the United Kingdom illegally with the  aid
    of an agent.  Secondly, the Appellant did not comply with the reporting
    conditions imposed on him when he was granted temporary  admission  and
    that, in March 2011, he was recorded as an absconder.

 6. When the Appellant appealed, his appeal was heard by Judge  Malone  and
    in a decision promulgated on 18th November 2014, the appeal was allowed
    on the basis that the ECO had given no valid reasons  for  disbelieving
    the Appellant's claim that he and his wife had lived  together  as  man
    and wife, that he was in a genuine husband and wife relationship,  that
    the maintenance tests had been satisfied and that accommodation was not
    a problem.

 7. The judge had also observed that he had  found  "Miss  Bibi  to  be  an
    honest and reliable witness.  I had no reason to  disbelieve  what  she
    told me regarding communication with the Appellant" (paragraph 44).  In
    the appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  that  decision,  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Monson had regard, in a decision dated 13th  April
    2016,  that  the  issue  between  the  discrepancy  relating   to   the
    Appellant's name between "Abdul Malik" and "Abdul Mukit" had  not  been
    properly resolved by the judge below.

 8. As the judge observed, "he effectively confessed to  having  given  the
    alternative name of Abdul Malik when encountered in January 2011.   But
    he relied in mitigation on the fact that he had come clean  about  this
    in his application of  November  2012".  There  had  therefore  been  a
    knowing failure to make a material disclosure of fact  (paragraph  32).
    This was that he was also known  by  friends  by  the  name  of  "Abdul
    Malik".

 9. In determining the issue, the judge observed  that  the  Appellant  had
    applied very shortly from Bangladesh, after his arrival there, and  the
    public interest still required to  be  maintained  in  favour  of  firm
    immigration control, although it was regrettable that nearly two and  a
    half years had elapsed since the refusal decision.  The judge ended the
    determination with the observation that the  Appellant  should  reapply
    "in what will now be  more  propitious  circumstances,  as  the  public
    interest  in  excluding  him  as  a  serious  immigration  offender  is
    diminished, and arguably assuaged, by the lengthy period  of  exclusion
    which he has now served" (paragraph 35).

10. In his latest application for entry, as the husband of  Miss  Bibi,  on
    the basis of an application made on 17th August 2017,  the  refusal  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer on 3rd November 2017 was described as being
    "a vague decision" by the Appellant's representatives (see paragraph  9
    of the grounds of application to the Upper Tribunal).

11. The matter came before Judge Feeney.  She observed how Judge Monson had
    concluded that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  erred  in  law  in  the
    assessment that the Appellant  had  met  the  suitability  requirements
    (paragraph 5).  Judge  Feeney  also  observed  that  Judge  Monson  had
    pointed out that "it was a point in the Appellant's favour  that  there
    had been no appeal from the finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    that he would be adequately maintained and accommodated in the UK  ..."
    (paragraph 6).  Indeed, Judge Feeney early set out in the determination
    how Judge Monson had

         "Added that it was open too for the Appellant to  reapply  in  what
         would be more propitious circumstances as the  public  interest  in
         excluding him as a serious immigration offender was diminished  and
         arguably assuaged by the lengthy period of exclusion which  he  had
         now served" (paragraph 7).

12. At the hearing before Judge Feeney, "there was no Respondent's  bundle.
    Two refusal letters had been issued in this case.  The initial  refusal
    letter was a pro forma  template  and  did  not  contain  any  analysis
    regarding the Respondent's case."  (See paragraph 9(i)).

13. As against this, there was a proper bundle from the  Appellant's  side.
    The judge set out the provisions of paragraph 320(11)  and  noted  that
    the  Respondent's  case  was  that  there  were   various   aggravating
    circumstances surrounding the Appellant's stay  in  the  UK  (paragraph
    14).  The Appellant's claim was also noted that  he  had  attempted  to
    abide by the Rules by returning  to  Bangladesh  and  making  a  proper
    application (paragraph 15).

14. The judge observed the principles in "Devaseelan  as  being  applicable
    and that the findings of fact made by Judge  Monson  were  significant"
    (paragraph 16).  It was moreover noted that the conduct of  the  couple
    was consistent with there being a genuine relationship here  (paragraph
    23).  Furthermore, the fact that  five  years  had  elapsed  since  the
    Appellant had returned  to  Bangladesh  from  the  UK  voluntarily  was
    highlighted (paragraph 25).

15. Even so, there were aggravating circumstances  in  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had worked illegally, had been apprehended and  subjected  to
    reporting conditions which he did not answer, had  absconded,  and  had
    arranged a passport for himself and ID to use in the UK (paragraph 27).



16. Against this background, the judge concluded that,

         "I bear in mind the weight I attached to the  public  interest  in
         terms of his exclusion had been somewhat  reduced.   However,  even
         accounting for this, when looking at the totality of the  evidence,
         in particular  the  application  of  320(11),  the  fact  that  the
         relationship was formed at a time when the Appellant's  immigration
         status was precarious and that it is reasonable for the Sponsor  to
         relocate  to  Bangladesh,  tips  the  decision  in  favour  of  the
         Respondent and find their decision is proportionate in  this  case"
         (paragraph 43).

Grounds of Application

17. In the grounds of application, it is said that, although the judge,  at
    paragraphs 6 to 7 of the determination,  did  set  out  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Monson's conclusions, and at paragraph 16, it was said  that  she
    accepted that she could not depart from the findings from Judge Monson,
    nevertheless,  "unfortunately,  FtTJ  failed  to  apply  UTJ   Monson's
    conclusions with regard  to  applicability  of  320(11)  in  a  further
    application" (paragraph 16).

18. It was also stated that

         "The FtTJ failed to place proper weight to the Appellant's  witness
         statement which was  previously  accepted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Taylor who allowed the appeal under 320(11) but  it  was  set
         aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Monson  because  the  Respondent  was
         entitled to apply 320(11) ..." (paragraph 18).

19. On 17th May 2019 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that "it
    is arguable that unfairness has arisen or can be seen to have arisen in
    relation to consideration of the totality of the factors set forward in
    the permission application in the context of the history of the case in
    relation to the findings made by the judge".



Submissions

20. At the hearing of the appeal before me on 2nd August 2019, Mr L. Rahman
    of Counsel appearing on behalf of the Appellant relied upon the grounds
    of application.  He submitted that it was another two and a half  years
    since Judge Monson gave the decision before anything was done and  five
    years had elapsed by the  time  that  the  appeal  arose  before  Judge
    Feeney, and six years for the appeal  to  come  before  this  Tribunal.
    Yet, at the time of the appeal before Judge Monson, he had already made
    it clear that  three  years  had  elapsed  and  this  had  considerably
    diminished the public interest in  favour  of  immigration  control  as
    against the human right of the Appellant to  a  family  life  with  his
    British citizen wife in the United Kingdom.

21. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the question  was  whether  Judge
    Monson was making a binding observation or simply saying  that  it  was
    open to a subsequent decision maker to take the view  that  the  public
    interest in immigration control had considerably diminished.  If it was
    the former, and the observation  was  one  that  had  to  be  taken  as
    conclusive of how the balance of considerations  fell  to  be  applied,
    then I should make a finding on an error of law and  proceed  to  allow
    the appeal outright.

22. In reply, Mr Rahman submitted that the only reason why  the  appeal  by
    the Secretary of State had been successful before Judge Monson  was  on
    the basis that the judge below had failed  to  properly  determine  the
    question of "suitability" because there had been a failure to  disclose
    the alternative name used by the Appellant.  Otherwise, the human right
    claim to family life based upon the relationship between the  Appellant
    and a British citizen wife would prevail.

Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to be  set
    aside (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are as follows.

24. First, this is a case where the judge, under the heading  "my  findings
    of fact", had made it clear that  "Devaseelan  applies  in  this  case.
    Findings of fact were made by Judge Monson" (see paragraph  16).   That
    being so, it is important to look at what Judge Monson did decide.   He
    observed that after the Appellant  had  returned  back  to  Bangladesh,
    accompanied by his wife with whom he married in a Bangladeshi religious
    ceremony thereafter in that country,

         "The claimant had only been in Bangladesh some  six  months,  since
         June 2013.  His application for entry clearance  as  a  spouse  was
         made on 21st August 2013.  In the light of his adverse  immigration
         history, he did not have a legitimate expectation of being  granted
         entry clearance so soon  after  his  voluntary  departure.   Having
         regard to paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules, the  claimant  needed  to
         wait for at least one year before applying for entry clearance, and
         even then he could only expect to be admitted if he was treated  as
         an ordinary overstayer with no aggravating circumstances (paragraph
         33).".

25. Judge Monson had then gone on to  say  that  "it  is  regrettable  that
    nearly two and a half years had elapsed since the refusal decision, and
    so the effective period of the claimant's exclusion is now  some  three
    years."  (Paragraph 34).  He had then gone on to  consider  the  appeal
    under the Rules and he concluded that it would fail  under  the  Rules.
    He then considered Article 8 outside the Rules.  He observed  that  "it
    is a point in the claimant's favour that there is no  appeal  from  the
    finding of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  he  is  going  to  be
    adequately maintained and accommodated in the  United  Kingdom  without
    recourse to public funds" (paragraph 35).  The judge also  referred  to
    other matters that were  in  favour  of  the  Appellant,  such  as  his
    reasonable fluency in the English language.

26. He ended the determination by stating that, although it  was  the  case
    that the interference with family and private life was proportionate at
    the time of the decision appealed against because he had only  been  in
    Bangladesh for some six months since June 2013, nevertheless,

         "It is open to the claimant to reapply in what  will  now  be  more
         propitious circumstances, as the public interest in  excluding  him
         as a serious  immigration  offender  is  diminished,  and  arguably
         assuaged, by the lengthy period  of  exclusion  which  he  has  now
         served" (paragraph 35).

27. Second, despite this conclusion, the judge  observes  that  the  public
    interest in exclusion  must  be  given  a  higher  weight  because  the
    Appellant's immigration status was precarious  at  the  time  that  the
    marriage was entered into and that it is reasonable for the Sponsor  to
    relocate to Bangladesh (paragraph 43).  This does not follow from  what
    Judge Monson had decided.  It also does not follow that some six  years
    after  the  Appellant  has  returned  back  to  Bangladesh,  that   his
    application to join his British citizen wife from  Bangladesh  to  this
    country should be consistently rejected.

28. This is for two reasons.  First, it  had  been  long  established  that
    there is a public interest in requiring people to return back to  their
    country of origin if they have breached  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    case of PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion:  care  needed)  India  [2010]
    UKUT 440, makes it clear that

         "The decision maker must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing  the
         aggravating circumstances set to  justify  refusal  and  must  have
         regard to the public interest in encouraging  those  unlawfully  in
         the United Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise their status  by
         an application for entry clearance".

29. This is exactly what the Appellant has done. Indeed, that case made  it
    clear (at paragraph 14) that

         "If the aggravating circumstances are not truly  aggravating  there
         is in this context a serious risk that those in the position of  Mr
         S would simply continue to remain in the United Kingdom  unlawfully
         and would not seek to regularise their stay as  he  has  sought  to
         do".

30. In this case the Appellant also had  sought  to  regularise  his  stay.
    That being so, the fact that he had breached the Immigration  Rules  in
    the manner that he has done in  this  case  cannot  infinitely  and  ad
    infinitum be taken against him so as to frustrate his right to join his
    wife in this country.

31. This brings me to the second reason.  I refer  to  the  much  neglected
    judgment of Blake J in MM [2013] EWHC, which recognized how since  1985
    when the European Court of Human Rights decided Abdul Aziz [1985]  EHRR
    471, which concerned women who were unable to sponsor the admission  of
    their husbands, "the rights of the citizen to enjoy a  family  life  in
    his or her country of nationality has emerged as a significant theme in
    the intervening period in European and domestic law" (paragraph 28).

32. Blake J made it clear that

         "British citizens are in a different position from foreign Sponsors
         generally.  This is because  they  have  an  independent  right  to
         reside in their own country.  This  is  not  a  right  afforded  by
         permission of the Secretary of State but it is a fundamental  right
         of constitutional significance recognised by the common law  before
         the legislation was codified in the Immigration Act 1971.  This Act
         describes the right as  the  ability  to  reside  without  'let  or
         hindrance' ... An inability to continue to reside in the country of
         one's nationality because of the  exclusion  of  the  spouse  of  a
         genuine  relationship  is  an  interference  with  that  right   of
         residence" (at paragraph 100).

33. Blake J continued that,

         "I consider that  British  nationality  is  of  importance  in  the
         present context, because if  the  spouse  cannot  obtain  admission
         under the Rules, and the citizen Sponsor wants to enjoy family life
         and matrimonial cohabitation following marriage he or she will have
         to leave the country of nationality in order to  do  so.   Even  if
         there are no insurmountable obstacles to a  British  citizen  doing
         so, this is a serious interference with the right of residence (see
         Pitchford LJ in Quila at paragraph 72)" (see MM at paragraph  104).



Remaking the Decision

34. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.  This appeal is allowed.

Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal amounted to an error of law.  I
    set aside the decision of the original judge.  I remake the decision as
    follows.  This appeal is allowed.

36. No anonymity direction is made.

37. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019
