
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00243/2017
                                                               HU/00247/2017
                                                               HU/00251/2017
                                                               HU/00256/2017
                                                               HU/00258/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2018                            |On 1 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                 mr Muhammad Suleman Anjum (first Appellant)
                    mrs Eram Shahzadi (second Appellant)
                         miss T S (third Appellant)
                          mr S H (fourth Appellant)
                          mr A H (fifth Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Coleman, of Counsel, instructed by Messrs Paul
                    John & Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Birk who, in a determination promulgated on  24
    October 2017, dismissed the appellants' appeals against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of  State  made  on  9  December  2016  to  refuse  their
    applications for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The first appellant entered Britain in February 2000 as a  student  and
    had leave to remain until March 2011.  The second and third  appellants
    (his wife and first child) entered Britain on  25  January  2008.   The
    third appellant was then aged 2.  The fourth and fifth appellants  were
    born in Britain in October 2008 and December 2010.   Therefore  at  the
    date of the determination of the  appeal  in  October  2017  the  third
    appellant had been in Britain for nine years, that is since the age  of
    2 and the fourth appellant had also been in Britain for nine years less
    five days and the fifth appellant had been in Britain for almost  seven
    years.

3.   The judge  considered  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  when
    considering the Article 8 rights of  the  appellants,  it  having  been
    agreed that the focus of this appeal  related  to  the  rights  of  the
    children.  He noted that it  was  argued  that  the  fourth  and  fifth
    appellants could not speak  Urdu  and  that  they  had  never  been  to
    Pakistan.

4.   He also noted that the principal appellant  had  received  a  suspended
    sentence in relation to his obtaining a British passport and trying  to
    use it, fraudulently, to open a bank account in order to  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He noted that the children were  at  school  here  and
    appeared to be doing well at school and that  the  principal  appellant
    and his wife had family in Pakistan.  The  principal  reason  that  the
    family had wished to stay in Britain was because their  children  would
    receive  a  better  education  and  life  here  as  there   were   more
    opportunities here.

5.   The judge noted that the principal appellant had spent  eighteen  years
    in Britain and that the second appellant had  spent  nearly  ten  years
    here.

6.   The judge set out relevant case law which  interpreted  the  provisions
    of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  In
    paragraphs 15 onwards he made findings and in particular he stated that
    it was clear that the first and second appellants could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

7.   He stated that the focus of the appeal had been on the ability  of  the
    third and fourth appellants to meet paragraph 276ADE(iv) and the  other
    appellants would seek to "piggyback" upon those appellants as they were
    all a family unit.  He  emphasised  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were for each to continue to be cared for by their parents who
    can meet all their emotional and physical needs and he stated that  the
    family could return as a family unit and that he  considered  that  the
    parents would be able to help  the  children  to  adapt  to  their  new
    environment.  He noted that there was no health issues and  said  there
    was no particular evidence regarding the ties of the  children  to  the
    UK.

8.   He concluded that any disruption to the current lives of  the  children
    will be overcome after the  short-term  because  they  would  have  the
    assistance  and  support  of  their  parents  and  extended  family  in
    Pakistan.  He said he took into account the fact  that  the  third  and
    fourth appellants had attained a residency of over seven years  in  the
    United Kingdom and the fifth appellant just some months  short  of  his
    seven years (the judge was wrong when stating that the fourth appellant
    had been in Britain for seven years as the fourth  appellant,  who  had
    been born in Britain had lived here for nine years to the date  of  the
    decision, as had the third appellant who had been born here in  October
    2008).

9.   Mr Coleman informed me that an application for British nationality  had
    now been made on behalf of the fourth appellant.

10.  The judge then considered the issue of reasonableness  under  paragraph
    276ADE, stating that he was looking at the case holistically  and  that
    despite the children having lived in Britain "for such periods as nine,
    seven and six years respectively" he found that it was  reasonable  for
    the third and fourth appellants to leave Britain.

11.  When considering Article 8 outside the Rules the  judge  did  refer  to
    the first appellant's length of residency  in  Britain  and  indeed  in
    paragraphs 32 and 34 he referred to the provisions of Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act but  concluded  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave Britain.

12.  At the beginning of the appeal I referred to the provisions of  Section
    117B(6) and in particular to the terms thereof.  That sub-Section reads
    as follows:-

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -




             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  responsibility for the qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom".

13.  I pointed out that, at Section 117D, a qualifying child was defined  as
    a person under the age of 18 and who was either a  British  citizen  or
    had lived in Britain for a continuous period of seven years or more.

14.  I asked Mr Coleman to address me on the term "liable  to  deportation".
    He pointed out that the Immigration Directorate's guidance  at  Section
    1, version 29.0 of 11 January 2018 said that where there was low  level
    criminal activity it was unlikely that a person would be refused  under
    the character, conduct or association grounds for a  single  conviction
    which result in a noncustodial sentence outside the relevant timeframe.
     He therefore pointed out that if  the  principal  appellant  had  been
    applying for leave to remain he would not  be  caught  by  the  general
    grounds of refusal. It was accepted by  Mr  Tufan  that  the  principal
    appellant could not be considered to be "liable to deportation".

15.  Mr Coleman then referred me to the determination of ET  and  MT  [2018]
    UKUT 88, accepting that that decision, which is,  of  course,  reported
    post-dated the decision of the judge in this appeal.   He  referred  to
    the facts of that case in which the parent had been convicted of  fraud
    and received a community based sentence  and  had  a  poor  immigration
    history but despite that the Tribunal had thought  that  her  behaviour
    was not such as to affect the  issue  of  the  reasonableness  of  that
    appellant as child being removed.

16.  The Tribunal in that determination had referred, at  paragraph  30,  to
    the issue of reasonableness and in the following paragraph  had  stated
    that in looking at the countervailing factors in  that  case  they  had
    little difficulty in  concluding  that  it  was  appropriate  that  the
    appellant should be granted leave to remain.

17.  Mr Coleman referred me also to the terms of the judgment  of  Elias  LJ
    in AM (Pakistan) and Others [2017] EWCA Civ 180 which he said  endorsed
    his  decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 where  at  paragraph
    he had stated:-

         "It seems to me that there are powerful reasons why, having  regard
         in particular to the need to treat the best interests of the  child
         as a primary consideration, it may be thought that once  they  have
         been in the UK for seven years or are otherwise citizens of the  UK
         they should be allowed to stay and have their position  legitimised
         if it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave  even  though
         the effect is that their possibly undeserving families  can  remain
         with them".

18.  He argued that taking  into  account  the  length  of  time  which  the
    children had been in Britain -  (a  length  of  time  which  had  been
    misunderstood by the judge) the decision of the judge was in  error  of
    law.

19.  In reply Mr Tufan referred to the judgment  in  MA  (Pakistan)  arguing
    that at paragraph 73 that Elias LJ had stated:-

         "The appropriate test can no longer be compelling reasons  that  is
         not the language of Section 117B(6) or paragraph 276ADE and it sets
         the bar too high.  It may be reasonable to  require  the  child  to
         leave where there are good cogent reasons, even  if  they  are  not
         compelling".

20.  He also referred to the judgment in AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA  Civ  180
    where at paragraph 26 Elias LJ had stated:-

         "It is true as the respondents emphasise, that in MA (Pakistan) the
         court observed that significant weight should be given to the  fact
         that a child has been here for seven years, but the  FtT  in  terms
         recognised that fact".

21.  He argued that the judge had properly weighed up all  relevant  factors
    and reached conclusions which were fully open to him.

22.   I  considered  that  there  are  material  errors  of   law   in   the
    determination of the Immigration Judge.  He clearly erred when  working
    out the ages or the length of time the two eldest children had been  in
    Britain and I consider that in a case such as  this  that  is  material
    given that the children had been in Britain for such a  lengthy  period
    of time.  Moreover I do not consider that he  properly  considered  the
    terms of Section 117B as it relates to the children.  While I  have  in
    mind the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1045, I consider that although this judge did very  carefully  consider
    all relevant factors he did make an error such that I should set  aside
    his decision.  He cannot, of course,  be blamed  for  not  taking  into
    account the determination in the Upper Tribunal in ET and  MT  which  I
    consider, although a reported decision,  was  in  my  view  principally
    concerned with the procedural point regarding the pilot scheme  but  it
    must,  in any event, be given some weight  because  it  is  a  reported
    decision of the President of the Upper Tribunal; it does  indicate  the
    emphasis which should be placed on the  rights  of  children  who  have
    lived in Britain for a long period of time.

23.  It is therefore appropriate, having  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to remake the decision.  I focus on the  terms  of
    Section 117B(6).  I considered first the issue of whether  or  not  the
    first appellant is "liable to deportation".  Clearly  for  the  reasons
    given by Mr Coleman he is not.  I am therefore left  with  a  situation
    where the public interest does not require  his  removal.   I  consider
    clearly that he and indeed his wife have a parental  relationship  with
    the qualifying children and clearly the case that all the children  are
    now, as at the date of this decision, qualifying  children  and  indeed
    the two eldest have lived in Britain for more than a continuous  period
    of 10 years. I also take into account that  the  second  child  is  now
    entitled to, and has applied for, British nationality.  The reality  is
    that the second and third child have never lived in Pakistan  and  have
    lived in Britain all their lives and indeed were both  born  here.   In
    due  course  the  third  child  will  also  be  entitled   to   British
    nationality.

24.  Although I accept the dictum of Elias LJ  in  AM  (Pakistan)  that  the
    relevant test is not whether or not their circumstances are compelling,
    I can only conclude taking the facts set  out  above,  that  there  are
    cogent reasons which mean  that  the  children  should  be  allowed  to
    remain.    I also take into account also that the first appellant lived
    in Britain legally for eleven years and has now lived in Britain for 18
    years.

25.  Taking these factors into account and following  the  judgment  of  the
    Tribunal in ET and MT I consider that having set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Judge it is appropriate that I shall remake the decision
    and allow these appeals.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   [pic]                  Date: 26 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

