
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00915/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 December 2019                  |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                 MARIAN [E]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:                  Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                  Mr. E. Pipi of counsel, instructed by
Devine Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Respondent is a  national  of  Nigeria.   She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 2 October 2004, as a student, and was  subsequently  granted
    further leave to remain until 31 May 2015. However, her last period  of
    leave was curtailed to end on 9 June 2011, as she had not been able  to
    start her course. She applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  her
    medical conditions and her private life rights on 11 January 2012,  but
    her application was refused on 22 May 2013.

2.   This decision was reconsidered but then maintained on 9 September  2014
    and on 2 September 2015 she was served with a notice of  removal.   She
    made a human- rights claim on 15 August 2017 which was  refused  on  23
    February 2018.  She  appealed  against  this  decision  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie allowed her appeal on human rights grounds in a
    determination promulgated on 7 August 2019.

3.   The Appellant appealed and  on  23  October  2019  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne refused her permission to appeal. However, Upper Tribunal
    Judge Blundell granted the Appellant permission to appeal on 7 November
    2019.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.   Counsel for the Respondent made an oral application  for  an  order  to
    admit a Nationwide statement, an email exchange and a witness statement
    from a case worker who had previously advised the Respondent.  However,
    as  this  evidence  had  not  been  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie, I informed counsel that I would only consider his application
    if I found an error of law in the Judge's decision and also decided  to
    remake the appeal  myself.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and
    Counsel for the Respondent  both  made  oral  submissions  and  I  have
    referred to them below, where relevant.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   The Respondent's appeal was allowed on  human  rights  grounds  on  the
    basis that there were very significant obstacles to her being  able  to
    reintegrate into society and her community, if she were to  be  removed
    to Nigeria. The findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie  in
    paragraphs 7 to 13 of his determination  were  not  challenged  by  the
    Appellant in her grounds of appeal.

6.   Instead, in her second ground of appeal, the Appellant  submitted  that
    the Judge had "incorrectly determined that the  [Respondent's]  removal
    would be disproportionate by focusing solely on her  medical  condition
    and finding that the disparity in the standard of treatment would  mean
    that her removal to Nigeria would be disproportionate".

7.   However, it was not the case that the Judge allowed the  appeal  solely
    on the basis of disparity of health care between the  UK  and  Nigeria.
    When considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  the  Judge  also  took  into
    account the deaths of the Respondent's close family members, the social
    stigma and discrimination she would experience in Nigeria on account of
    her medical condition, her lack of support and the likelihood of social
    ostracization there.

8.   But, as the Respondent  had  made  a  human  rights  claim,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie should have applied his mind to the contents of
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  when
    reaching a decision to allow the Respondent's appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

9.   In relation to the first ground of  appeal,  it  is  correct  that  the
    Appellant relied on two reasons for finding that she did not  meet  the
    suitability requirements which were a gateway to the Respondent meeting
    the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). One of these was the  fact
    that, for the purposes of paragraph S-LTR.4.4., it was asserted that  a
    costs order had been made against her on 8 July  2015,  which  remained
    unpaid and which amounted to a  litigation  debt.  The  Respondent  had
    provided a copy of the order made by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kekic  which
    confirmed that such a costs order was made.

10.  Counsel for the Respondent, who had represented her at first  instance,
    asserted that First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie had been shown a  copy
    of the Nationwide statement on the Respondent's  phone  at  the  appeal
    hearing and that this was why he did not need to deal  with  this  sub-
    paragraph. The record of proceedings in my file was very  difficult  to
    read but did not appear to confirm this and neither party had their own
    record of the proceedings. In any event, the statement showed that  the
    Respondent had paid her litigation debt on 18 January 2019,  which  was
    after the decision under challenge and, at the very  least,  the  Judge
    should have addressed this.

11.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie did address paragraph S-LTR.2.2.  of
    Appendix FM and the fact that the Respondent had failed to  disclose  a
    conviction on 24  February  2017,  which  led  to  a  suspended  prison
    sentence of four months, a curfew requirement and a  victim  surcharge.
    In oral evidence at the hearing the Respondent did not deny  that  this
    was the case but explained the circumstances of her  offence  and  said
    that she had pleaded guilty.

12.  Paragraph S-LTR.2.2. contains a discretionary basis  for  finding  that
    leave should not be  granted  but  the  issue  to  be  considered  when
    considering whether to exercise such discretion was whether  there  was
    an explanation for not disclosing this offence which would trigger  the
    exercise of this discretion. Instead, in paragraph 16 of his  decision,
    the Judge only considered the circumstances in which the  offence  took
    place.

13.  In her witness statement, the Respondent had asserted that she had  not
    filled in her application form but that it had been  completed  by  her
    legal representative. However, this did not absolve the  Respondent  of
    the responsibility to disclose all relevant factors in her application.
    Her counsel submitted that she was mentally unwell when she signed  her
    application form on 15 August 2017 and could not read through the  form
    but merely signed it.  However, the medical evidence  goes  no  further
    than to find that she suffered from anxiety and depression. There is no
    suggestion that she was  unable  to  understand  the  case  being  made
    against her or give proper instructions to her legal representative  at
    that time.

14.  For these reasons I find that there were errors of  law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Devittie's determination.

15.  I also heard submissions in relation to whether this appeal  should  be
    remitted.  On balance and taking into account the lack  of  clarity  on
    many points in the decision under challenge, I found that it  would  be
    in the interests of justice for the appeal to  be  remitted.  It  would
    also enable a First-tier Tribunal Judge to have the benefit of relevant
    evidence which has now come to light.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie's  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Devittie and Osborne for the issue of suitability to be considered.

Nadine Finch
Signed                                  Date 16 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

