




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00947/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 29 September 2016                    |On: 05 October 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                 manuel [u]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of USA, born on 22  January  1961.  He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  Mozolowski,  dismissing  his   appeal   against   the
      respondent's decision to refuse to grant entry clearance to the UK  as
      a returning resident.


   2. The  respondent  considered  the  appellant's  application  for  entry
      clearance under paragraph 18 of the immigration rules. The  respondent
      noted that his US passport showed that he had visited the UK on 18 May
      2012, 12 May 2013, 15 May 2014  and  17  October  2014,  but  did  not
      demonstrate that he had been granted indefinite leave to remain in the
      UK. Furthermore, he had stated that he had left  the  UK  in  2001  to
      return to live in the United States. Therefore he had been  away  from
      the UK for longer than two  years.  Accordingly  the  application  was
      refused under paragraph 18(i) and (ii) of the immigration rules.


   3. The appellant appealed against that decision but did  not  request  an
      oral hearing. He produced his old passport containing  his  indefinite
      leave to remain which was granted on 10 February 2000. His appeal  was
      considered on the papers by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski on 22
      December 2015 and was dismissed in a determination  promulgated  on  2
      February 2016.


   4. Judge Mozolowsi set out the relevant facts as stated by the  appellant
      and as set out in two emails submitted from his wife. She  noted  that
      the appellant, a national of the USA residing in North  Carolina,  had
      worked in the UK on a US Air Force base and had met his  British  wife
      in the UK, 29 years ago, and had married her in 1986. He had  remained
      in the UK and obtained indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  spouse.  In
      early/mid 2001 he had moved with his family to the USA.  However  that
      had proved problematical financially for the family with  the  decline
      in the dollar and house prices rising in the UK and as  a  result  the
      family could not afford to move back to  the  UK.  In  2006  his  wife
      returned to the UK with their daughter to see if she could adjust to a
      British high school and he remained in the USA with his son. That  did
      not work out and so his wife and daughter  returned  to  the  USA  and
      their children completed their education in USA. The appellant and his
      spouse now owned properties in the UK and USA. The appellant had  been
      living in the USA but had visited the UK regularly on six month  visit
      visas. His wife's mother had been diagnosed with  Alzheimer's  disease
      and his wife had been helping to care for her and, it  was  said,  was
      now living full-time in  the  UK.  Their  UK  property  was  near  her
      mother's house. The appellant wished to return to the  UK  on  a  more
      permanent basis so that he could be there with his wife.


   5. Judge Mozolowsi accepted that the appellant had  indefinite  leave  to
      remain in the UK at the time he left in 2001, but  was  not  satisfied
      that he did so when he last left the UK after  his  visit  in  October
      2014. She noted a lack of any evidence before her to show that he  had
      returned to the UK on a regular basis less than every two years  since
      2001. She considered that since 2001 he had not been normally resident
      in the UK and that he had employment and a home in the USA.  She  also
      noted that, although it was said that the appellant's wife was  living
      full-time in the UK, there were clear indications in the evidence that
      she travelled between the UK and the USA. There was no  evidence  that
      the children were in the UK and there appeared to be  strong  ties  to
      the USA. The judge did not, therefore,  accept  that  the  appellant's
      spouse had been shown to be living full-time in the UK. She found that
      the appellant was unable to meet the requirements in paragraph 18  and
      was unable to benefit from the discretion in paragraph 19.  The  judge
      then went on to consider Article 8 but considered that  the  appellant
      was unable to meet the requirements in Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE
      of the immigration rules and that there was no case outside the rules.

   6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      and granted on 1 August 2016. The matter then came before me.


   7. There was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
      hearing and no explanation for the appellant's spouse's absence or for
      the absence of any other party on behalf of the appellant. Mr  Kandola
      made brief submissions and I advised him that I  was  upholding  Judge
      Mozolowki's decision.


   8. My reasons for so doing are as follows.

Consideration and findings

   9. The appellant's grounds seeking permission consist of  a  letter  from
      the appellant and his wife responding  to  various  points  raised  by
      Judge Mozolowsi which she noted had not been explained in the evidence
      before her and providing further details  of  the  appellant's  wife's
      concerns about being available for her mother's care.  Permission  was
      granted on the basis that the judge arguably gave insufficient  weight
      to the question of emotional  dependency  by  the  appellant's  wife's
      mother upon his wife.

  10. However, as Mr Kandola submitted, the grounds do not in fact  seek  to
      identify any errors of law made by the judge,  but  simply  provide  a
      further narrative and a response  to  some  of  the  judge's  concerns
      arising from gaps in the evidence.


  11. The evidence before the judge was extremely  limited.  She  considered
      the accounts given  by  the  appellant's  spouse  in  her  two  emails
      produced for the appeal, setting out the family circumstances, but  as
      she said at [26], there were more questions raised than answers  given
      in that evidence. The judge pointed out in particular that  there  was
      no indication in the evidence that the appellant had travelled back to
      the UK on a regular basis less than every two years after 2001;  there
      were clear indications in the evidence that his spouse travelled  back
      and forth between the UK and the USA; there was no evidence where  the
      children were; there was no  explanation  from  the  appellant  as  to
      whether he intended to settle permanently in the UK rather  than  just
      visit for extended periods; there was no evidence about the extent  of
      the  appellant's  mother-in-law's  condition  or  the  level  of  care
      available to her from other family members, there was no  evidence  to
      explain the extent of the role played by the appellant's wife  in  her
      care; there was no indication how close the appellant's  home  was  to
      his mother-in-law's home; and there was no evidence about  what  would
      happen to the appellant's home in the USA if he came to the  UK  on  a
      more permanent basis. The grounds of appeal provide an answer to  some
      of these questions, but the information provided was  not  before  the
      judge at the time she made her decision, and she  cannot  be  said  to
      have erred in law by failing to consider evidence not provided to her.



  12. On the evidence she had available to her,  the  judge  considered  and
      addressed all relevant matters. At [25] and  [26]  she  considered  in
      some detail the question of emotional dependence  by  the  appellant's
      wife's mother. It seems to me that, faced  with  an  appeal  in  which
      there was no oral evidence and  very  limited  written  evidence,  the
      judge did all that she possibly could and provided  clear  and  cogent
      reasons for reaching the  conclusions  that  she  did.  The  appellant
      plainly could not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  18  and  the
      limited evidence before the judge provided  no  basis  upon  which  he
      could demonstrate any entitlement to  the  discretion  afforded  under
      paragraph 19. The judge was unarguably entitled to  conclude  as  such
      and, for the reasons cogently given at [16] to [28], to conclude  that
      the appellant could not succeed under Article 8, either on  the  basis
      of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE or outside the immigration rules.

  13. Accordingly, I find no errors of law in the  judge's  decision  and  I
      uphold the decision.

DECISION

  14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  05 October
2016
