

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/00564/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House without a       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|hearing                                   |                                 |
|On 6 December 2017                        |On 7 December 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                 SHIPA BEGUM
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 6 November 2017 I gave the following directions:-


   1. Having had regard to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  and  to
      the decision of the respondent, it appears to me that there  may  have
      been a misunderstanding as to which Immigration Rules are applicable.


   2. It does not appear to be in  doubt  that  the  appellant's  mother  is
      settled in the United Kingdom  or  that  she  is  the  sole  surviving
      parent, the appellant's father having died in 1999  -  see  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge's decision at paragraphs [8] and [13].  It  would  thus
      appear  that  the  application  should  have  been  considered   under
      paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules as E-ECC 1.6 is applicable only
      where the parent has limited leave to remain which  is  not  the  case
      here (see the paragraph entitled "Family life as a child of  a  person
      with limited leave..." which precedes paragraph  E-EC-  C).   Further,
      this would appear to be a case falling within paragraph 297 (i) (d) in
      which case the appellant does not need to show that her mother has had
      sole responsibility for her. The sub-paragraphs in paragraphs 297  (i)
      are to be read disjunctively, not cumulatively.


   3. It is therefore my preliminary view that the decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal should be set aside and that the appropriate  course  of
      action would be remake the decision allowing the appeal  as  the  sole
      reason given for refusal under the Immigration Rules is a  failure  to
      show sole responsibility under paragraphs E ECC 1.6. and no  basis  is
      put forward as to why, given that the Immigration Rules were  in  fact
      satisfied, it is nonetheless necessary  in  a  democratic  society  or
      proportionate to refuse Entry Clearance.


   4. Unless within ten working days of the issue of these directions  there
      is any written objection to this course of action, supported by cogent
      argument, the Upper Tribunal will  proceed  to  determine  the  appeal
      without an oral hearing on the above basis, setting aside the decision
      and substituting it with a decision allowing the appeal.


   5. In the absence of a timely response by a party, it  will  be  presumed
      that it has no objection to the course of action proposed


 2. The appellant has by a letter dated 14  November  2017  agreed  to  the
    proposed course of action.


 3. The respondent has not, however, engaged with the directions but has in
    a letter dated 17 November 2017 responded to the grounds of  appeal  in
    generalised terms. There is no attempt whatsoever to  engage  with  the
    directions made. While  reference  is  made  to  the  finding  of  sole
    responsibility being sustainable, there is no engagement  with  whether
    the correct provisions of the Immigration Rules were  applied,  nor  is
    any proper reason given for requesting an  oral  hearing  supported  by
    arguments relevant to the mattes raised in the directions.  The  letter
    of 17 November 2017 cannot properly be considered as a response to  the
    directions, nor has there been any subsequent correspondence  from  the
    respondent.


 4. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that it is  in  the  interests  of
    justice to determine the appeal without a hearing and  that  no  cogent
    argument has been provided as to why the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should not be set aside and remade allowing the appeal for the
    reasons set out above in the directions made on 6 November 2017.


 5. Given the findings made  that  the  appellant  did  in  fact  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, careful consideration should  be
    made as to the basis on which  entry clearance should now be granted.



Summary of conclusions

 1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
    an error of law and I set it aside.


 2. I remake the decision and allow the appeal on human rights grounds.




Signed                                             Date:  6 December 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


