
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00794/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 8 July 2021                       |On 3 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PJA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Lotay of Derby Immigration Aid Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (PJA).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines who was born on 12  March
    1990.  On 25 May 2019, he made a human rights claim based upon Art 8 of
    the ECHR.  That application was refused on 18 October 2019.

 4. The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Following  a
    hearing, on 23 November 2020 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  V  Jones)
    allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of
    grounds and, on 17 December 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grant)
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 6. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing by Microsoft  Teams  at  the
    Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on 8 July 2021.  I was  present  in  court
    and Ms Aboni, who represented the Secretary of State, and Mr Lotay, who
    represented the appellant, joined the  hearing  remotely  by  Microsoft
    Teams.

 7. Subsequent to the hearing, Mr Lotay emailed the appellant's bundles  to
    me which were missing from the file.

The Judge's Decision

 8. In allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR,  the  judge
    found that the  public  interest,  in  particular  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control, was outweighed by the severity of the impact  upon
    the appellant's family.

 9. In particular, the evidence before the judge concerned the  appellant's
    two children, K and P aged respectively 6 years  and  4  months  and  8
    years and 1 month at the date of the hearing on 15 October 2020.  K and
    P have been diagnosed with  Autistic  Spectrum  Disorder  ("ASD").   In
    allowing the appeal, highly significant to the judge's decision was her
    view as to the best interests of K and P and the impact  upon  them  of
    returning to the Philippines.

10. Before the judge, was a letter of support from Ms Paul,  the  SEND  Co-
    ordinator relating to the provision of support given  to  K  and  P  at
    their school.  The judge summarised the evidence as regards K  at  para
    33 of her decision as follows:

         "33. There was no objective  evidence  supporting  the  appellant's
             evidence that the  Philippines  does  not  have  a  system  of
             providing for special education needs such as autism.   But  I
             am satisfied from the evidence of [K's] SEN  Co-ordinator  and
             consultant physician that he  has  wide  ranging  and  complex
             educational needs arising  from  his  ASD  diagnosis  and  has
             characteristics suggesting that he  has  additional  needs  in
             relation to ADHD.   He  has  an  EHC  Plan  and  is  therefore
             receiving funding for additional support over  and  above  the
             SEN support normally provided by local authorities to  schools
             with SEN pupils.  The fact he has a Plan means his  needs  are
             at a very high level.   He  is  making  progress  but  he  has
             significant  speech  and   language   delay,   together   with
             cognitive, sensory and behavioural needs.  He is receiving 1:1
             support and a differentiated curriculum.  Whilst there was  no
             evidence to support the appellant's submission that no  school
             in the Philippines could provide additional support for [K], I
             was satisfied from the evidence from the  school  and  medical
             professionals that the process of reassessing his needs there,
             together with the disruption of changing not only  his  school
             but his teachers, teaching assistants and therapists is highly
             likely to set his educational development back  significantly.
             Not only this, but he will have  to  adjust  to  moving  to  a
             different country with a different  language,  whilst  already
             struggling with language delay.  I attach particular weight to
             the evidence of Ms Paul that his  school  has  kept  the  same
             teacher and teaching assistants for [K] for the last two years
             precisely because of the significant emotional difficulties he
             experiences with change".

11. The judge then dealt with support provided by K's paternal  grandmother
    outside school in para 34 of her decision:

         "34. Outside school, the children receive additional  support  from
             their paternal grandmother who has professional experience  of
             supporting children with additional needs.  Having  regard  to
             [K's] age and significant speech and language difficulties,  I
             find it would be very difficult for him to maintain the  close
             relationship he has established with his  grandmother  through
             social media or other remote means  of  communication  as  the
             respondent suggests he can do.  The loss of her support  would
             be a further significant change which,  on  the  evidence,  he
             will  struggle  to  adjust  to  and   will   have   difficulty
             understanding".

12. Then at para 35, the judge dealt with the  position  of  P,  K's  elder
    brother:

         "35. [P] also has an ASD diagnosis and  though  his  needs  do  not
             appear to be at the level requiring  an  EHCP,  I  accept  the
             school's evidence that he too has  difficulties  adjusting  to
             change and if he were  to  attend  a  school  in  a  different
             country would struggle with the  fact  that  lessons  will  be
             taught very differently.  At present he is taught in  a  small
             class and benefits from a high level of teacher support".

13. Then at para 36, the judge reached the following finding in relation to
    K and P's best interests:

         "36. Having carefully considered all the relevant  factors  I  have
             concluded that the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  two
             children lie in remaining in the UK with their parents so that
             they can continue their education here and maintain the  close
             relationship and support they  currently  receive  from  their
             grandmother".

14. At para 37, the judge cited a passage from the judgment of Lord Kerr in
    ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 concerning the best interests  of  a
    child being a primary consideration and that:

         "What  is  determined  to  be  a  child's  best  interests   should
         customarily dictate the outcome  of  cases  such  as  the  present,
         therefore, and it will require considerations of substantial moment
         to permit a different result".

15. At para 38, the judge reached her ultimate conclusion as follows:

         "38. The maintenance of immigration  control  is  a  strong  public
             interest consideration, in furtherance of the  legitimate  aim
             of maintaining economic well-being of the UK.  Having balanced
             all the public interest considerations, with particular regard
             to the weight to be  attached  to  the  primacy  of  the  best
             interests of the two children affected  by  this  decision,  I
             find that the severity of the  respondent's  decision  on  the
             Article 8 rights of the appellant's family outweigh the public
             interest  of  immigration  control  in  this  case.   I   have
             concluded the impact  of  the  respondent's  decision  on  the
             appellant's Article 8 rights is disproportionate to the public
             interest it seeks to pursue.  I  find  the  decision  breaches
             Section  6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  and  allow  the
             appellant's appeal".

16. As a result, the judge allowed the appeal under Art 8.

The Respondent's Submissions

17. The respondent relies upon four grounds  which  were  developed  by  Ms
    Aboni in her oral submissions.

18. First, it is submitted that the judge failed to apply the correct  test
    in assessing whether the appellant's removal would be proportionate  by
    failing  to  consider  whether  it  would  have  "unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences" for the appellant, his wife or children.  It  is  further
    argued that in assessing  the  children's  best  interests,  the  judge
    failed to take into account that there was no  evidence  to  show  that
    adequate care was not  available  in  the  Philippines.   Finally,  the
    report of Ms Paul, it was submitted, related that  the  impact  upon  K
    would be very upsetting and might lead to him lashing out if he were to
    move to a new school "without support" and there was no  evidence  that
    such support would not be available (Ground 1).

19. Secondly, the grounds contend that, in considering what weight to  give
    to the appellant's private life,  the  judge  was  wrong  to  apply  by
    analogy the decision in CI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 on the
    basis that the appellant had previously lived in the UK  where  he  had
    entered aged 6 years of age and had had a permanent right of  residence
    and would have obtained British citizenship but for the fact  that  his
    mother sent him back to live in the Philippines when he was 13 years of
    age (Ground 2).

20. Thirdly,  the  judge  was  wrong  not  to  apply  the  approach  in  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at [58]-[60] that the decision
    should be made in the "real  world"  and  that  it  would  normally  be
    reasonable to expect children to return to their own country when  none
    were British citizens (Ground 3).

21. Fourthly, the judge gave too little weight to the public interest.  The
    fact that he spoke English was a neutral factor but he was receiving  a
    very high level of  help  paid  for  from  the  public  purse  and  was
    therefore a burden on the taxpayer (Ground 4).

The Appellant's Submissions

22. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Lotay relied upon  a  skeleton  argument
    and rule 24 response which he also developed in his oral submissions.

23. First, he submitted that the judge had not failed  properly  to  direct
    herself.  She had considered  that  the  impact  upon  the  appellant's
    family would be severe and, the dictionary definition of "severe" meant
    "rigorous or harsh treatment".  Consequently, the judge had, in effect,
    decided that the impact would be  harsh  and  unjustified  because  the
    public interest was outweighed.

24. Secondly, the judge had not failed properly to apply the approach in EV
    (Philippines), he had found that the best interests of the children  (K
    and P) were to remain in the  UK  and  that  that  tipped  the  balance
    against the public interest in the appellant's favour.

25. Mr Lotay submitted that I  should  only  interfere  with  Judge  Jones'
    finding if it was perverse or irrational.  I should not interfere  with
    the decision just because it might be generous and another judge  might
    not necessarily come to the same conclusion.

26.  Mr  Lotay  accepted  that  there  was  no  evidence  concerning   what
    educational provision there would be in the Philippines but  the  judge
    had approached the impact upon the children on that very basis and  had
    reached a reasonable and rational conclusion as to their best interests
    and that the decision was disproportionate.

27. As regards CI (Nigeria), Mr Lotay submitted that the judge was entitled
    to take that into account, by analogy, in assessing what weight to give
    to the appellant's private life.  In this appeal, had  the  appellant's
    mother not sent him back to the  Philippines  aged  13,  as  the  judge
    found, the appellant would in all  likelihood  have  become  a  British
    citizen and that was relevant in assessing his claim under Art 8.

28.  Mr  Lotay  submitted  that  the  judge's  finding   in   relation   to
    proportionality was  rational  and  reasonable  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal should be dismissed.

Discussion

    Grounds 1, 3 and 4




29. It is helpful to take Grounds 1, 3 and 4 together.

30. In assessing whether the appellant's removal would be disproportionate,
    the only misdirection put forward by Ms Aboni was the  judge's  failure
    explicitly to ask  herself  whether  there  were  "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences" sufficient to outweigh the public interest.   It  is  not
    suggested that the  judge  wrongly  directed  herself  as  regards  the
    primary consideration being given to the best interests  of  K  and  P.
    The judge correctly referred to s.55 of the UK Borders Act 2009 at para
    7.  At para 8 of her decision, the judge also cited ZH  (Tanzania)  and
    that the Supreme  Court  had  concluded  that  the  best  interests  of
    children  were  a  primary  consideration  although   they   could   be
    cumulatively outweighed by other factors in determining proportionality
    but  no  other  factor  was  inherently  more  significant.    Further,
    reference was made by the  judge  to  the  subsequent  Supreme  Court's
    decision in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 at para 8 of the decision.

31. Ms Aboni relied upon the terms of Appendix FM (para  GEN.3.2(2))  which
    states that where an individual does  not  meet  the  requirements  for
    entry clearance or leave under Appendix FM then the decision maker must
    consider:

         "Whether there are exceptional  circumstances  which  would  render
         refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter or remain,  a  breach
         of Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,  because
         such refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for
         the applicant, their partner, a relevant child  or  another  family
         member whose Article 8 rights it is evident  from  the  information
         would be affected by a decision to refuse the application".

32. Mr Lotay also drew attention to GEN.3.3 which stated that  in  applying
    GEN.3.2:

         "The  decision-maker  must  take  into  account,   as   a   primary
         consideration, the best interests of any relevant child".

33. The Immigration Rules are, of course, only a statement of the Secretary
    of State's policy.  In R (Agyarko and Another) v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11,
    the Supreme Court accepted that the terms, for  example  of  GEN.3.2(2)
    were compatible with Art 8.  However, the Supreme Court recognised that
    the test of proportionality under Art 8.2 required a fair balance to be
    struck between the competing  public  and  individual  interests.   The
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences" test was not, in itself, part of the
    Strasbourg jurisprudence on applying Art 8 but was a domestic  approach
    that was consistent with Art 8.  At [60], Lord Reed said this:

         "It remains the position that the ultimate question is how  a  fair
         balance  should  be  struck  between  the  competing   public   and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord Bingham [in R(Razgar)  v
         SSHD [2004] UKHL 27] had in mind: that is  to  say,  a  requirement
         that the case should exhibit some highly unusual feature, over  and
         above the application  of  the  test  of  proportionality.  On  the
         contrary, she  has  defined  the  word  "exceptional",  as  already
         explained, as meaning "circumstances in which refusal would  result
         in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  individual  such  that
         the refusal of the application  would  not  be  proportionate".  So
         understood, the provision in the Instructions  that  leave  can  be
         granted outside the Rules  where  exceptional  circumstances  apply
         involves the application of the  test  of  proportionality  to  the
         circumstances of the individual case, and  cannot  be  regarded  as
         incompatible with article 8. That conclusion is  fortified  by  the
         express statement in the Instructions that "exceptional"  does  not
         mean "unusual" or "unique": see para 19 above.

34. At [57], Lord Reed emphasised that:

         "The critical issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to
         the strength of the public interest in the removal of the person in
         the case before it, the Article 8 claim is sufficiently  strong  to
         outweigh it.  In general, in cases concerned with precarious family
         life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the
         public interest in immigration control".

35. In R (MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10, Lady Hale and Lord  Carnwath
    in their joint judgment at [61]:

         "As we have explained, in agreement with Lord Reed in Hesham Ali,
         para 42, and Agyarko, para 42, the ultimate issue is whether a fair
         balance has been struck between individual  and  public  interests,
         taking account the various factors identified."

36. It follows, in my judgment, that it is not in itself a misdirection for
    a judge to  fail  explicitly  to  refer  to  the  "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences" test in assessing proportionality.  The judge must  apply
    the correct approach, set out in the Strasbourg jurisprudence, striking
    a fair balance between the public interest (which may  be  strong)  and
    determining whether in a precarious  family  life  case  (such  as  the
    present) there is a strong or compelling claim to outweigh  the  public
    interest.  In striking that fair balance, and doing so in a proper  and
    lawful manner, the best interests of any child  who  may  be  adversely
    affected by the decision are a "primary consideration".

37. In this case, I  accept  Mr  Lotay's  submission  that  the  judge  did
    approach the  balancing  exercise  in  para  38  of  her  determination
    appropriately and lawfully.  She specifically  considered  whether  the
    "severity" of the impact upon the  appellant's  family  outweighed  the
    public interest which she said was a "strong  ...  consideration".   Mr
    Lotay may well be correct that as a matter of dictionary definition the
    term "severe" means, in any event, "rigorous or harsh  treatment".   Of
    course,  whether  it  is  "unjustifiable"  is,  in  large  measure,   a
    reflection of striking a fair balance between  the  consequences  (that
    are harsh) and the public interest on the other  side  of  the  scales.
    Consequently, I reject  what  is  said  in  ground  1  that  the  judge
    misdirected  herself  as  to   the   proper   approach   to   assessing
    proportionality under Art 8.

38. I also reject ground 4, namely  that  the  judge  failed  to  give  due
    consideration to the public interest.  Whilst  the  judge  at  para  31
    referred to the appellant being able to speak English and not a  burden
    on public funds, she nevertheless recognised that there was a  "strong"
    public interest in the maintenance of immigration control derived  from
    the "legitimate aim of maintaining the economic well-being" of the  UK.
    That is a correct self-direction of the engaged public interest.  I see
    no basis on which it can be properly argued that the  judge  failed  to
    give proper consideration to  the  public  interest  in  her  decision.
    Consequently, I reject ground 4.

39. That then leaves both in ground 1 and ground 3, the judge's approach to
    K and P's  "best  interests".   These  were,  as  the  Supreme  Court's
    jurisprudence plainly states, "a primary consideration".

40. Ground 3  contends  that  in  reaching  an  assessment  that  the  best
    interests of K and P were  to  remain  in  the  UK,  the  judge  failed
    properly to apply what was  said  in  EV  (Philippines)  at  [58]-[60].
    There, Lewison LJ said this:

         "58.  In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
         interests of the children must be made on the basis that the  facts
         are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no  right  to
         remain, but the other parent does, that is the  background  against
         which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the  right
         to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment
         is conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
         the country of origin?

         59. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to expect the children
         to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least  because  the  family
         would be separated and the children would be deprived of the  right
         to grow up in the country of which they were citizens.

         60. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none
         of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to remain in
         this  country.  If  the  mother  is  removed,  the  father  has  no
         independent right to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is
         entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them. As  the
         immigration judge found it is obviously in their best interests  to
         remain with their parents. Although it is, of course a question  of
         fact for the tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of  being
         educated at public expense in the UK can outweigh  the  benefit  to
         the children of remaining with their parents.  Just  as  we  cannot
         provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate  the
         world.

41. However, I see nothing in the judge's decision which  runs  counter  to
    the approach set out by Lewison LJ in EV (Philippines).  In that  case,
    it was recognised that generally speaking  when  parents  and  children
    lack any basis to remain in the UK, the best interests of any  children
    lies in accompanying their parents to  their  home  country.   However,
    that  need  not  necessarily  be  the  case.    There   may   well   be
    circumstances, as Lewison LJ  said  at  [58]  where  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right  to
    remain in the UK.  The best interests of  a  child  remain  a  "primary
    consideration" following ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas and an assessment of
    those best interests is necessarily  fact-sensitive.   A  child's  best
    interests may point to remaining in the UK.  That, of course,  was  the
    judge's finding in this appeal based upon the impact upon K and  P  (in
    particular K) of the disruption  caused  by  leaving  the  UK  and  his
    schooling here to return to the Philippines  and  start  school  there.



42. Consequently, I reject ground 3.

43. That then leaves the final point raised in ground  1  that  the  judge,
    having  no  background  material  to  determine  whether  K   and   P's
    educational needs could be met in the Philippines, was  wrong  to  rely
    upon the evidence of Ms Paul and  to  conclude  that  K  and  P's  best
    interests were to remain in the UK.

44. In my judgment, that contention is not made out.   Ms  Paul  did  state
    that:

         "If [K] was to move to a  new  school  without  support  [K]  would
         become very upset and may lash out at others.  He would  be  unable
         to sit at a desk for more than a few minutes and would disrupt  the
         learning of others".

45. However, the remainder of Ms Paul's evidence concerning the  disruption
    caused to K and P of being dislocated from the UK to a  school  in  the
    Philippines was, as Mr Lotay submitted, based on  the  premise  as  the
    judge accepted that there was no evidence concerning what support  they
    would receive in terms of SEN in the Philippines.  At para  33  of  her
    decision,  the  judge  took  into  account  the  evidence  of  Ms  Paul
    concerning the  impact  upon  K  arising  from  his  ASD  and  ADHD  of
    relocating to a school in the Philippines even with support.  Likewise,
    in para 35 the judge, albeit to a  lesser  extent,  took  into  account
    disruption in change of school, teachers and to a  country  where  they
    would have to speak a different language (presumably also in  order  to
    receive education) as relevant issues in assessing their best interests
    and the impact upon them.

46. Further, at para 34 the judge took into account the support from  their
    grandmother that they would lose if they relocated to the  Philippines.



47. In MM(Lebanon), Lady Hale and Lord Carnwath in their joint judgment (at
    [107]) reminded appellate bodies of its role when assessing whether  an
    error of law was established:

         "107. It is no doubt desirable that there should  be  a  consistent
         approach to issues of this kind at tribunal level, but as  we  have
         explained there are means  to  achieve  this  within  the  tribunal
         system. As was said in Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, para 40 (per Carnwath LJ):

             "... It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
             tribunals, without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
             different conclusions on the same case ... The mere fact  that
             one tribunal has reached what may seem an  unusually  generous
             view of the facts of a particular case does not mean  that  it
             has made an error of law ... Nor does it create any precedent,
             so as to limit the Secretary of State's right to argue  for  a
             more restrictive approach on a similar  case  in  the  future.
             However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of
             the specialist tribunal should be respected.""

48. The judge was entitled, in my view, having taken all of  this  evidence
    into account, to find that the best interests of both K and P  were  to
    remain in the UK in the educational setting in which they had  settled,
    the judge reached a reasonable and rational finding, in the sense  that
    it was not a decision that no reasonable  judge  could  reach  on  this
    evidence.   In  addition,  the  judge  was  reasonably  and  rationally
    entitled to find that the  "severity"  of  the  impact  outweighed  the
    public interest carrying out the balancing exercise as set out in  para
    38 of her decision.

    Ground 2

49. That then leaves ground 2 and the contention that the judge  was  wrong
    to apply by analogy CI (Nigeria) to the appellant.  In CI (Nigeria) the
    Court of Appeal held that it was relevant in assessing what  weight  to
    give  to  an  individual's  private  and  family  life  that,  had  the
    individual's parents applied earlier in time, the appellant would  have
    been granted indefinite leave to remain earlier  (see  [49]-[53]).   At
    [52]-[53] Leggatt LJ (as he then was) said this:

         "52. This does not  mean  that  it  is  always  irrelevant  to  ask
         whether, if CI's application for leave to remain had been  made  or
         determined sooner than it was, the application would or should have
         succeeded. As Lord Reed explained in R (Agyarko)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11; [2017] 1  WLR  823,
         paras 51-52:

                "51.  Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully,  or  is
                entitled to remain in the UK only temporarily, however,  the
                significance of  this  consideration  depends  on  what  the
                outcome of  immigration  control  might  otherwise  be.  For
                example, if an applicant would  otherwise  be  automatically
                deported as a foreign  criminal,  then  the  weight  of  the
                public interest in his or her removal will generally be very
                considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even  if
                residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to  be
                granted leave to enter, at least if an application were made
                from outside the UK, then there might be no public  interest
                in his or her removal. ...

                52.  It is also necessary to bear in mind that  the  cogency
                of the public interest in the removal of a person living  in
                the UK unlawfully is liable to diminish - or, looking at the
                matter from the opposite perspective, the weight to be given
                to precarious family life is liable to increase -  if  there
                is a protracted delay  in  the  enforcement  of  immigration
                control. ...

         53. The stage at which such considerations are  relevant,  however,
         in a case involving deportation  of  a  "foreign  criminal"  is  in
         assessing whether there are "very  compelling  circumstances"  over
         and above those described in  the  Exceptions  which  outweigh  the
         public interest in deportation. That is  indeed  implicit  in  Lord
         Reed's discussion, which starts from the premise that the applicant
         is residing in the UK unlawfully."

50. This point, of course, in the context of this  appeal  related  to  the
    appellant's  reliance  upon  his  private  life  and   the   issue   of
    proportionality under Art 8.  That is made clear  in  para  24  of  the
    judge's determination where it is recorded  that  Mr  Lotay  (who  also
    represented the appellant before Judge Jones) relied upon CI  (Nigeria)
    in support of the submission that the fact that the appellant had  been
    eligible for British citizenship, but his parent failed to apply on his
    behalf, was relevant to the weight to be attached to his  private  life
    in the UK in assessing proportionality under Art 8.

51. In para 25, the judge concluded that  the  appellant  would  have  been
    granted British citizenship and in para 32 took that into account:

         "A matter to be put into  the  balance  when  weighing  the  public
         interest  considerations   and   conducting   the   proportionality
         assessment under Article 8".

52. To the limited extent this played in  the  judge's  reasoning,  it  was
    consistent with CI (Nigeria) and the passage from Lord Reed's  judgment
    in Agyarko.  In fact, of course, this appeal was largely determined  on
    the basis of the impact upon P and K and their lives in the  UK  rather
    than that of the appellant directly.  The relevance of CI (Nigeria)  to
    their claim was, perhaps, somewhat tangential.  Indeed, apart from  the
    reference in para 32, the judge made no further and explicit  reference
    to this factor when carrying out the balancing exercise in para  38  of
    her determination.  Nevertheless, to the extent that it was relevant, I
    accept Mr Lotay's submission, which was accepted by the judge, that the
    appellant's history, and that he would in all probability have become a
    British citizen, was not irrelevant to his claim under  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.  Although, as I have said, I do not consider that it factored  in
    in any significant way in the judge's reasoning when she concluded that
    the "strong" public interest was outweighed  by  the  severity  of  the
    impact, largely by reference to K and P's lives in the UK.

53. Consequently, I also reject ground 2.



Decision

54. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the  ECHR  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

55. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                19 July 2021


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Having allowed the appeal, Judge Jones did not  make  a  fee  award  on  the
basis that the appeal took account of evidence which was  not  available  to
the original decision maker.  That decision  has  not  been  challenged  and
therefore Judge Jones' decision not to make a fee award stands.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                19 July 2021
