
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2017                             |On 31 October 2017            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Akua Kyeraa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss D Ofei-Kwatia


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant applied for entry clearance as the partner  of  Mr  Ofori
    Nyarko on 13 March 2015 and she  was  interviewed  on  5  May  2015  in
    connection with that  application.   Presumably  as  a  result  of  the
    answers that she gave at that interview  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    decided on 6 May 2015 to refuse that application on the basis  that  he
    was not satisfied that the relationship with the  sponsor  was  genuine
    and subsisting.  The Appellant duly appealed and although the  decision
    was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager on 11  August  2015  it  was
    maintained.

 2. The appeal came before Judge Bradshaw in the First-tier Tribunal on  16
    December 2016.  She reviewed  the  record  of  the  interview  and  the
    written evidence of the Appellant.  She also had the  benefit  of  oral
    evidence from the sponsor, who she records having  been  cross-examined
    at some length.  Whilst there were questions raised about the  evidence
    the two individuals had given and whether it was  entirely  consistent,
    in the end, after assessing that evidence, she came to  the  conclusion
    that they were telling  the  truth  and  that  they  had  been  in  the
    relationship that was the basis for the entry clearance application for
    the length of time that they had described. In  my  judgment  she  gave
    entirely adequate reasons for that conclusion and indeed  I  note  that
    the Respondent in this application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal does not suggest otherwise.  So those findings  of  fact
    in relation to the relationship must stand and indeed I confirm that.

 3. The Respondent's challenge to Judge Bradshaw's decision, however, takes
    the fundamental point that  the  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was one that was statutorily limited by Section 84 of the 2002
    Act to one of lawfulness by reference to Section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act and indeed Judge Bradshaw did fall into that error.   It  is  quite
    clear that she stopped short  at  the  point  of  concluding  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting, and simply sought to allow the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules.  That was a route that was not open
    to her and both parties before me today are agreed  that  that  is  the
    case.

 4. Were the Upper Tribunal to go on to deal with the appeal  today  it  is
    however now also considered that the outcome of the human rights appeal
    is one that is clear and I am invited by both  parties  to  reach  that
    conclusion, and I do. Building on Judge Bradshaw's findings of fact  in
    relation to the relationship it is clear that the Article 8  rights  of
    both the Appellant, and the sponsor, are engaged by the decision  under
    appeal.  It is clear that the Entry Clearance Officer offered no  other
    reason for refusing the entry  clearance  application  other  than  his
    doubt over the relationship and  Mr  Clarke  accepts  that  before  me.
    Having had regard to section 117A-B it is difficult, indeed impossible,
    to identify any good reason  how  the  public  interest  could  lie  in
    maintaining the refusal.  The public has no interest in a case such  as
    this as far as I can see in doing so.   Indeed  in  my  judgement,  the
    public interest in maintaining a coherent and effective and predictable
    scheme  for  immigration  must  lie  in  the  appeal   being   allowed.
    Accordingly, I set aside Judge Bradshaw's decision to allow the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules because she had no jurisdiction to  do  so,
    and I remake the decision on the appeal so as to allow it on Article  8
    grounds.



Notice of decision

    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  6
    January 2017 did involve the making of an error of  law  that  requires
    the decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules to be  set
    aside.


    I remake the decision upon the appeal so as  to  allow  the  Article  8
    appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes




To the Respondent
Fee award
The fee award made by the First tier Tribunal is confirmed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes


