
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00041/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 April 2016                             |On 13 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                    JAAL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Adebayo, of Lonsdale & Mayall Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Mitchell who, in a decision promulgated on 19 August  2015,
       dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
       of 29 January 2015, served on him on 02 February 2015, refusing  his
       human right claim. The Respondent's decision additionally  certified
       the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim  under  section  94B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  the  consequence  of
       which is that the Appellant could only appeal the decision  refusing
       his human rights claim after he left the United Kingdom.


    2. The Appellant was deported to Nigeria on 24 March  2015.  The  Judge
       dismissed  the  appeal  without  hearing  any  evidence   from   the
       Appellant's partner,  who  was  not  present  at  the  hearing.  The
       Appellant contends that his partner was trying to  get  the  hearing
       centre and that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  committed  a  procedural
       impropriety rendering  the  hearing  unfair  by  proceeding  in  the
       partner's absence.

Background

    3. The Appellant is a male national of Nigeria, date of birth  05  June
       1980. He claims to have entered the United Kingdom in 1988  aged  8.
       Although noting the absence of evidence to  support  this  assertion
       the Respondent does accept that Appellant's grandparents became  his
       legal  guardian  in  1991.  She  acknowledges  that   he   spent   a
       'significant period of time in the UK'. The  Appellant  was  granted
       Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) on 15 January  2003.  He  travelled
       once to Nigeria for a ten day trip on 18 June 2005.

    4. The Appellant has three children born in the United Kingdom, all  of
       whom are said to be British citizens. The oldest child was  born  in
       November 2004 to his ex-partner. His other two children were born in
       May 2009 and  July  2010  to  his  current  partner.  The  Appellant
       maintains that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with all
       three  children,  and  with  his  current  partner.  The  Respondent
       accepted that these relationships were genuine and subsisting.

    5. The Appellant maintains that his two youngest children  have  severe
       language difficulties and are autistic. His  middle  child  is  also
       said to suffer from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder  (ADHD)
       and was receiving one-on-one anger management treatment. The  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge noted the absence of any independent evidence to
       support the last assertion, but, for  the  purposes  of  the  appeal
       before him, accepted that it was so. A letter before the  First-tier
       Tribunal from  Norfolk  County  Council,  dated  03  February  2015,
       confirmed that both of the Appellant's  children  with  his  current
       partner were subject to a Child Protection Plan under  the  category
       of Emotional Abuse. This was as a result of  their  mother's  mental
       health difficulties and history of substance misuse, and an incident
       of domestic violence between their mother and an ex partner of hers.
       The letter indicated that both the children  had  "...  considerable
       difficulties with their  speech  and  language,  and  are  receiving
       ongoing support for this". Both children were said to be  behind  in
       their learning and were affected by their mother's mental health and
       substance misuse. A GP letter dated 11 February 2015  described  the
       Appellant's  partner  as  having  a  long  history  of  anxiety  and
       depression and was, at that time,  under  the  care  of  the  Mental
       Health Team. She had a history of psychoactive substance misuse with
       'current opioid dependence and maintenance on Subutex'. She was said
       to have anxious, paranoid  and  emotional  unstable  traits  with  a
       possible post-traumatic stress disorder.


    6. Between 22 May 2001 and 21 November 2008 the Appellant committed  29
       offences for which he received 10 convictions. On 03  November  2010
       the Appellant was convicted of causing  Grievous  Bodily  Harm  with
       intent, and supplying a Class A drug. The GBH offence  involved  the
       use of torture to inflict pain through, inter alia, the use of a hot
       iron and boiling water. On 06 June 2011 the Appellant was  sentenced
       to  10  years  imprisonment  for  the  first  offence  and  5  years
       imprisonment  for  the  2nd  offences,   both   sentences   to   run
       concurrently. It is clear that these were  offences  of  the  utmost
       seriousness.

    7. A letter  from  the  Probation  Service,  dated  26  February  2015,
       indicated that the Appellant had  recently  been  in  a  category  D
       prison and had been issued with a temporary licence to  the  Norwich
       area to 'rebuild family ties'. The Appellant was said to  have  used
       his time in prison in a productive way  and  had  completed  several
       educational  and  other  courses.  He  had  provided  all   negative
       mandatory drug tests. He was assessed  as  posing  a  high  risk  of
       serious harm to the public  and  known  adult,  but  this  would  be
       reviewed after his release after he had spent time in the community.



    8. In her refusal of the Appellant's human rights claim the  Respondent
       set out the Appellant's immigration  and  criminal  history.  Having
       noted, as a result of the length of  his  index  offence,  that  the
       Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraphs 399 or  399A
       of the immigration rules, the Respondent  considered  whether  there
       were 'very compelling circumstances' over and above those  contained
       in paragraphs 399 and 399A that could outweigh the  public  interest
       in the Appellant's deportation. She concluded there were not.

    9. In preparation for First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing on  10  August
       2015 the Appellant's representatives created a bundle running to 264
       pages. This  included  unsigned  and  undated  statements  from  the
       Appellant, his brother and his partner, a handwritten statement from
       the Appellant dated 10 March 2015,  a  further  statement  from  the
       Appellant's partner dated 05 February 2015, a school report relating
       to the Appellant's oldest child, personal correspondence between the
       Appellant and his family  and  photos  of  the  Appellant  with  his
       family.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and its decision

   10. The first 8 paragraphs of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  appear
       under the heading 'Details of the  Appellant  and  Some  Preliminary
       Matters'. The Judge noted that a case-management  hearing  had  been
       held on 03 June 2015 and that there were to be six witnesses on  the
       Appellant's behalf. Confirmatory notices setting out the date,  time
       and  place  of  the   hearing   were   sent   to   the   Appellant's
       representatives on 12 June 2015. These indicated that the start time
       of the hearing was 10am.
   11. On the day of the hearing both parties' representatives were said to
       be present at 10am, Mr Adeolu being the Appellant's  representative.
       According to his decision the Judge was informed that the  witnesses
       had not arrived at 10am. At 10:45  the  Judge  was  informed  by  Mr
       Adeolu that he had been in contact with the witnesses at 10:30,  who
       were, at that time, at Liverpool Street Station, and that they  were
       on their way to the hearing centre, the witnesses having  missed  an
       earlier train. The Judge, aware that it would take  around  half-an-
       hour to reach the hearing  centre  from  Liverpool  Street  station,
       returned to  his  chambers  after  dealing  with  other  preliminary
       matters. He was informed at  11:10am  that  the  witnesses  had  not
       arrived. The Judge returned to the  hearing  room  at  11:35am.  The
       witnesses were not present. Mr  Adeolu  informed  the  Judge  of  an
       unsuccessful attempt he made to contact the witnesses at 11:21am.


   12. At this stage there was an application by the Home Office Presenting
       Officer for the appeal to proceed by way of  submissions  only.  The
       Judge indicated that, in the absence of any application to  adjourn,
       the First-tier Tribunal was required to proceed  to  hear  the  case
       unless there was a good reason for the  absence  of  the  witnesses.
       According to the Judge Mr Adeolu indicated that he  had  nothing  to
       say in response to the application. The Judge thereafter stated that
       he would proceed to hear the appeal in light of the  absence  of  an
       explanation for non-attendance by witnesses and any application  for
       an adjournment.

   13. Having heard submissions from the  Respondent  Mr  Adeolu  indicated
       that it was regrettable that the  witnesses  were  not  present  and
       stated that the appeal was not suitable  for  a  'submissions  only'
       approach. Mr Adeolu then made an adjournment application  which  was
       refused. In so doing the Judge noted that at 10:30am  the  witnesses
       were only a half hour's walk from the Tribunal, and that it was  now
       11:55am. The Judge noted that the witnesses had Mr  Adeolu's  mobile
       phone number but that there had been  no  attempt  to  contact  him.
       Having regard to the statements in the Appellant's bundle the  Judge
       was of the view that the hearing could fairly proceed by way of oral
       submissions. The adjournment application  having  been  refused,  Mr
       Adeolu stated that it would not be in his  client's  best  interests
       for him to make oral submissions. The appeal decision  was  reserved
       at 12 noon. Crucially for the purposes of this error of law hearing,
       the Judge stated, at paragraph 8, that he  instructed  the  Tribunal
       administration  to  let  him  know  if  any  witnesses  subsequently
       arrived. Having heard other cases from  the  float  list  the  Judge
       confirmed at 1:30pm that the witnesses had still not arrived at  the
       Tribunal.


   14. Having set out the above history of the hearing, the Judge proceeded
       to determine the appeal. The Judge made reference to the appropriate
       immigration rules and his duty to take account of his considerations
       in sections 117B to D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
       2002 (paragraphs 67 to 73). The  Judge  considered  the  appropriate
       judicial authorities (paragraphs 65,  66,  74  &  98)  and  he  took
       account  of  the  medical  evidence  before  him  relating  to   the
       Appellant's partner and children (paragraph 94). The Judge sought to
       identify the best interests of the children (paragraphs 101  &  108)
       and had regard to the public interest considerations (paragraphs 105
       & 113). The Judge accepted that the  Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with his children (paragraphs 80 & 81),  but
       found that he had not been involved in the children's  lives  during
       the time he was incarcerated and that the children had largely grown
       up without him (paragraphs 80 & 106). The Judge concluded  that  the
       refusal of the human rights decision had the 'potential'  to  be  an
       interference with the family  life  that  'may  exist'  between  the
       Appellant and his children (terminology that may, on  its  face,  be
       inconsistent with his findings at paragraphs 80 and 81).  The  Judge
       expressed doubts about the Appellant's relationship with his partner
       given that she fathered a  child  with  another  man  in  2013  and,
       significantly, given her absence from the appeal hearing  (paragraph
       95). Having regard to the  seriousness  of  his  offending  and  the
       stated high risk of serious harm to the public the Judge found there
       were no very compelling  circumstances  concerning  the  Appellant's
       relationship with his partner and children  sufficient  to  outweigh
       the public interest and he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

   15. The poorly drafted grounds of appeal made reference to  a  statement
       from Mr Adeolu signed and dated 17 September 2015,  almost  a  month
       after the decision was promulgated (an application for an  extension
       of time was granted by the First-tier Tribunal). Mr  Adeolu  claimed
       that the 'lead witness' (the partner) had  missed  her  train  as  a
       result of child-care issues. She was travelling from Norfolk and was
       not familiar with London. Mr Adeolu and the Home  Office  Presenting
       Officer had informed the Judge that only the partner would be cross-
       examined and, as  a  result,  her  evidence  was  considered  to  be
       'crucial'. Mr Adeolu stated that the Judge entered the hearing  room
       at 10:45am and said he  was  'bored  sitting  upstairs'.  Mr  Adeolu
       stated that the Judge then returned to his chambers and returned  to
       the hearing room at 11:30am indicating that he was going to commence
       the appeal without hearing oral evidence. Mr Adeolu  maintains  that
       he did  suggest  to  the  Judge  that  the  witness  may  be  in  an
       underground train, a point not recorded either by the Judge  in  his
       Record of  Proceedings  (ROP)  or  in  the  Home  Office  Presenting
       Officer's note of the hearing. Mr Adeolu denied that  he  failed  to
       object to the hearing proceeding without the  witnesses.  Mr  Adeolu
       complained that the Judge should have heard from  him  first  rather
       than the Presenting Officer. This, it  was  claimed,  constituted  a
       procedural impropriety. Mr Adeolu  stated  that,  by  the  time  the
       hearing commenced, the witnesses were 'only 95  minutes  late',  and
       that there were still 85 minutes until the lunch break.


   16. Paragraphs 18 and 19 of Mr  Adeolu's  statement  are  of  particular
       relevance in this error of law hearing. He stated that the witnesses
       arrived at the hearing centre around 12:05pm.  He  stated  that  the
       witnesses signed in at the reception desk  and  "...  the  witnesses
       requested the receptionist to indicate the time they  arrived  [sic]
       the court premises." Mr Adeolu then queried  the  Judge's  assertion
       relating to his instruction to the court administration to  let  him
       know if any witnesses arrived after the hearing had ended. Mr Adeolu
       thereafter criticised the  Judge's  decision  to  proceed  with  the
       hearing in the absence of the witnesses and claimed that  the  Judge
       acted unreasonably. The grounds argued that the hearing was  unfair,
       that  the  judge's  failure  to  wait  for  the  attendance  of  the
       Appellant's partner amounted to a material  error  of  law  and  was
       unreasonable, and that the same amounted to a breach  of  Article  6
       ECHR.

The proceedings up to the error of law hearing

   17. Following the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal an error of law hearing was set down for 19  February  2016
       in  front  of  Deputy  Judge  Latter.  At  this  hearing,   somewhat
       surprisingly given that he had filed  a  statement  giving  evidence
       relating to the proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
       Appellant was represented by Mr Adeolu. The appeal was adjourned  to
       give the First-tier Tribunal Judge an opportunity of  commenting  on
       the grounds of appeal and  the  supporting  witness  statement.  The
       Deputy Judge noted that this would also give the Appellant,  through
       his representative, an opportunity to obtain from Taylor  House  the
       witness sheet for 10 August 2015 referred to in paragraph 20  of  Mr
       Adeolu's witness statement. I note that a written request  was  made
       to Taylor House on 09 March 2016 for the sign-in sheet  for  the  10
       August 2015 hearing. I was informed at the error of law hearing that
       the Taylor  House  administration  had  failed  to  respond  to  the
       request. The adjournment was also  granted  to  give  Mr  Adeolu  an
       opportunity to make arrangements for another advocate to  appear  at
       the adjourned hearing if his statement was to be  put  in  evidence.
       Permission was granted for the Appellant  to  file  further  witness
       statements  concerning  the  conduct  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
       hearing.


   18. In an email dated  03  March  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       provided a response. With reference to his decision and  his  Record
       of Proceedings (ROP) the Judge noted that, at 10:30am, the witnesses
       were said to be in Liverpool Street Station, which was less than  30
       minutes from the hearing  centre.  They  had  failed  to  arrive  by
       11:35am and were not answering Mr Adeolu's calls.  The  Judge  noted
       that Mr Adeolu did not resist the Home Office  Presenting  Officer's
       application to proceed  with  the  hearing,  noting  only  that  the
       witnesses were not present and that the Appellant  was  in  Nigeria.
       There was no adjournment application at this  stage.  One  was  only
       made after the Respondent's submissions. When this  was  refused  Mr
       Adeolu did not make any submissions, indicating that he  would  rely
       on representations contained in earlier  correspondence  he  himself
       had drafted. The Judge commented that no explanation was offered for
       the absence of the witnesses. The Judge stated that he had asked the
       Tribunal administration to inform him if the  witnesses  did  arrive
       but, by 1:30pm, they had not done so.

The error of law hearing

   19. Prior to the commencement of  the  hearing  on  14  April  2016  the
       Judge's typed ROP and handwritten record of the  preliminary  issues
       were provided to the parties. On 08 April 2016  the  Upper  Tribunal
       received a statement from ML, the Appellant's sister, and a  further
       copy of the statement from Mr Adeolu. At the hearing,  after  having
       obtained the necessary clearance, Ms Willocks-Briscoe served on  the
       Appellant and the  Tribunal  a  copy  of  the  Presenting  Officer's
       handwritten notes from the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

   20. Given the conflicting evidence surrounding the circumstances of  the
       First-tier Tribunal hearing and the nature of the error  of  law  in
       play, I heard oral evidence from Mr Adeolu and from the  Appellant's
       sister.


   21. Mr Adeolu adopted his statement. I asked  a  number  of  preliminary
       questions. I asked him whether he had a  contemporaneous  record  of
       the events of the First-tier Tribunal hearing. He said he did keep a
       record but it had not been disclosed. When I asked Mr Adeolu whether
       he was OISC certified he did not understand the question. He claimed
       he worked under the supervision of a person who  was  authorised  to
       practice by a designated professional body. This was consistent with
       his 'section 84 form' provided at the hearing on 10 August  2015.  I
       inquired whether a statement had been obtained from the  Appellant's
       partner.  Mr Adeolu said that no statement  had  been  obtained  and
       that no attempt had been made to obtain a statement. He claimed  the
       partner  went  into  'rehab'  soon  after  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing. There was  no  independent  evidence  before  me  that  the
       partner had entered rehab. Mr Adeolu confirmed that his firm had not
       received any response from Taylor House following a request for  the
       sign-in sheet.

   22. In examination-in-chief Mr  Adeolu  claimed  that  he  made  a  full
       statement and did not  see  it  as  essential  that  he  attach  his
       contemporaneous notes  from  the  hearing.  He  confirmed  that  the
       partner entered rehab one or two days after the First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing and that she remained in rehab. She was in a terrible  state
       of health and her children had been taken away from her.  There  was
       no evidence to support this assertion because permission had  to  be
       obtained from the Family Courts. No attempt had been made to  obtain
       permission from the Family Courts. For the same reasons there was no
       medical evidence relating to the partner.

   23. Mr Adeolu was asked to describe what happened after  the  conclusion
       of the appeal hearing. He  described  how  and  when  the  witnesses
       arrived and that he advised them to sign in at the  reception  desk.
       He had spoken to a Taylor House receptionist and asked for the Judge
       to return. He claimed that the Presenting Officer walked by at  this
       stage as she was hurrying to attend to a family issue.

   24. In cross-examination Mr Adeolu said no statement was taken from  the
       Appellant's partner at the hearing centre because she  was  agitated
       and 'broke down'. He believed at that time that a statement could be
       taken at a later stage. Mr Adeolu stated that he made an adjournment
       request on two occasions. The first  time  was  shortly  before  the
       commencement of the hearing at 11:35am when he asked for the case to
       be put back, and the second time was when the Judge invited  him  to
       make submissions. When it was suggested to Mr Adeolu that he refused
       to make submissions he  stated  that  he  did  not  refuse  to  make
       submissions but he indicated that "... it was not  a  case  suitable
       for submissions." He confirmed that he did not make any submissions.
       Mr Adeolu explained that, following  his  call  to  the  Appellant's
       partner at 10:30am, he called again afterwards but  the  lines  were
       not connecting. He told the Judge this may be because the  witnesses
       were on the Underground. He had earlier informed the Judge that  the
       Appellant's partner was late as a result of child-care issues.

   25. In response to a question from me Mr  Adeolu  stated  that,  if  the
       Appellant's partner had given evidence at  the  hearing,  she  would
       have described the impact that the Appellant's  deportation  had  on
       her and her children's  lives.  There  had  been  some  developments
       following her statement such as the issue of rehab. The partner  had
       apparently arrived at the hearing centre with a letter  relating  to
       her proposed rehab, but there was no copy of this letter. Mr  Adeolu
       confirmed once again that he asked for the Taylor House reception to
       inform the Judge of the arrival of the witnesses. He was informed by
       the receptionist that this information  would  be  passed  onto  the
       Tribunal usher. Mr Adeolu did not see the usher himself and  he  and
       the witnesses remained in Taylor House for 30 to 40  minutes  before
       leaving.

   26. The Appellant's sister, ML, signed and adopted her statement. In her
       statement she indicated that she was one of the witnesses who was to
       give evidence at the appeal hearing  on  10  August  2015.  She  was
       called very early in the morning by the partner as there had been  a
       'disappointment' regarding her child care arrangements. As a  result
       the partner missed her train. She was upset  and  confused.  It  was
       claimed the partner was a 'bipolar patient' and had 'drug problems'.
       The partner was not familiar with London. ML, who  lived  in  Forest
       Gate, said she would meet the partner at the train station and would
       take  her  to  the  Tribunal.  At  all  times  ML  claimed  she  was
       communicating developments to the Appellant's legal representatives.
       When ML and the Appellant's partner  eventually  arrived  around  12
       noon Mr Adeolu, who was walking into the reception  area,  announced
       that the Judge had not waited. The Appellant's partner was described
       as being 'quite agitated' and demanded to go and meet the  Judge  in
       his room to explain her late attendance. She  was  informed  by  the
       receptionist that this would not be possible. Mr Adeolu advised that
       the witnesses sign-in and insisted that  the  reception  record  the
       time of arrival. The Appellant's children have now been subjected to
       care proceedings. The Appellant's partner was said to  be  in  rehab
       and ML had put herself up as 'special guardian'.


   27. In examination-in-chief ML expanded upon her written statement. When
       ML met the Appellant's partner at Liverpool St station she contacted
       the legal representative at Taylor House and intended to head to the
       court. The partner was however in quite a  state.  The  partner  was
       said to have been inappropriately dressed and ML thought it was best
       to 'clean her up' as she was crying. They therefore took a detour to
       Stratford Station.  ML  was  trying  to  get  in  contact  with  the
       representative but the line kept on going to voicemail. She believes
       she left a voicemail message, but could recall  for  certain.  After
       obtaining  a  change  of  clothes   ML   attempted   to   call   the
       representative from Mile  End  station  when  the  train  they  were
       travelling  on  stopped.  When  asked  why  she  had  not  let   the
       representative know where they were ML said  that  the  partner  was
       'all over the place' and ML had to calm her down.  ML  was  juggling
       trying to calm the partner down  with  trying  to  get  her  to  the
       hearing centre. They eventually came to Chancery Road tube  station.
       ML had never been to the hearing centre before and waited for a bus.
       The first bus they got on was going  the  wrong  way.  They  saw  no
       taxis. She tried to contact the representative  but  was  unable  to
       speak to him. They eventually arrived  at  Taylor  House  around  12
       noon.  When  they  got  to  the  reception   area   they   saw   the
       representative who said the proceedings had  finished.  The  partner
       was frantic and said she wanted to speak to the Judge. They  had  to
       calm her down. They were there for some time and did not leave until
       around 1pm. The representative  insisted  that  they  sign-in.  When
       asked whether the representative spoke to the staff at Taylor House,
       ML said he may have done. He spoke to one or two  people  but  could
       not recall much detail. The Appellant's partner was not  present  at
       the error of law hearing because she had a lot of  problems  due  to
       drug abuse. It was difficult to get hold of her and she was  erratic
       and 'over the place'.


   28. In cross-examination ML confirmed that she  saw  the  representative
       when she was at the counter of the hearing centre and he told her to
       sign a sheet of paper. She was pretty sure  there  were  members  of
       staff  there.  When  asked  whether   she   had   seen   the   legal
       representative speak to staff at the counter  ML  said  'yes'.  When
       asked why the detour to Stratford did not appear in her statement ML
       said she was uncomfortable putting this into a statement as she  had
       not  discussed  it  with  the  partner.  ML   did   not   give   the
       representative a detailed explanation for their late arrival because
       'everything was in  a  fluster'.  ML  stated  that  the  Appellant's
       partner made every effort to be present at  the  hearing  in  August
       2015.

   29. In his submissions Mr Adebayo invited me to find the witnesses  were
       credible. The First-tier Tribunal judge, it  was  submitted,  had  a
       wide discretion and should have adjourned the  hearing.  An  extract
       from the Home Office Presenting Officer's written note read,  "Judge
       says he doesn't care if rep makes submissions or not." This, it  was
       submitted, indicated that the appeal did not matter to the Judge. Ms
       Willocks-Briscoe submitted that it was for the  Appellant  to  prove
       his case and that any procedural impropriety would not have  made  a
       material difference to the decision given  the  seriousness  of  his
       offences.

Discussion

   30. I have considered the statements and the oral evidence from both  Mr
       Adeolu and ML in detail, set against the Judge's ROP  and  comments.
       There were several aspects of Mr  Adeolu's  evidence  that  I  found
       unsatisfactory. The Judge's contemporaneous note indicates  that  it
       was the Presenting Officer's suggestion that the appeal  proceed  by
       way  of  submissions.  This  stands  in  contrast  to  Mr   Adeolu's
       statement, which was written almost a month after the  decision  was
       promulgated. In the absence of  any  contemporaneous  note  from  Mr
       Adeolu I find the evidence from the Judge to be  more  reliable.  Mr
       Adeolu denied  the  assertion,  contained  in  paragraph  6  of  the
       decision, that he had nothing to say in response to the  application
       to proceed with the hearing. Mr Adeolu's statement accompanying  the
       grounds of appeal asserts that he 'strongly objected to  the  matter
       as not suitable for submission only' and that the fair thing  to  do
       would be to wait for the witness. His  statement  does  not  however
       indicate that he made an adjournment application at this stage, and,
       at paragraph 14 of his statement, he indicated that he did  not  ask
       for an adjournment prior to submissions.  The  Judge's  contemporary
       note states that no adjournment application was made  prior  to  the
       commencement of the Respondent's submissions. This is echoed to some
       extent in  the  Presenting  Officer's  contemporaneous  notes  which
       state, "Judge states adjournment not even been requested."  However,
       in his  oral  evidence  Mr  Adeolu  claimed  that  he  did  make  an
       application to adjourn in order  to  put  the  matter  back  shortly
       before the  commencement  of  submissions.  Having  regard  to  this
       evidence I am satisfied that this aspect of Mr Adeolu's evidence  is
       not reliable and that he did not  make  an  adjournment  application
       prior to the commencement of the Respondent's submissions.


   31. There is no  merit  whatsoever  in  Mr  Adeolu's  assertion  that  a
       procedural  impropriety  occurred  because  the  Judge  first  heard
       submissions from the Respondent. In circumstances  where  an  appeal
       proceeds by way  of  submissions  only  it  is  convention  for  the
       Respondent to make her submissions first and the Appellant  to  then
       respond to those submissions. Nothing in  the  order  in  which  the
       Judge heard  submissions  even  arguably  amounts  to  a  procedural
       irregularity.

   32. Mr Adeolu's statement contained no reference to his assertion,  made
       during  his  oral  evidence,  that  he  spoke  to  a  Taylor   House
       receptionist and asked for the Judge to return. Given the importance
       he attached to the oral evidence that he sought to extract from  the
       partner I find this a surprising omission. In his oral  evidence  Mr
       Adeolu accepted that he did not  attempt  to  communicate  with  the
       clerk to the  hearing  room.  Having  been  refused  an  adjournment
       application, and  in  the  absence  of  his  witnesses,  I  find  it
       surprising that Mr Adeolu did not seek to make formal submissions on
       behalf of his client, a decision that arguably  did  not  serve  his
       client's best interests.

   33. I found ML, however, to be a most impressive witness.  Her  evidence
       was given in a direct and forthright manner, and without hesitation.
       She engaged with each question and her answers were given in detail.
       Her evidence was internally consistent and largely  consistent  with
       her statement. There was no perceptible  attempt  at  embellishment.
       Whilst the provision of detailed  and  consistent  evidence  is  not
       determinative of credibility, it is indicative of credibility.  ML's
       explanation for seeking to calm the partner down and obtain a change
       of  clothes  is  inherently  plausible.  Given  the  background  and
       circumstances of the Appellant's partner,  which  was  supported  by
       reference to the medical  documents  produced,  I  accept  that  she
       arrived late at Liverpool Street Station and  in  a  state  of  some
       distress. While it may not have been advisable to  keep  a  Tribunal
       waiting, one can appreciate  why  ML  suggested  they  first  go  to
       Stratford. Mr Adeolu's inability to contact the  partner  or  ML  at
       11:21am is consistent with ML's evidence that they were  on  a  tube
       train heading to Chancery Lane station. I again accept as inherently
       plausible ML's claim that she had never  previously  visited  Taylor
       House and that, having  emerged  from  Chancery  Lane  station,  she
       believed it best to wait for a bus.  I  also  accept  as  inherently
       plausible, if unfortunate, that she got on the wrong bus.


   34. Significantly, ML's evidence relating to the  events  that  occurred
       after she and the Appellant's partner arrived at  Taylor  House  was
       largely consistent with that of Mr Adeolu. This is  with  particular
       regard to the time  at  which  she  arrived  at  Taylor  House,  the
       partner's emotional state, the instructions from Mr Adeolu  to  sign
       in at the reception  counter,  and,  crucially,  her  witnessing  Mr
       Adeolu speaking to the staff. Having weighed  up  my  concerns  with
       aspects  of  Mr  Adeolu's  evidence,  and   having   given   careful
       consideration to ML's account, I am satisfied that Mr Adeolu did ask
       for the Taylor House reception staff to  inform  the  Judge  of  the
       arrival of the witnesses.

   35. Both Mr Adeolu and ML were adamant that the ML and  the  Appellant's
       partner signed in. In his response to  the  grounds  of  appeal  the
       Judge indicated that he asked the court administration to inform him
       if the witnesses did arrive and that they had not done so by 1:30pm.
       I have no reason to doubt the  accuracy  of  the  Judge's  comments.
       Having given careful and holistic consideration to the  totality  of
       the evidence before me I  find  that  the  administrative  staff  at
       Taylor House were informed of the arrival of the witnesses at around
       12 noon, that the were asked to pass  on  this  information  to  the
       Judge, but that they failed to do so.

   36. In light of the above findings I find that the Judge did not act  in
       a procedurally unfair or inappropriate manner. He waited some 1 hour
       and 35 minutes before proceeding with the  appeal  in  circumstances
       where there had, incredibly, been no  application  to  adjourn.  The
       Judge was entitled to assume that  the  witnesses  would  only  take
       around half an hour to reach Taylor House having been informed  that
       they were at Liverpool St at 10:30am. The Judge waited over an  hour
       before proceeding with the hearing. There was no explanation offered
       for  the  non-attendance  of  the  witnesses  other  than   possible
       speculation that they may be on the Underground.

   37. I nevertheless find that there has  been  a  procedural  impropriety
       capable of undermining the fairness of the proceedings. I have found
       that the administrative staff at Taylor House failed to  inform  the
       Judge of the arrival of the witnesses shortly after the close of the
       hearing. Mr Adeolu requested that the Judge be informed.  The  Judge
       himself asked the staff to inform him. This was not done. Under  the
       case  management  powers  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier
       Tribunal) (Immigration & Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  the  First-tier
       Tribunal has a relatively wide discretion as to how it regulates its
       own procedure. It would have been open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge, had he been informed of the attendance of the  witnesses,  to
       have either re-opened the hearing or to have re-listed  the  hearing
       for another date, assuming of course that he found it appropriate to
       do so in light of any explanation offered for the delayed attendance
       and with the overriding objective of the Rules in mind. The  failure
       to communicate this information to the Judge, which deprived him  of
       the opportunity to consider these options, constituted a  procedural
       impropriety  and  a  breach  of  procedural  justice  (see   Nwaigwe
       (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)   and   Marghia
       (procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 00366 (IAC)).


   38. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that any  unfairness  could  not  have
       affected the lawfulness of the underlying decision as it  could  not
       have  been  material.  The  Appellant  committed  extremely  serious
       offences and received a substantial  custodial  sentence.  He  could
       only succeed by persuading the First-tier Tribunal of the  existence
       of very compelling circumstances over and above those  contained  in
       paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  immigration  rules.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal judge had before him statements from the partner  and  some
       evidence of her and  her  children's  circumstances,  and  this  was
       sufficient to enable him to deal fairly with the appeal.


   39. Whilst there is some force in these  submissions,  I  am  ultimately
       persuaded that, had the First-tier Tribunal Judge heard and assessed
       the partner's oral evidence, he would not  inevitably  have  reached
       the same conclusion. Given  that  the  Appellant  has  already  been
       deported it is vital that the  highest  standards  of  fairness  are
       applied. The partner was to provide the core  evidence  relating  to
       the impact of his deportation on her and her children.  The  partner
       did speak in her statement of her relationship  with  the  Appellant
       and his relationship with their children. A statement cannot however
       always cover all material aspects of an appeal, and points may arise
       in  a  hearing  that  were  not   anticipated   or   which   require
       clarification.  Events  had,  it  appears,  progressed   since   the
       partner's most recent  statement.  She  was,  at  the  date  of  the
       hearing, expected to shortly enter 'rehab' and, it is  claimed,  had
       brought with her a letter to this effect. The impact of such a  move
       on the children, requiring them to live with another  family  member
       other than their parents, was a relevant factor  that  the  Tribunal
       could have considered, especially given their medical  and  learning
       difficulties and their being subject to a Child Protection Plan. The
       Judge concluded that there was no  subsisting  relationship  between
       the Appellant  and  his  partner,  a  point  that  could  have  been
       investigated in a hearing, and the existence of a  relationship  and
       impact on the partner  of  the  deportation  were  clearly  relevant
       factors  in  an  overall  assessment  under  paragraph  398  of  the
       immigration rules.

   40. I am satisfied, for the reasons given,  that  the  determination  is
       unsafe and that it must be re-made. It is appropriate to  remit  the
       appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing,  all
       issues open, to give  the  Appellant's  partner  an  opportunity  of
       attending the hearing and giving oral evidence, and for any  further
       evidence to be provided relating to the existence of very compelling
       circumstances'.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is marred by a material error of law.

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant  to  section
12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  for  reconsideration,
to be decided afresh.

The appeal is to be listed before a Judge other than  Judge  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Mitchell.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]                               11 May 2016
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
