
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00778/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 January 2018                    |On 9 March 2018                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    O. J.
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Goddard, Southwark CAB
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who entered the UK as  a  visitor
    and became an overstayer six months later in  July  2005.  He  made  no
    attempt to regularise his immigration status until October 2005 when he
    sought a grant of discretionary leave to remain outside the Immigration
    Rules.  It  is  common  ground  that  he  did  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of leave as a parent.

 2. The appellant's application was refused on 22 December 2015. His appeal
    against that refusal on  Article  8  grounds  came  before  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge Reid at Taylor House  on  14  March  2017,  and  it  was
    dismissed by decision promulgated on 21 March 2017. The  appellant  was
    refused permission to appeal by the First tier  Tribunal,  but  renewed
    his application to the Upper Tribunal. Limited permission  was  granted
    by decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on  31  October  2017  in  the
    following terms;

         "The Appellant does not arguably fall within the parameters of  the
         Respondent's policy identified in SF  and  others  (Guidance,  post
         2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 120 as, although the FtJ  appears  to
         find that he has a parental relationship with  D,  he  is  not  her
         parent or primary carer. Any reliance  in  the  grounds  on  Sanade
         [2012] UKUT 48 is misguided in light of VM  (Jamaica)  [2017]  EWCA
         Civ 255, and the evidence did not, on any view, support  a  finding
         that D would be forced to leave  the  EU.  There  was  no  evidence
         before the FtJ that the Appellant was certain to be  granted  entry
         clearance if he applied for entry clearance Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11
         [51].

         Although not clearly articulated in the Grounds it is arguable that
         the FtJ was not entitled to conclude that Ms  O  and  the  children
         including D, could relocate to Nigeria  with  the  Appellant  given
         that  Ms  O  and  the  Appellant  say  they  are  no  longer  in  a
         relationship. It is arguably unreasonable to  expect  an  estranged
         partner to relocate even if that  partner  is  a  national  of  the
         country of proposed relocation and has only limited leave to remain
         in the  UK.  This  is  relevant  when  determining  whether  it  is
         reasonable, pursuant to s117B(6) to expect D to go to Nigeria."

 3. Thus the matter comes before me.

 4. Before me it is accepted on behalf of the appellant that the  following
    material findings of primary fact were made by Judge  Reid,  and,  that
    they were all fully taken into account in the course of her decision;

      i) The appellant fathered a child, Q, in Nigeria before he  left  that
         country in 2005. Q continues to live in Nigeria  with  her  mother.
         She is a Nigerian citizen, and she has never met the appellant.

     ii) The appellant undertook a telephone marriage  ceremony  with  T,  a
         Nigerian citizen, who was then living in  Nigeria,  on  8  November
         2008. T is not  Qs  mother.  The  ceremony  is  not  recognised  as
         constituting  a  lawful  marriage  under  English  law,   and   the
         relationship between the appellant and T in  any  event  failed  in
         2012/3.

    iii) T entered the UK as  a  visitor  on  6  May  2011,  and  became  an
         overstayer in November 2011.

     iv) The appellant is the father of K, a Nigerian citizen, born to T, in
         the UK, on 22 March  2012.  K  was  conceived  and  born  when  the
         appellant and T were in a relationship together,  having  cohabited
         since Ts entry to the UK in May 2011. (Although the Judge  did  not
         spell this out, under EU jurisprudence, the result of Ks birth to a
         settled relationship between the appellant and T, would be that  de
         facto "family life" existed between K and the  appellant  from  the
         point of his birth. Again, although not spelt  out,  Ks  age  meant
         that he could not be a "qualifying child" as defined  in  s117D  of
         the 2002 Act, at the date of the hearing .)

      v) D was born to T on 8 June 2013. The appellant is not Ds father,  he
         has not adopted her, and he has  taken  no  other  formal  step  to
         acquire a legal status in the UK of parental responsibility for  D.
         Although no DNA evidence was provided to  corroborate  this  claim,
         the Judge was told that D was conceived in the course  of  a  short
         lived affair between T and the Appellant's brother M. As  a  result
         of Ms paternity, D is a British citizen, and  as  a  result  of  Ts
         maternity she is a Nigerian citizen; she has  dual  citizenship.  D
         has no existing relationship with M, her father.  (Again,  although
         not spelt out, this meant that D is a "qualifying child" as defined
         in s117D of the 2002 Act, because of her British  citizenship.  She
         was not however born to a settled relationship, and  so  she  would
         not under EU jurisprudence enjoy de facto "family  life"  from  the
         point of birth with either her father M, or the appellant.  "Family
         life" could however be created subsequently between D and either of
         them, if a suitable relationship was formed.)

     vi) C was born to T on 30 May 2015. A is Cs father, and C was conceived
         as the consequence of the briefest of encounters between T and  the
         appellant at a wedding; she  was  not  conceived,  or  born,  to  a
         settled relationship between them.  (Although  the  Judge  did  not
         spell this out, again under EU jurisprudence, the result  would  be
         that de facto "family life" would  not  exist  between  C  and  the
         appellant from the point of her birth; although it could of  course
         be created subsequently  if  a  suitable  relationship  was  formed
         between them. Again, although not spelt out, Ks age means  that  he
         was not a "qualifying child" as defined in s117D of the 2002  Act.)
         C is a Nigerian citizen.

    vii) K is on the autistic spectrum, although as a result of a failure by
         the appellant to provide any relevant and  reliable  evidence  upon
         the issue, the Judge was unable  to  make  any  finding  upon;  (a)
         precisely where he fell upon that spectrum, (b)  what  his  medical
         needs were, or, (c) how well those needs were  being  met  [28].  K
         attends a mainstream  primary  school,  and  is  provided  with  no
         additional support at school, and T has been provided with no extra
         help from the Early Years Autism Support Service.

   viii) The appellant's appeal was not advanced before  the  Judge  on  the
         basis that K's autism posed any risk of harm in Nigeria for  either
         K himself, or, for any member of his extended family (such  as  the
         appellant) who sought to care for K in Nigeria, or to  protect  him
         from harm. The Judge noted that the evidence of T and the appellant
         failed to raise the possibility of  such  a  risk  of  harm.  Thus,
         although the possibility of the existence of such a risk  had  been
         raised in the papers submitted to the Respondent, and  those  filed
         in support of the appeal, the Judge concluded  that  there  was  no
         such risk of harm.

     ix) The appellant is of no fixed abode, and has not lived as  a  member
         of Ts household since 2012/3. The Judge  was  unable  to  make  any
         finding as to how the appellant supported himself, but he has never
         been entitled to take lawful employment in the UK.

      x) The appellant does not differentiate between the three children  K,
         D, and C on the basis of their paternity, but treats  them  all  as
         his own. The appellant  is  involved  in  the  life  of  the  three
         children to a degree, albeit not to the extent that was claimed  in
         evidence either by himself, or,  T;  both  having  exaggerated  his
         involvement.

     xi) T has  suffered  some  intermittent  mobility  issues  since  2012.
         Intermittently that means her mobility is  impaired  to  the  level
         that she is unable to take  the  children  to  school,  to  medical
         appointments, or, to sporting activities. That medical condition is
         not sufficiently severe that it prevents her from  caring  for  the
         three children.  The  contemporary  reliable  documentary  evidence
         showed the Judge that the appellant did help T out with the care of
         K, D and C sometimes, but equally that sometimes he  did  not.  The
         result was that they did sometimes miss school,  therapy  sessions,
         and sports activities. The appellant did  not  do  the  school  run
         every day, rather T would ordinarily do it.  He  had  not  attended
         with K all of his speech and  language  therapy  appointments,  or,
         ensured that K had done so.

    xii) Ts immigration status was not regularised  until  she  was  granted
         leave to remain on 24 October 2014. Grants of leave to remain  were
         made on the same occasion to K and C.  D,  as  a  British  citizen,
         needed no such grant. Neither party placed  before  the  Judge  any
         evidence concerning the Respondent's reasons for making that grant.
         (I note that no subject access request was made by  the  appellant,
         and the Respondent disclosed no reasons for the  decision  to  make
         such a grant either in the course of making her decision  upon  the
         appellant's application, or, subsequently  in  the  course  of  the
         appeal.)

 5. The grounds make no complaint about the rejection of any risk  of  harm
    to any individual in Nigeria, and  Mr  Goddard  accepted  that  in  the
    circumstances no challenge to these findings are open to the  appellant
    before me. Nor do the grounds raise any  complaint  about  any  of  the
    other findings of primary fact made by the Judge.

 6. Although the first ground argued that the appellant was entitled as  of
    right to a grant of  leave  to  remain  in  the  light  of  Ds  British
    citizenship in reliance upon Sanade  [2012]  UKUT  48,  permission  was
    refused on this argument as a result of the guidance  provided  by  the
    Court of Appeal in VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255. The concession  by
    the Respondent  which  was  central  to  the  decision  in  Sanade  was
    withdrawn in VM. No such concession was made  in  the  course  of  this
    appeal. The Judge explicitly rejected the argument that the  inevitable
    consequence of the appellant's removal would be that D would be  forced
    to leave the UK. She was in my judgement plainly right to do so in  the
    light of the evidence concerning Ts ability to care for  D  unaided  by
    the appellant, and indeed no challenge is offered  in  the  grounds  to
    that finding.

 7. It is in my judgement clear from the decision when  it  is  read  as  a
    whole that although the Judge did not offer a detailed analysis of  how
    this arose, she did conclude that the appellant's Article 8 rights were
    engaged by the decision under appeal. That conclusion could have arisen
    either because she was satisfied that the appellant had demonstrated  a
    "private life" of the requisite nature and strength,  or,  a  de  facto
    "family life" with K created at the point of birth as a result  of  his
    paternity and Ks birth into a settled family relationship  between  the
    appellant and T, or, "family life" as a result of the relationships the
    appellant had formed with D and C subsequent to their birth, or, indeed
    a combination of all three. It would have been much better if the Judge
    had clearly identified the Article 8 "gateway" through  which  she  had
    found the appellant had passed, because of the different considerations
    arising in a "private life" and a "family life" appeal. To  the  extent
    that it is necessary to  speculate  I  infer  however  that  the  Judge
    concluded that "family life" existed at least between the appellant and
    K, sufficient to engage Article 8.

 8. It is clear from the decision that the  Judge  sought  to  address  the
    issue of the best interests  of  the  four  children  affected  by  the
    decision under appeal, Q, K, D, and C. Mr Goddard argued before me that
    the Judge's efforts in this regard were deficient because there was not
    one final conclusion that the best interests of the  children  required
    the appellant to remain in the UK. However, as I  think  he  ultimately
    conceded, no such conclusion could  have  been  reached  by  the  Judge
    because each of the different children had different circumstances, and
    indeed arguably inconsistent interests. Thus the Judge  concluded  that
    it was in Qs interests for the appellant to return to Nigeria  so  that
    during  her  childhood  she  could  have  the  chance  of   forming   a
    relationship with him, and indeed that it was in her interests  for  K,
    D, and C to also live in Nigeria so that she could have the  chance  of
    forming a sibling relationship with them. On the other hand it  was  in
    the interests of K, D and C to remain in the UK where they could access
    free education and healthcare. It was also in the interests of K, D and
    C to remain together, and  to  remain  with  their  mother  T,  and  to
    continue to have regular contact with the appellant. Accordingly, in my
    judgement, the Judge did undertake in my judgement a proper analysis of
    the competing interests which then fed into the balance sheet exercise,
    or assessment of the balance of proportionality that she undertook.

 9. Equally there can be no proper criticism of the Judge  for  considering
    whether the appellant would be able to gain entry clearance to  the  UK
    in the future in the event of a return to Nigeria. Such a consideration
    is not usually decisive, but it will often be argued to be relevant  to
    the assessment of the balance of proportionality. Moreover, as  pointed
    out by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum when refusing permission to appeal  on
    ground two, there was in  this  appeal  no  evidence  that  would  have
    established that the appellant would be bound to gain  entry  clearance
    if he were to apply for it; Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  I  agree.  I  note
    that the appellant denied the existence  of  any  ongoing  relationship
    with T, and he identified no other individual with whom he had been  in
    a relationship whilst living in the UK. Thus entry for settlement as  a
    partner, fianc�e or spouse was not open to him.  Since  the  Judge  had
    concluded that T did care on a  day  to  day  basis  for  the  children
    adequately, and could continue  to  do  so  following  the  appellant's
    removal then unless there was some future change in  circumstances  the
    route of entry for settlement as a parent/carer was also  not  open  to
    him. In the light  of  his  immigration  history  he  would  be  highly
    unlikely to persuade an ECO that he genuinely intended a  short  visit,
    and would not overstay.

10. Although permission upon this limb to ground one was  also  refused  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, Mr Goddard argued that in the light  of  the
    decision in SF and others (Guidance, post 214 Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT
    120, which considered the application of the Respondent's  policy  upon
    British citizen children, the appellant was  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    leave to remain as a result of Ds citizenship. This argument fails,  as
    Upper Tribunal Judge Blum pointed out, because the evidence before  the
    Judge did not establish either that the appellant was  her  parent,  or
    her primary carer. Self evidently he was neither. (If, contrary to  the
    appellant's case, he was in truth Ds father,  then  she  would  not  of
    course enjoy the British citizenship upon which this argument relied.)

11. Mr Goddard also argued that the Judge had failed to have regard to  the
    Respondent's decision to grant leave to remain to  T,  K  and  C.  That
    argument fails for two reasons. First it is not  a  complaint  that  is
    included in the grounds, and, second there is no merit in it. The Judge
    is entitled to have her decision read as a whole, and it  is  perfectly
    clear that the Judge had this grant of leave to remain well in mind. It
    is referred to directly on a number of occasions in the course  of  the
    decision [2, 7, 41].

12. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum considered it arguable that the  Judge  would
    have erred if she had assessed  the  proportionality  of  the  decision
    under appeal on the basis of a finding that T, K,  C  and  D  could  be
    removed from the UK. D as a British citizen  could  not  of  course  be
    removed from the UK, and the others  have  been  granted  discretionary
    leave to remain in the UK. That was not however  in  my  judgement  the
    approach taken by the Judge. When the decision is properly  read  as  a
    whole, I am satisfied that the Judge went no  further  than  to  remind
    herself that it was a matter  of  choice  for  T,  as  to  whether  she
    relocated to Nigeria with her children, to follow the appellant  there.
    The Judge was correct to conclude that  the  decision  to  relocate  to
    Nigeria was open to T since they are all Nigerian citizens,  and  since
    the Judge had concluded that no individual faced any risk  of  harm  in
    Nigeria.

13. Properly analysed, central to this Article 8 appeal is the choice  that
    is open to T. The appellant is  not  in  a  position  to  dictate  that
    choice, and he is not in a position to deny that it exists. If T wished
    the appellant to continue to have direct contact with the children  and
    to continue to have a similar role in their lives to the one  that  the
    Judge had found existed, then, notwithstanding the grant of immigration
    status in the UK, it was open to T to decide to follow the appellant to
    Nigeria with her children. That  was  no  more  than  a  conclusion  of
    commonsense, once the Judge had concluded that no individual faced  any
    risk of harm in Nigeria.  In  my  judgement  the  Judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to conclude that such a choice was open to T  in  real  terms.
    Indeed, although she had  not  had  the  benefit  of  it,  the  Judge's
    approach was in my judgement entirely consistent with the  guidance  to
    be found in Patel [2017] EWCA  Civ  2028.  There  was  no  question  of
    compulsion that arose; simply a choice to be made by T. T was perfectly
    capable of looking after K, C, and D alone in the UK satisfactorily, as
    the Judge had found she was doing. Indeed the Judge had concluded  that
    T and the appellant had exaggerated the extent of  his  involvement  in
    the lives of those children.

14. What then is left of the appellant's challenge to the Judge's  approach
    to the Article  8  appeal?  In  my  judgement  it  is  reduced  to  the
    proposition that no  Tribunal  properly  directing  itself  could  have
    concluded in the light of the primary facts as the Judge had found them
    to be, the legitimate public interest in the appellant's  removal,  and
    Ds British citizenship, and the grant of leave to  K  and  C,  and  the
    existence of the genuine parental/quasi-parental relationships  between
    the appellant and K, D and C (as  described  and  detailed  within  the
    Judge's findings of primary fact), that his removal was a proportionate
    response. Phrased differently it is the proposition that simply because
    D is a British citizen, and K and C have been granted leave to  remain,
    that the appellant's removal from the UK  must  be  a  disproportionate
    response, and any conclusion  to  the  contrary  must  be  perverse  or
    irrational. In my judgement the appellant's case has to be  pitched  so
    high, because otherwise his  complaint  would  be  reduced  to  a  mere
    disagreement with the Judge's proportionality assessment. This was  not
    of course the way in which the application for permission to appeal was
    framed.  Arguments  of  perversity  and  irrationality  carry  a   high
    threshold; Miftari [2005] EWCA Civ 481. In my  judgement  the  relevant
    threshold is simply  not  met.  Were  such  a  finding  perverse,  then
    s117B(6) of the 2002 Act would not be framed in the way that  it  is  -
    all Parliament would have needed to do would  have  been  to  stipulate
    that there was no public interest in the removal of an individual  with
    a genuine parental relationship with a child who is a British citizen.

15. In my judgement the Judge properly considered the  competing  interests
    and balanced them, giving  adequate  reasons  for  her  conclusions.  I
    therefore dismiss the appeal and confirm the decision to  dismiss  this
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

16. An anonymity direction is made in the interests of the children.

Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 21 March 2017 did not involve the making  of  an
error of law sufficient to  require  the  decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeal is confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  of  the  individuals  referred  to  in  this
decision.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 8 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
