
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/00034/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5/11/15                           |On  9/11/15                          |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE PHILLIPS
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                 WAHEED KHAN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, of counsel, instructed by Turpin and
                    Miller, Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Naith, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan and his date of birth has
         been assessed as being 1 January, 1993. This assessment was made by
         Immigration Judge Archer in a determination dated 28  April,  2010.
         The judge rejected the appellant's account but accepted that he was
         his claimed age.

      2. The applicant then applied for further leave to remain on the basis
         that he was a refugee. The respondent refused the application on 27
         October, 2010 and an  appeal  against  that  decision  came  before
         Immigration Judge  Blum  (now  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum)  on  9
         December, 2010.

      3. The judge accepted that the appellant's father killed his mother on
         the basis of what he believed to be an act of adultery. He accepted
         that the appellant's father came to believe that the appellant  was
         the product of the adultery. He found that the  appellant  had  not
         attended  any  school  and  had  been  abused  by  his  father  and
         stepmother and that his father had attacked him with  a  knife  and
         that the appellant had had to flee to the village elder.  When  the
         appellant was returned to the family home the judge  accepted  that
         his father had tried to shoot the appellant that the appellant  was
         able to escape making his way to a shrine.

      4. The judge did not find that the appellant was being targeted for  a
         Convention reason. His father, the judge found, wished to harm  the
         appellant because he believed the appellant was not his  biological
         son. This  did  not,  in  the  view  of  the  judge,  constitute  a
         particular social group. The judge found however that the appellant
         did fear his father who had already bribed  the  local  police  and
         that his father did wish to harm the  appellant.  The  judge  found
         there was an insufficiency of  protection  for  the  appellant  and
         relocation would be unduly harsh.

      5. The judge dismissed the appellant's asylum appeal and his claim for
         humanitarian protection and his appeal under Article 8. However  he
         allowed the appeal under Article 3.

      6. This determination does not appear to  have  been  the  subject  of
         challenge by either party.  On  20  January,  2011  the  respondent
         granted  the  appellant  humanitarian  protection  valid  until  19
         January, 2016.

      7. In June 2014 the appellant was sentenced in respect of two offences
         of conspiracy to supply heroin and cocaine and was sentenced  to  6
         years imprisonment to be served concurrently.

      8.  The  respondent  decided  to  deport  the  appellant  for  reasons
         contained in a notice accompanying a letter dated 23  March,  2015.
         The notice itself is dated 23 March, 2013 (rather  than  2015)  but
         that is acknowledged to be a mistake. In the notice it is said that
         the appellant had the right of appeal exercisable from  within  the
         United Kingdom although the possibility was held out that the claim
         might be certified under section  94B  of  the  2002  Act.  In  the
         accompanying letter, however, it was stated that the appellant only
         had a right to appeal the refusal of his human rights  claim  after
         he had been deported. It was said that the appellant's human rights
         protection status was no longer valid.

      9. The appellant  appealed  and  his  appeal  came  before  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Eldridge on 3 July, 2015. The judge noted  that  the
         respondent appeared to be relying on sub- paragraphs (i)  and  (ii)
         of paragraph  339G. The material part of paragraph  339G  reads  as
         follows:

             "A person's humanitarian protection  granted  under  paragraph
             339C will be revoked or not renewed if the Secretary of  State
             is satisfied that at least one of the following applies:

               i) the circumstances which led to the grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection have ceased to exist or have changed to such  a
                  degree that such protection is no longer required;

              ii) the person granted  humanitarian  protection  should  have
                  been or is excluded from humanitarian  protection  because
                  there are serious reasons  for  considering  that  he  has
                  committed a crime against peace,  a  war  crime,  a  crime
                  against humanity, or any other serious crime or instigated
                  or otherwise participated in such crimes..."

     10. The judge accepted the findings made by Judge Blum and  found  that
         the respondent had  not  made  out  of  her  case  in  relation  to
         paragraph 339G (i). The judge found that the appellant would  still
         be at risk from his father and would not be able to relocate safely
         to avoid the danger.

     11. The judge however was satisfied that the respondent had made out of
         her case to revoke the appellant's grant of humanitarian protection
         under subparagraph (ii) of paragraph 339G on the basis of the  fact
         that the appellant had been convicted of very serious crimes.  This
         conduct warranted the withdrawal of international protection and he
         had not demonstrated very compelling circumstances to outweigh  the
         public interest in his deportation: s.117C(6) of the 2002 Act.

     12. The judge dealt with an argument  in  relation  to  asylum  in  the
         following paragraph of his determination:

             "The  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  refused   by   the
             respondent and the appeal in  that  regard  was  dismissed  by
             Judge Blum. The appellant  seeks  to  rely  upon  that  ground
             before me on the basis of him being a member of  a  particular
             social group. This is dealt with only briefly by Ms Radford in
             her skeleton argument at paragraph 12. In her oral submissions
             she made it plain this was on the basis  of  the  stepmother's
             family. On the basis of my findings of  fact  concerning  this
             family, which reflect those of Judge Blum,  I  do  not  accept
             this contention. Whatever risk there is to the  appellant,  he
             has not shown it is for a Convention reason. His  claim  under
             the Refugee Convention cannot succeed."

     13. The appellant appealed against the judge's decision on two grounds.
         The first ground is that the judge was compelled by his findings to
         allow the appeal under Article 3 of the ECHR.

     14. The second ground was that the judge had erred in finding that  the
         appellant was not a member of  a  particular  social  group.  While
         Judge Blum's findings formed the starting point they could  not  be
         followed if they were wrong in law. The  judge  had  misinterpreted
         the submissions. The appellant was not at risk as a member  of  his
         stepmother's family. He was persecuted because he was his  mother's
         son. The family was a well-established social group. Reference  was
         made to Fornah v Secretary of State [2007] 1 AC  412;  [2006]  UKHL
         46.

     15. The error was material because the applicant could not be  excluded
         from refugee status on the sole basis of  the  seriousness  of  the
         crime he had committed  and  it  would  be  necessary  to  consider
         whether he  constituted  a  present  danger  to  the  community  by
         reference to Article 1F of the Refugee Convention.

     16. On 12 August, 2015 permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Parkes. Having  recited  the  grounds  Judge  Parkes
         stated as follows:

             "The judge found in paragraph 32 that the respondent  had  not
             shown that it was right to revoke the protection given to  the
             appellant under paragraph 339G of the rules, it  is  therefore
             arguable that the dismissal of the appeal on that  ground  was
             erroneous. Permission to appeal is granted."

     17. On 20 August, 2015 the respondent filed  a  response  pointing  out
         that  paragraph  339G  set  out  five  reasons   why   humanitarian
         protection could be withdrawn and while the judge had rejected 339G
         (i) he had upheld the respondent's decision  under  paragraph  339G
         (ii)  which  was  relevant  to  the  revocation   of   humanitarian
         protection that the appellant had been granted.

     18. It is clear that the respondent did  not  interpret  the  grant  of
         permission  as  including  the  argument  based  on  the  appellant
         belonging to  a  particular  social  group  and  accordingly  being
         entitled to asylum.

     19. At the  hearing  we  invited  Mr  Naith  to  clarify  the  apparent
         contradiction between the  decision  notice  and  the  accompanying
         letter. Counsel's position was that the letter was simply mistaken.

     20. Having taken instructions Mr Naith confirmed that it  was  accepted
         that the appellant had at all times the right of appeal  in-country
         under Article 3 and accepted further  that  the  appeal  should  be
         allowed on that ground although he stood by the point made  in  the
         response in relation to humanitarian protection.

     21. Ms Radford said it was nevertheless desired  to  proceed  with  the
         point based on the asylum appeal since the appellant would be in  a
         better position if he had asylum status. The grant  of  his  appeal
         under Article 3 would result in him being given a period  of  leave
         which would be a matter for the respondent.

     22. She submitted that appellant was a  member  of  a  family  and  the
         product of an adulterous union with his father's deceased wife. His
         parentage was a reason for this persecution. He was a social  group
         of one, an illegitimate child.

     23. Counsel referred to the facts in the case of K (the first appellant
         in Fornah) set out at paragraph 2 of the Opinion of  Lord  Bingham.
         She submitted that the House of Lords had accepted  what  had  been
         said by Laws LJ in R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, Ex  p  De  Melo
         [1997] Imm AR 43, 49-50:

             "It is necessary next to examine the second question:  is  the
             alleged  or  actual  persecution  'for  the  reasons  of   ...
             membership of a particular social group'? Mr Kovats  [for  the
             Secretary of State] submits as follows. Where an individual is
             persecuted  for  a  non-Convention   reason,   concurrent   or
             subsequent threats (or, presumably, acts) against  his  family
             likewise cannot be regarded as persecution  for  a  Convention
             reason. If it were otherwise, the person initially ill treated-
             here, the father-would have no claim to asylum under the  1951
             Convention, and so it would be anomalous were the  members  of
             his family, persecuted or ill-treated simply because of  their
             association with him, to be accorded Convention rights.

             I do not consider that this argument is  correct.  Let  it  be
             assumed that an individual has been ill-treated or  terrorised
             for a reason having nothing to do with the Convention. He  has
             no Convention rights. But, on  the  view  I  have  taken,  his
             family may form a particular social group within  the  meaning
             of the Convention. If then  they  are  persecuted  because  of
             their connection with him, it  is  as  a  matter  of  ordinary
             language and logic, for  reasons  of  their  membership  of  a
             family-the group-that  they  are  persecuted.  I  see  nothing
             anomalous in this. The  original  evil  which  gives  rise  to
             persecution against an individual is one thing; if it is  then
             transferred so that a family is persecuted, on the face of  it
             that will  come  within  the  Convention.  The  definition  of
             'refugee' in article 1 of the Convention treats membership  of
             a particular social group as being in pari  materia  with  the
             other 'Convention reasons' for persecution: race, religion and
             so  forth.  Mr  Kovats'  argument   implies,   however,   that
             membership of a particular social group is (at least  on  some
             sets of facts) to be  regarded  as  merely  adjectival  to  or
             parasitic upon the other reasons. With deference to him,  that
             in my judgment amounts to a misconstruction of article 1  with
             the consequence  that  his  submission  proceeds  on  a  false
             premise. Moreover I incline to think that the argument accords
             to the persecutor's motive  a  status  not  warranted  by  the
             Convention's words. The motive may be to terrorise the  person
             against whom the persecutor entertains ill will (for  a  'non-
             Convention' reason) by getting at  his  family;  but  when  it
             comes to the question whether the  family  are  persecuted  by
             reason of their membership of a  particular  social  group-the
             family-I do not see  that  the  persecutor's  motive  has  any
             relevance."

     24. Counsel argued that the  appellant  was  targeted  because  he  was
         believed to be illegitimate and he was a  member  of  a  particular
         social group. In order to exclude him from the  refugee  Convention
         it would be necessary to show that he was a present danger  to  the
         community.

     25. Mr Naith submitted this was a family dispute and did  not  raise  a
         Convention reason. The appellant was simply one individual  in  the
         family. He was not being persecuted by virtue of  membership  of  a
         particular social group.

     26. At the conclusion of the submissions we reserved our  decision.  It
         is agreed that the appeal should be allowed under Article 3.

     27. It may be that the First-tier Judge was confused  by  the  conflict
         between the decision notice and the letter but it is  now  accepted
         that he had jurisdiction in respect of Article 3 and in  the  light
         of his findings it is clear that the appeal must be allowed on that
         ground.

     28. As we already noted, in granting permission to  appeal,  the  judge
         appeared to confine argument to the issue arising  under  paragraph
         339G. It does not appear that permission was granted in respect  of
         the argument based on asylum and particular  social  group.  Having
         heard submissions de bene esse we fully understand why Judge Parkes
         did not find the point arguable.

     29. We observe firstly that the findings made  by  Judge  Blum  do  not
         appear to have been the  subject  of  challenge  by  either  party.
         Secondly, the Judge Everett records that the matter was only raised
         briefly in a skeleton argument and although  his  understanding  of
         the oral submissions is disputed we do not find that  he  erred  in
         concluding that "Whatever risk there is to the  appellant,  he  has
         not shown it is for a Convention reason."

     30. Counsel submitted that the findings made by Judge  Blum  were  only
         the starting point and drew an analogy with the  facts  in  K.  The
         appellant had been persecuted because of his parentage.

     31. The facts in K are summarised in paragraph 2 of Fornah as follows:

             "The first appellant is an Iranian citizen. She is married  to
             B with whom, and their child, she  lived  in  Iran.  In  about
             April 2001 B disappeared. It appears he was arrested,  and  he
             has since been held in prison without, so  far  as  the  first
             appellant is aware, charge or trial. On her one visit  to  him
             in prison he appeared to her to show signs  of  ill-treatment.
             The grounds for his detention are  not  known.  About  two  or
             three weeks  after  B's  disappearance  Revolutionary  Guards,
             agents of  the  Islamic  Iranian  state,  searched  the  first
             appellant's house and took away books and papers. About a week
             later  the  Revolutionary  Guards  again  visited  the   first
             appellant's  house:  they  searched  the  house  further,  and
             insulted and raped her.  Following  this  incident  the  first
             appellant made herself scarce. She was not again approached by
             Revolutionary Guards and nor were members of her  family.  But
             the school  year  began  on  23  September  2001  and  on  the
             following day the headmaster of the  school  attended  by  her
             son, then aged 7, told her that the  Revolutionary  Guard  had
             been to the school  to  make  enquiries  about  the  boy.  The
             Adjudicator found that the Revolutionary Guards had approached
             the school in an open manner knowing that this would  come  to
             the attention of the first appellant and that it  would  cause
             her great fear. She was indeed very frightened, and fled  from
             Iran with her son. The Adjudicator accepted that in  the  then
             current situation in Iran the families  of  those  of  adverse
             interest to the authorities could well be targeted. The  first
             appellant travelled via Turkey to the United Kingdom where, on
             5 October  2001,  the  day  after  her  arrival,  she  claimed
             asylum."

     32. In our view the circumstances of the appellant could hardly be more
         distant from those in K. This case concerns a personal vendetta  by
         a father in the light of his belief that his son was  illegitimate.
         The appellant was  targeted  by  the  father  because  of  his  own
         personal characteristics, not as a member of  a  particular  social
         group. Whether or not Judge  Eldridge  was  confused  by  counsel's
         submissions about the step-mother's family we see no merit  in  the
         argument that the appellant fears persecution  as  a  member  of  a
         particular social group. Doubtless it  was  for  that  reason  that
         permission was not granted to argue the point.

         DECISION

         We find the First-tier Judge erred in law in respect of  the  claim
         under Article 3. We re-make the decision.

         The appeal is allowed under Article 3.

         The decision of the First-tier Judge to dismiss the appeal  in  all
         other respects stands.

         Anonymity Order

         No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal and we  make
         none.

         Fee Award

         The judge found that no fee award was paid or payable and  we  make
         no fee award.


Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               6 November 2015


