
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: HU/00636/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2018                 |On 23 October 2018            |


                                   Before

                   deputy upper tribunal judge R K CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                      v

                                CHIDIMMA [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Adams, counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on  15  August  1982.   Her
    appeal came before me for an error of law hearing on 12 July 2018. In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 1 August  2018,  I  found  material
    errors of law in the decision of the  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    adjourned the appeal for a resumed hearing. A copy of that decision and
    reasons is appended.

         Hearing

 2. At the hearing before me, Ms Willocks Brisoce accepted that the
    requisite financial limit was met, but the appeal was confined to an
    assessment of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules, with
    consideration of EX1 informing the Article 8 assessment and that
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules was also in play.

 3. Mr Adams submitted that the HMRC printout clearly shows that from 2014
    onwards that the financial requirements are met.

 4. The Appellant gave evidence and adopted her statement signed previously
    on 30 January 2018. Mr Adams asked her why she was unable to go to
    Nigeria and maintain family life there, to which she replied that her
    husband and family life are here in the UK; that she had given up
    everything to come here and there was no need for her to live in
    Nigeria. The Appellant stated that she resigned from her job because
    she received her visa and that she sold her house and car.

 5. In cross examination, the Appellant stated that she was a human
    resources officer at Unity Bank, dealing with recruitment and
    placements. It was put to the Appellant that she had said that she
    could not get the same job if you returned, but why could she not get
    another job, to which she responded that she was trained on the job in
    the bank and that the economic circumstances mean it is very difficult
    to get a job.

 6. When asked what she did with the money from selling her car she said
    that it is in her account and she uses it for the upkeep and financial
    support of her mother, who lives in Imo state in Nigeria, whereas the
    Appellant was living in Abidjan.

 7. When asked why she could not go back to Nigeria, the Appellant
    responded that the whole reason she is here is to live together with
    her husband and start a family. She stated that whilst her husband is
    now British, he originates from Nigeria. When asked why he could not
    return to Nigeria with her the Appellant responded that he works in the
    UK and all his financial dealings are here and if he were to go back he
    would not be able to sustain that. She said that they had spoken about
    what he would do if the Appellant had to go back.

 8. In response to questions by the Upper Tribunal regarding IVF treatment
    from Homerton Hospital, the Appellant stated that the hospital
    contacted the Home Office and said she had no rights to have NHS
    treatment. She was meant to commence it in November but was told she
    cannot, however, if she were able to sort out her status she could go
    back on the waiting list. She confirmed her date of birth (15.8.82).

 9. The Sponsor then gave evidence and confirmed his statement, which was
    signed and dated 31.1.18. When asked by Mr Adams why he would not be
    able to go back to Nigeria with your wife, he replied that his wife had
    resigned from her job and moved out from her accommodation and so they
    have absolutely nothing to fall back on if they moved back. She even
    sold her car. He denied that he would be in a position to go with her
    to start a family there, on the basis that he has been living in the UK
    for the last 12 years; that his friends and his life are here and that
    he works and pays his tax. He added that he is a British citizen since
    25 January 2018 (passport shown).

10. In cross-examination by Ms Willocks-Briscoe the Sponsor confirmed that
    he originates from Nigeria. He said that he had returned to Nigeria to
    complete the burial in March 2016 after his mother had passed away in
    January 2016. He said that he had not spoken to his wife about what
    would happen if she had to return to Nigeria but that it would break
    their family and that he was fully convinced she is not going back.
    When asked what would stop him from going with your wife to Nigeria he
    would lose his job and he does not have anything there having left
    Nigeria in 2007. He said that nobody is going to feed him in Nigeria
    and he would have to fend for himself and he did not have the
    werewithal to do this.

11. When asked why he could not obtain work in Nigeria he said that his job
    - head care assistant - did not exist in Nigeria. The Sponsor said that
    he also goes to school here as well. When asked if his wife had to
    return and needed accommodation whether he would help with finance, he
    said that he was not sure and that he would need to go through his
    budget and see and that it would affect him emotionally,
    psychologically and mentally and his right to family life would be
    violated.

12. When asked about family members the Sponsor stated that he has no
    family in the UK, but he has three brothers in Nigeria and that his
    wife has two brothers in Nigeria and her mother.

13. There was no re-examination.

14. In her submissions, Ms Willocks Briscoe handed up the judgment in TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109. Her submission is that there is a
    large volume of evidence but that it does not meet the requirements of
    Appendix FM-SE. The application was made on 19.9.16 so evidence is
    required for the 6 months prior to that and whilst some of the evidence
    is pre-decision e.g. evidence of employment in the form of a letter
    from HMRC and Maison Moti and the bank statements go as far back as
    June 2015, she has not seen the original documents. Under Appendix FM-
    SE the Sponsor would have had to provide a letter from the employer
    with his start date, salary and other details. Whilst she accepted that
    the new employment in 2017 at North Middlesex Hospital sets out the
    correct terms, the Maison Moti information is missing. In terms of the
    specified requirements she invited the Upper Tribunal to find the
    Appellant cannot succeed on that basis.

15.   In light of the judgment in MM Lebanon [2017] UKSC 10, Ms Willocks
Briscoe submitted that the Upper Tribunal can take into account
evidence even though it does not meet the strictures of Appendix FM
and that she did accept that the level of income is met, although not the
specifics and that this is material to an assessment of Article 8 outside
the Rules. However, she submitted that there were no insurmountable
obstacles nor would it be unduly harsh to expect them to live in    Nigeria
and nothing had been said in evidence to suggest this. She    sought to
rely on TZ (Pakistan) and the Supreme Court judgment in  Agyarko [2017]
UKSC 11.

16.   Is respect of the Appellant's immigration status and whether she was
here precariously or lawfully, Ms Willocks Briscoe submitted that one
can be both precarious and lawful and that unless one has settled   status
or unequivocal leave then leave is precarious. The initial visa     was
issued in error and then a residence card was not provided so she   is
lawful but precarious. She submitted that there is no evidence to   show
family life could not continue and her partner, the Sponsor, is of
Nigerian descent. The issue of his work in the UK and the fact he has
friends here as indicated in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 are not matters
that would make it unduly harsh for them to live in Nigeria.

17.   In respect of the fact that the Appellant and Sponsor are seeking
fertility treatment, Ms Willocks Briscoe submitted that this was a
consideration that the parties would have to make themselves and    there
was no evidence they would not be able to obtain IVF in Nigeria.

18.   Ms Willocks Briscoe submitted that there were no very significant
obstacles to return and the Appellant could be supported by her     husband
or live with her mother.

19.   In respect of the judgment in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, Ms Willocks
Briscoe sought to rely on the judgment in R (on the application of Chen) v
Secretary of State for the Home Department) (Appendix FM - Chikwamba -
temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)
and the finding that temporary separation for entry clearance was   lawful,
unless there is evidence to show adverse effects such as to   make
separation disproportionate when assessing that - eg individuals    with
young children or circumstances which would render it    unreasonable. She
submitted that there is no evidence the Appellant  could not return for a
short period to obtain entry clearance.

20.   In respect of the section 117A-D criteria, she submitted that little
weight should be attached to the relationship as it is precarious and the
Appellant's ability to speak English and be financially independent are
neutral factors.

21.   In his submissions, Mr Adams asked that the appeal be allowed. He
submitted that the evidence is clear and that all the circumstances
needed to be considered in the round. The Appellant and Sponsor have
given credible evidence and have told the truth about having relatives
in Nigeria.

22.   Mr Adams sought to rely on the document from HMRC and the
originals of the P60's, which clearly suffice and that these should be
considered within the Rules. Mr Adams invited the Upper Tribunal to
make a finding in light of the judgment in MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC
10. Mr Adams further submitted that precariousness has not been     defined
properly. He sought to reply on [21] of error of law decision       and
submitted that precariousness is where there is no legal basis for  being
in the UK and that was not the case. Once she was given a family    permit
all that was needed to be shown was the exercise of treaty    rights in the
UK. Mr Adams submitted that there was no economic  liability for the UK. He
further submitted that it would be unduly    harsh, due to advice by the
Respondent's representative the Appellant    left Nigeria and sold all her
possessions and gave up her job. Her    husband has been in the UK for 12
years, for the better part of his adult      life and he has put down roots
in the UK.

23.   In respect of the judgment in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40, Mr Adams
submitted that if one looked at the requirements that, but for the Entry
Clearance Officer's mistake, they would have been able to meet the
requirements of Appendix FM. He submitted that in these  circumstances it
would not be reasonable for her to go back and make      the application
when the evidence is considered in the round. He   submitted that what
distinguishes this case is the fact that she is going    to IVF and it will
cause a break and that factor alone is very important    and it would be
unduly harsh on the Appellant and her husband and  their family life.

24.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my findings.

         Findings

25.   It is not in dispute that the Appellant entered the United Kingdom on
3     October 2015, pursuant to an EEA family permit valid for 6 months.
Thereafter the Appellant applied for a residence card as the family
member of the Sponsor, who had been granted permanent residence     on 28
November 2015. This application was refused in a decision dated     27
January 2016 because there was no legal basis for the Appellant's   husband
to sponsor her because he is not an EEA national (having      derived his
permanent residence from his former marriage to an EEA   national).
Thereafter, the Appellant made a further application for a    residence
card and also raised the issue of her family life pursuant to       Article
8 of ECHR, however, this application was refused on 7 August  2016 for the
same reason as before and no decision was made in respect     of the
Article 8 claim due to the fact that she had not made a formal
application.

26.   The Appellant then made a formal application on the basis of her
family life with her husband on 19 September 2016, which was refused
in a decision dated 22 November 2016 on the basis that she did not  meet
the eligibility requirements, given that she had become an    overstayer
after the refusal decision of 7 August 2016 and had not  made the extant
application within 28 days and EX1 did not apply.

27.   I have considered whether EX1(b) applies and I have concluded that,
in    the absence of any evidence to the contrary, there are no
insurmountable obstacles to the Appellant's family life continuing with
her partner outside the UK, given that the Sponsor originates from
Nigeria. Whilst I entirely accept that he would not wish to return to
Nigeria, given that he left in 2007 and is now British, he returned in
March 2016 following his mother's death and there is nothing which  would
amount to an insurmountable obstacles that would prevent him  from
returning.

28.   No analysis of whether or not the Appellant could meet the financial
requirements of the Rules was made at the time of the refusal decision.
At the hearing before me, both parties agree that the financial
threshold is met through the Sponsor's salary, but not the specific
requirements set out in Appendix FM SE. This is because the   March 2016
bank statement and some deposits are missing but there   are wage slips
covering September 2015 to August 2016 viz the period    covering the 6
months prior to the extant application made.

29.   Thus I find that the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of
Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  I further find that the
Appellant is unable to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi)
as there was no evidence that there would be very significant obstacles
to her integration in Nigeria. I make this finding in light of the fact
that  the Appellant was born and brought up in Nigeria and was gainfully
employed prior to resigning in order to come to the UK to join her  husband
and she has only resided in the UK for the last 3 years which is an
insufficient time to amount to a significant obstacle to her  integration.
I also bear in mind that her mother and two brothers     continue to reside
in Nigeria and there was no evidence that they     would not be prepared to
offer accommodation or emotional support,    albeit I accept that the
Appellant is financially supporting her mother     from the proceeds of the
sale of her car.

30.   I proceed to consider whether there are exceptional circumstances
justifying consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules. I have concluded
that there are such circumstances, as a result of the fact that the
Appellant entered the UK lawfully pursuant to an EEA family permit.
Whilst the Respondent subsequently and lawfully realised that the
Appellant was not entitled to such a permit, for the reasons set out at
[26] above, I accept that the Appellant and her Sponsor were not aware
of this and relied upon it to the extent that the Appellant resigned from
work and sold her car and ended the contract on her rental apartment.

31.   I find that family life has been established between the Appellant
and   the Sponsor, who have now lived together as a married couple for the
last three years. Applying the judgment in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 I  find
that to require the Appellant to return to Nigeria would constitute
an interference with her family life with her husband, however, the
Respondent's decision is in accordance with the law and is necessary to
maintain immigration control. The question is whether it would be
proportionate.

32.   Relevant to the proportionality assessment are the public interest
considerations set out in section 117B of the NIAA 2002. The Appellant
speaks English and gave her evidence in English. She is financially
supported by her husband and thus there is no recourse to public    funds.
Whilst the point has not been definitively decided by the
jurisprudence, I am prepared to accept that financial dependence upon
one's partner can be equated to financial independence. I find that she
developed her family life whilst in the UK lawfully, at least ab initio,
however her leave has always been precarious.

33.   I also take account of the fact that, in light of Ms Willocks-
Briscoe's   concession that the Sponsor's salary meets the financial
requirements     (albeit not the specific requirements of Appendix FM-SE)
at the date of   decision, that any application for entry clearance were
the Appellant    to return to Nigeria, would be likely to be granted. In
these       circumstances, the judgment in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 is
applicable. Ms Willocks-Briscoe sought to argue that the decision in R
(on the application of Chen) v Secretary of State for the Home Department)
(Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation - proportionality)  IJR
[2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) was applicable, however, I find that Chen   is
distinguishable on its facts and given that it was a judicial review.

34.   I have also considered the judgment in TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ
1109, a copy of which was provided by Ms Willocks-Briscoe. I find that
it is distinguishable from this case, in that it is clear from [18](a) that
      the first question that required an answer was with regard to foreign
      nationals who commenced relationships in the UK when they were
well aware that their immigration status was precarious.

35.   This Appellant was admitted lawfully pursuant to an EEA family
permit, albeit one to which it materialised she was not entitled. That
does not detract from the fact that, having married the Sponsor, she
sought to obtain the correct entry clearance to join him as his partner or
family member, based on the fact that he has permanent residence in
the UK. This is a factor that can properly considered as part of the
proportionality assessment following Charles {2018] UKUT 00089      (IAC).
I find that it is also material to the assessment of whether a
temporary separation would be proportionate that the Appellant and  her
husband are seeking fertility treatment and she is now aged 36      years
of age.

36.   I note that in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11, the second Appellant, Ms
Ikuga,      sought to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis inter alia
that she    was seeking fertility treatment and that upholding the
decisions of the       lower courts, the Supreme Court found that this did
not amount to:   "exceptional circumstances" as defined in the
Instructions, that is to say,     unjustifiably harsh consequences for
the individual such that the refusal of the  application would not be
proportionate."

37.   However, notably, both Ms Agyarko and Ms Ikuga formed   relationships
with their British partners at a time when they were     present in the UK
unlawfully, which is not the position in respect of      this Appellant who
entered lawfully and has sought at all time to abide     by the Immigration
Rules, albeit she ultimately became an overstayer  by a small margin.

38.   Thus, I find on the particular facts of this case, given that the
requirements of the Immigration Rules for entry clearance as a partner
would be met, that to expect the Appellant to return to Nigeria     simply
in order to obtain entry clearance to re-join her husband in the    United
Kingdom, would be unjustifiably harsh and thus     disproportionate.

      Decision

39.   The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).


      Rebecca Chapman
      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

      19 October 2018
