
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00287/2017
     HU/00292/2017
     HU/00300/2017
     HU/00333/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th January 2019                           |On 5th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                            Miss Fahmida Tanzeem
                         Mr Saifuddin Muhammed Tariq
                        Mr Waseeuddin Muhammed Rafid
                              Mrs Selina Akter
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by FLK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellants.  There are four
Appellants, all citizens of Bangladesh.  The Appellants had made
application for leave to remain indefinitely on human rights grounds.  At
the time of the Decision none of the Appellants had accumulated ten years'
lawful residence nor were either of the children qualifying children,
having not been here for seven years.

It took a long time for this case to come before the First-tier Tribunal
and it was adjourned on one occasion, at the Secretary of State's request,
so that he could reconsider the matter on the basis that by this time the
first Appellant had accrued ten years' lawful residence in the United
Kingdom and one of the children had become a qualifying child, having
arrived on 12th September 2010.

Unfortunately, as is too often the case, the Secretary of State in fact did
not make any further Decision and when the matter came before First-tier
Tribunal Judge Handley on 16th April 2018 chose not to be represented
either.  There had been some indication previously from the Secretary of
State that the fact that one Appellant had been here for ten years and one
was now a qualifying child were new matters.  The judge decided that they
were new matters and therefore did not take those factors into account in
deciding the human rights appeal.

Whilst it is true that the judge could not have found that they met the
requirements of the Immigration Rules on the basis of ten years' lawful
residence the facts being that he had in fact been here that length of time
and that one of the children was a qualifying child were clearly matters
which were important considerations in the proportionality exercise.

The judge in deciding that they were new matters did not take those into
account when considering Article 8 and in that regard, I find that the
judge has made an error of law which is clearly material to the outcome.
The passage of time is not a new matter.  The judge was considering Article
8, which has to be decided on the basis of the facts as they are at the
date of hearing. Ms Pal was unable to indicate where in the judgment the
First-tier Tribunal did take those matters into account.  Clearly, it did
not, and therefore the matter has to be set aside in its entirety.  It is
appropriate, given that it all has to be redecided, for it to be remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered before a different judge.  The
appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House and I would hope that the
Secretary of State in the meantime will look again at this case and if not,
at the very least will field a Presenting Officer on the next occasion.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that he  Decision  and  Reasons  is  set
aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing  on  all
matters.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed [pic]                            Date 18th January 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
