
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/00495/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2019                           |On 19 September 2019              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    M.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali of White Horse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.   This matter came back before the Tribunal further  to  the  adjournment
    hearing of 15 January 2019. The case was  adjourned  on  that  occasion
    because it was considered prudent to await the  outcome  of  a  pending
    appeal before the President. A decision in JG  (s.117B(6):  "reasonable
    to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) has now been  promulgated.
    Further, it is to be noted that the Court of Appeal has  more  recently
    expressed agreement with "the interpretation given by the UT to section
    117B(6)(b) in JG" in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Department  v  AB
    (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 (paragraph 72).


2.   On 15 January 2019 I also considered  and  refused  an  application  to
    amend the grounds of appeal. A combined written decision in respect  of
    the adjournment and  the  refusal  of  the  application  to  amend  was
    promulgated on 1 May 2019. The background to the appeal  is  referenced
    therein, and is also apparent on the face of  the  documents  on  file,
    including - necessarily and in particular - the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In such circumstances I do not propose  to  repeat  here
    the relevant background, but make reference to it as is incidental  for
    the purposes of this Decision.


3.   The Appellant's application of 22 August 2017 - a  human  rights  claim
    -was made with primary reference to  his  medical  condition.  This  is
    manifest on the face of the FLR(HRO)  application  form  signed  on  21
    August  2017  (Respondent's  bundle  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    Appendix A - see in particular at A3 and A7),  and  in  the  supporting
    evidence submitted with the application (Respondent's bundle Annex  D).
    Be that as it may, reference was also made to the circumstances of  the
    Appellant's wife and children, and their length of residence in the  UK
    (A3-A6).


4.   In this latter regard of particular relevance are the circumstances  of
    the Appellant's youngest child - herein 'E' - because she is  the  only
    one still a minor. E was born in Bangladesh on 10 August 2002 and is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh - as is the Appellant.  She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as his dependant on 22 September 2008.  She  enjoyed  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom up until 1  September  2014  -  i.e.  just
    short of 6 years' residence in the UK with leave.  She has not had  any
    leave since


5.   The notion that the primary focus of the Appellant's  case  as  put  by
    him was on his medical condition is reinforced by the contents  of  the
    Notice of Appeal, and the attachment thereto  of  two  further  medical
    letters. The matter is underscored yet further by  a  consideration  of
    the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal.  Whilst  it  is
    clear that the Appellant also continued  to  place  reliance  upon  the
    circumstances of his wife and daughter, the extent of  the  information
    and supporting evidence provided was relatively slight. In  respect  of
    E, I note the following:

         (i)  There  is  brief  reference  to  her  circumstances   in   the
         Appellant's witness statement signed on 26 February 2018, in  which
         it is related that E "has been attending Reading Girls' School full-
         time. She enjoys her studies and has adapted life here in  the  UK.
         She integrated to the society here so uniquely that she foresees  a
         bright and potential future in the UK". Such generalised assertions
         contain little meaningful or specific information as to the quality
         of E's private life, or otherwise.


         (ii) It is also stated in the Appellant's  witness  statement  that
         E's "well-being  is  also  involved  with  my  well-being  and  any
         decision in this matter must encompass a child's best interest".  I
         pause to note that even in this context to  a  certain  extent  the
         relevance of these circumstances are emphasised as an aspect of the
         Appellant's case based on medical grounds. In  so  far  as  it  was
         being argued  that  the  Appellant's  return  to  Bangladesh  would
         "undoubtedly endanger [his] life"  (witness  statement),  and  that
         this would adversely impact upon his dependants (including  E),  it
         is to  be  noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
         Appellant had not  established  his  case  in  respect  of  any  of
         prognosis, availability of treatment in  Bangladesh,  and  cost  of
         treatment (e.g. see paragraph 44).

         (iii) Three documents were produced in respect of E's education.  A
         letter dated 10  March  2016  from  her  primary  school  confirmed
         attendance from 30 April 2013 until  31  August  2013;  an  undated
         letter from  her  secondary  school  confirmed  attendance  from  1
         September 2013, as did a second letter from  the  school  dated  13
         February  2018.  None  of  the  letters   contained   any   further
         information.

         (iv) No other  evidence  in  respect  of  E  was  included  in  the
         Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.


6.   Further to the above, whilst it is clear that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge identified at the outset of the hearing in discussing the  issues
    with the representatives that E was a  'qualifying  child'  within  the
    meaning of section  117D(1)(b)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (Decision at paragraph 21(c)), and  that  it  would  be
    necessary to consider "whether it would not be reasonable to expect [E]
    to leave the UK" (paragraph 22(c)), it is also  clear  that  there  was
    little further  by  way  of  meaningful  evidence  in  respect  of  E's
    circumstances. The Judge listed  the  documentary  evidence  (paragraph
    17), and additionally noted the Appellant's oral testimony  in  respect
    of  his  daughter  -  in  part  uncontroversial  confirmation  of   her
    attendance at school, in part a reassertion "that she  has  adapted  to
    life here", and in part the additional information "that she is sitting
    exams now" (paragraph 50). (For completeness I note that the Judge also
    identified in preliminary discussions that irrespective of any issue as
    to 'reasonableness' in respect of E, it was also necessary to determine
    whether the Respondent's decision contravened Article 8 of the  ECHR  -
    paragraph 22(d).)


7.   The Appellant's and his  advisers'  apparent  elective  preference  for
    emphasising the medical circumstances of the Appellant  continued  into
    the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal, notwithstanding the  limited
    scope of the grant of permission to appeal  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Saffer:

         "The "medical" grounds amount to nothing more than  a  disagreement
         with findings FTT  Judge  Bristow  was  entitled  to  make  on  the
         evidence regarding the failure by the Appellant to  establish  that
         the "N" or "GS" thresholds [were met].
         However, it is arguable that despite a detailed s55  best  interest
         assessment, the  Judge  has  not  articulated  what  the  'powerful
         reasons' are to make it proportionate to remove a 15 year old  girl
         (the Appellant's dependant in the appeal) who has been here  for  9
         years and is at a crucial stage of her education".

     This is demonstrated by the Appellant's attempt at the last hearing  to
    amend the grounds of appeal -  rejected  for  reasons  set  out  in  my
    earlier written decision. And even at this latest stage Mr  Ali  placed
    emphasis in his opening observations  and  submissions  on  a  supposed
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's medical condition in considering the  circumstances  of  E,
    submitting that the 'reasonableness' test (whether in respect  of  rule
    276ADE(1)(iv) or section 117B(6)) should factor  in  all  circumstances
    including the circumstances of E's father (i.e. the Appellant).


8.   Indeed it seems to me that the core strategy of  the  Appellant's  case
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  was  to  continue  to  attempt  to  pursue
    arguments in respect of his health condition: the initial tactic was to
    seek to amend the grounds of appeal to permit challenge to the  Judge's
    findings notwithstanding the  basis  of  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal; when that tactic failed Mr Ali sought to pursue submissions  in
    respect of the  Appellant's  medical  circumstances  as  an  aspect  of
    reasonableness - notwithstanding that they did not feature  in  such  a
    context in the grounds of appeal or inform the grant of  permission  to
    appeal.


9.   I accept that in principle the medical circumstances of a parent  could
    potentially impact upon  the  question  of  reasonableness.  Indeed,  I
    recognised as much in my decision refusing the application to amend the
    grounds of  appeal  when  concluding  my  written  decision  with  this
    observation:

         "Of course in this context if the  Appellant  wishes  to  file  any
         further medical evidence to address the real world situation of the
         likely circumstances upon return to Bangladesh with a view to  rely
         upon such matters in the event that an error of law was found  that
         is permissible" (paragraph 25).

    The reference to the 'real world' situation  there  is  necessarily  an
    echo of the observations of Lord Justice Lewinson in  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 referenced with approval by  Lord  Carnwath  in  KO
    (Nigeria) and Others v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] UKSC 53,  and  as  such  was  an  acknowledgement  that  if  the
    'reasonableness' test in respect of E were to be revisited in light  of
    a finding of error of law then that might encompass a consideration  of
    her father's medical circumstances were the family to be in Bangladesh.
    (In the event, no such further medical evidence has  been  filed  since
    the last hearing.)


10.  However, Mr Ali's submissions in this  regard  essentially  constituted
    an attempt to  traverse  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the  evidence
    relating to the Appellant's medical condition at paragraphs 25-44 in  a
    manner that amounted to nothing more than an  attempt  to  reargue  the
    appeal. He repeatedly sought  to  take  me  to  the  materials  in  the
    Appellant's First-tier bundle as a means  of  challenging  the  Judge's
    evaluation and findings in respect of the Appellant's medical  grounds.
    I indicated to him that I considered that this  was  inappropriate:  at
    the error of law stage - and bearing in mind the scope of the grant  of
    permission to appeal - what was required was a consideration of whether
    or not the Judge had erred in the application of  the  'reasonableness'
    test to E or 'proportionality' under Article 8, in the context  of  the
    findings made by the Judge; the refusal to grant permission  to  appeal
    to challenge the decision in respect of the medical  grounds  was  such
    that it was not presently open to the Appellant to  attempt  to  reopen
    such findings to establish a new premise from which  to  challenge  the
    Judge's conclusions in respect of E's position.


11.  In this context, and for the avoidance of any  doubt,  I  note  that  I
    could identify nothing in Mr Ali's submissions,  and  cannot  otherwise
    identify anything in the available materials, to suggest anything other
    than  that  the  Judge   in   considering   the   Appellant's   medical
    circumstances had full regard to  the  evidence  and  reached  entirely
    sustainable findings for reasons that were readily apparent on the face
    of the Decision.


12.  As per paragraph 24 of my ruling  in  respect  of  the  application  to
    amend the grounds of appeal, I in substance reminded Mr  Ali  that  the
    permissible basis of the challenge was "to the Article 8 aspect of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with particular reference  to  the
    circumstances of the Appellant's  daughter  against  the  framework  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act", which  in
    effect meant addressing me in  respect  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision from paragraph 49 onwards.


13.  In my earlier decision herein I referred to  Lord  Carnwath's  "simpler
    and more direct approach" to 'reasonableness' (per paragraph 14  of  KO
    (Nigeria)), and  suggested  that  pursuant  to  KO  (Nigeria)  what  is
    required is

         an evaluation of what is reasonable for the child;

         bearing in mind best interests;

         and bearing in mind the Zoumbas principle, that the child is not to
         be blamed for matters for which she is not responsible;

         but in the real world situation of where the parent or parents  are
    expected to be;


         which usually mean that the ultimate  question  will  be  -  is  it
         reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with  no  right
         to remain to the country of origin.


14.  I can see no suggestion of a contrary approach in JG.


15.  In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  method  at  paragraphs
    49-54 was entirely in keeping with this approach. The sub-heading above
    paragraph 49 - "Reasonable to leave the UK - [E]" -  and  paragraph  49
    describe the question being addressed. Paragraphs 50-52 entirely  focus
    on the circumstances  of  E,  and  essay  an  evaluation  of  her  best
    interests. At paragraph 53 the Judge refers to the circumstances of the
    Appellant, but in doing so is manifestly considering the claimed impact
    upon E of returning to Bangladesh in the company of her parents  -  and
    therefore the real world situation of E's likely circumstances  in  the
    event of return.


16.  The criticism of these paragraphs in the  Grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal  -  appearing  as  it  does  in  a
    document focused in the  main  on  the  medical  circumstances  of  the
    Appellant - is limited and essentially  amounts  to  the  following  at
    paragraph 10:

         "The Appellant further contest that although Judge J L Bristow  was
         rightly mindful of [E]'s life in  the  UK  and  her  best  interest
         (Paragraph 50 and 51) was enunciated while determining  Appellant's
         matter. But he contends that her private life and her best interest
         were not substantively taken into account.  She  started  going  to
         school since her formative life.  She  completed  her  primary  and
         secondary education here and is waiting for  her  GCSE  results  to
         reveal. Such fact cannot be  denied  even  though  there  were  not
         sufficient documents to prove this notion which is raised by  Judge
         J L Bristow. Her best interest also means to her basic right  which
         is right  to  education.  The  Appellant  contends  that  her  best
         interest was not reflected and her insurmountable hardship was  not
         even  addressed  in  the  determination.  Therefore  the  Appellant
         strongly believes the determination of the First-tier Tribunal thus
         erred factually and legally." [sic.]


17.  It may be seen that paragraph 10 of the Ground  acknowledges  that  the
    Judge evaluated best interests, but disputes that evaluation.  It  does
    so with reference to E's education. I  can  see  no  substance  to  the
    challenge: the  Judge  expressly  referred  to  the  testimony  of  the
    Appellant in respect of E, including her education, and referenced  the
    supporting evidence from  the  schools  (paragraph  50);  there  is  no
    suggestion on the face of the decision that the Judge  did  not  accept
    such a commonplace circumstance of E being in state  education  in  the
    UK; indeed he  expressly  found  "that  she  has  been  educated  here"
    (paragraph 51, and see also paragraph 52).


18.  It is to be recalled that beyond the amount of time spent  in  the  UK,
    and the fact that she was in school in  the  UK,  nothing  further  was
    advanced in respect of E's circumstances, whether by way of  supporting
    evidence or testimony. E's position and circumstances  as  advanced  by
    the Appellant are fully reflected in the Judge's evaluation.


19.  In all the circumstances I conclude that the pleading at  paragraph  10
    of the Grounds in substance amounts to no more than a disagreement with
    the outcome. No error of law is identifiable.


20.  For the avoidance of any doubt I  note  that  there  is  an  additional
    pleading  at  paragraph  14  of  the  Grounds  which  references   best
    interests. However, in context paragraph 14  has  as  its  premise  the
    assertion that the Appellant's life would be at risk in Bangladesh  and
    that this was not taken forward into  the  best  interests  evaluation.
    This point is answered by the circumstance of the  Judge  finding  that
    the Appellant had not made out his  case  in  respect  of  his  claimed
    circumstances in the event of  return  to  Bangladesh.  (See  similarly
    paragraph 5(ii) above.)


21.  Mr Ali's oral submissions did not advance the  case  much  further.  He
    criticised the  Judge's  use  of  the  word  'many'  in  the  following
    sentence: "It is correct that many of her formative years have been  in
    the UK and that she has been educated  here"  (paragraph  51).  Mr  Ali
    submitted that the use of the word 'many' did not reflect that  it  was
    in fact 'most' of E's formative years that had been spent in the UK.  I
    do not accept that the Judge lost sight of the  facts  recited  in  the
    immediately preceding paragraph - "[E] came to the UK on  22  September
    2008. She would then have been 6 years of age. She has been  living  in
    the UK for 9 years. She is now 15 years of age." - or that  the  choice
    of the word 'many' otherwise amounts to an error of law.


22.  Mr Ali was also critical of the Judge's use of the word 'some'  in  the
    sentence "She will  have  assumed  some  of  the  culture  of  the  UK"
    (paragraph 51). It was submitted that this underplayed the significance
    of the time spent in the UK, and that  more  generally  the  Judge  had
    accorded too much weight to the initial 6 years  lived  in  Bangladesh,
    and had not sufficiently balanced the subsequent approximately 10 years
    in the UK. In my judgement this was essentially to re-present arguments
    as to weight which were also matters for the evaluation of  the  Judge;
    the submission was rooted in disagreement and not in the identification
    of an error of law.


23.  Mr Ali also sought to impugn  the  Judge's  finding  that  E's  parents
    would  be  able  to  facilitate  her  integration  back  into  life  in
    Bangladesh (paragraph 52). In this context he argued that there was  no
    consideration of the Appellant's ability so  to  do  in  light  of  his
    medical  circumstances.  As  already  noted,  the  Judge  rejected  the
    Appellant's case in respect of his medical circumstances, and  as  such
    it  was  not  established  that  either  parent  would  be   materially
    restricted in this context. The finding  was  open  to  the  Judge.  In
    respect of integration Mr  Ali  also  made  reference  to  a  potential
    language problem on the basis of Sylheti being  a  spoken  rather  than
    written dialect; however he accepted that this was not a matter pleaded
    in the Grounds, and he was not able to identify that it  was  a  factor
    that has been advanced before the First-tier Tribunal.


24.  In all such circumstances I find no error of  law  in  respect  of  the
    Judge's approach to the  question  of  reasonableness  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) and section 117B(6).


25.  The Judge went on to consider  proportionality  under  Article  8:  see
    paragraph 55-73. On the matters that focus upon the Appellant's medical
    circumstances, I can  identify  no  express  pleading  in  the  written
    Grounds in support of the application for  permission  to  appeal  that
    challenge the evaluation in respect of E. Nonetheless, as noted  above,
    it  is  with  particular  regard  to  'proportionality'  that  it   was
    considered appropriate to grant permission to appeal.


26.  In seeking to develop the case in this regard - in the absence  of  any
    formal written ground of appeal - Mr Ali  focused  on  the  factors  at
    paragraph  69(a)  and  (c)  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's   Decision.
    Paragraph 69 begins "I find  that  the  following  factors  weaken  the
    Article 8 claim:". At subparagraph (a) reference  is  made  to  section
    117B(5) of the 2002 Act and it is observed that "little  weight  should
    be given to the private lives of the Appellant [his wife] and [E] since
    01 September 2014 because these were established when their immigration
    status was precarious". Subparagraph  (c)  takes  forward  the  Judge's
    earlier findings to the effect that the Appellant had "not  proved  the
    prognosis  of  his  medical  condition",  and  "has  not   proved   the
    seriousness of it... the necessity or  otherwise  of  the  bone  marrow
    transplant [or] the cost of treatment  in  Bangladesh  or  whether  the
    treatment is available or not".


27.  The submission in this latter regard constituted a yet further  attempt
    to revisit the Judge's findings in respect of the Appellant's  case  on
    medical grounds. I find no substance in  Mr  Ali's  criticisms  of  the
    Judge's reliance on the matters set out at paragraph 69(c).


28.   In  the  abstract  there  is  nothing  objectionable  to  the  Judge's
    observation at paragraph 69(a). Mr Ali sought to suggest that focus  on
    this  as  an  adverse  factor  that  weakened  the  Article   8   claim
    demonstrated a failure to balance all the circumstances of the case. It
    seems to me that this submission fundamentally disregarded the positive
    matters identified by the Judge at paragraph 68  -  "I  find  that  the
    following factors  contribute  weight  to  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    claim", which included expressly that "the private and family  life  he
    has established in the UK with [his wife] and [E] is of around 9  years
    duration" (paragraph 68(a)), and "[E] has spent  formative  years  here
    and has been in education here. She has been here for 9 years since the
    age of 6" (paragraph 68(d)).


29.  Indeed it is manifest that Judge undertook a 'balance  sheet'  approach
    in evaluating proportionality. The Judge had regard to the five  Razgar
    questions  (paragraphs  55-60),  and  in  respect  of   proportionality
    identified that it was for the Respondent to demonstrate  the  decision
    was justified in the public  interest  (paragraph  63),  before  having
    regard to  the  public  interest  considerations  under  the  2002  Act
    (paragraphs  64-67),  and  then  expressly  setting  out  positive  and
    negative factors (paragraph 68  and  69).  The  Judge  Paul  all  these
    matters together at paragraph 70 and concluded that the Respondent "has
    justified the decision".


30.  I cannot identify any fault or error in the approach of the  Judge.  In
    respect of E it is manifest that the Judge took fully into account  the
    limited information provided in respect of her circumstances, including
    in particular the amount of time that she had been in the  UK  and  the
    fact that she was in education here.  The  Judge  recognised  that  the
    Appellant was a qualifying child, but  sustainably  concluded  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK. The Judge went on to
    consider proportionality, again taking into account  the  private  life
    established by E the UK, but balancing this against the public interest
    requirements in the context of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case.
    Again, I find that the conclusion reached was adequately  reasoned  and
    is sustainable; it is not impugnable for error of law.


31.  In all such circumstances I find that the Appellant's challenge to  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal fails.


Notice of Decision

32.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
stands.


33.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 18 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
