
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00972/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 March 2017                         |On 29 June 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          HIS HONOUR JUDGE EYRE QC


                                   Between

                              Mr Cemal Aydogdu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, Counsel, Islington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Cemal Aydogdu is a Turkish citizen of  Kurdish  origin.   He  was  made
    subject to a deportation order in June of 2015  and  was  removed  from
    this country in September 2015.  That order and that  removal  followed
    his conviction in  respect  of  an  offence  committed  in  2003.   The
    circumstances of that offence  are  not  contentious  and  I  take  the
    summary  of  them  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Macdonald.

 2. On 11th February 2003 the Appellant went to Manchester Airport with his
    wife and his 7 year old daughter.  At  the  entrance  to  the  terminal
    building he set various immigration papers alight and then when  police
    officers arrived he poured  petrol  over  himself,  his  wife  and  his
    daughter, splashed the police officers with petrol  and  threatened  to
    set himself and his family on fire.

 3. The current hearing results from the Appellant's application to  revoke
    the deportation order.  The Secretary of State refused that application
    in June of 2015, the effect being that by the time matters came  before
    Judge Macdonald more than ten years had elapsed since the making of the
    deportation order.

 4. The Appellant appealed against the refusal by the  Secretary  of  State
    and that appeal was heard by Judge Macdonald in June of 2016  with  his
    decision being dated 4th July 2016. It is in respect of  that  decision
    that  this  appeal  takes  place.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Pitt   gave
    permission on ground 1 of the grounds of appeal but  declined  to  give
    permission on other grounds.

 5. Before me Ms Robinson sought to reopen the other grounds but I  refused
    permission for that. Those  other  grounds  being,  in  my  assessment,
    directed to questions of findings of fact rather than matters  of  law.
    It was my view that Judge Pitt was entirely right to refuse  permission
    in respect of them.  I did not intend today's hearing to be complicated
    by the inclusion of those matters.

 6. The law is not substantially in issue between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent.  The effect of Rule 391, shortly stated, is that  with  the
    passage of ten years  from  the  making  of  a  deportation  order  the
    proportionality of maintaining it in force must be assessed on  a  case
    by case basis.  All are agreed that the relevant approach derives  from
    the Court of Appeal decision in the case of ZP (India) v The  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1197.  What  it  boils
    down to is that the  proportionality  of  maintaining  the  deportation
    order in force must  be  assessed  on  a  case  by  case  basis  having
    reference  to  the  public  interest  but  also   to   the   particular
    circumstances of the particular applicant for a revocation.

 7. The grounds on which Ms Robinson relies in this  hearing  are  twofold.
    The first is the contention that although the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    stated the law correctly he did not apply it correctly.  She says  that
    the judgment and reasons for decision show that he had made up his mind
    based on the nature of the offending before looking at  the  particular
    circumstances of this particular appellant and so did not carry out the
    appropriate case specific assessment. The second element on  which  Ms.
    Robinson relies is to  contend  that  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    improperly took account of the public revulsion at offences of the kind
    with which we are concerned.

 8. So, taking those in turn, did the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  apply  a
    proper case specific assessment? By which I mean: did he  in  assessing
    the proportionality of maintaining the deportation order in  the  light
    of the public interest  take  particular  and  proper  account  of  the
    individual circumstances  of  the  Appellant  rather  than  applying  a
    blanket approach determined by the desirability or  appropriateness  of
    deportation?

 9. Ms Robinson's argument centres on the Judge's  comments  at  paragraphs
    100 to 103 of his decision and their position in the  decision  itself.
    At paragraph 100 the First-tier Tribunal Judge said this:

         "100.    I have considered whether  or  not  the  passage  of  time
             lessens the Appellant's offence.   It  is  now  over  thirteen
             years since he was sentenced.  The Appellant was, literally, a
             spark away from killing or  seriously  injuring  himself,  his
             wife, his son, his  daughter,  two  police  officers  and  any
             members of the public who were  nearby.   A  fire  could  have
             spread to the terminal building.

         101. I bear in mind that since 2003 there have been similar violent
             instances (but not identical) in the  United  Kingdom  and  in
             Europe at railway stations, airports and other public  meeting
             places such as Members of Parliament surgeries.  Some of those
             have been caused by terrorist groups  and  others  by  persons
             like the Appellant who might have carried out their acts in  a
             moment of desperation and agitation.   I  find,  if  anything,
             looking at the Appellant's behaviour in 2016 that the  passage
             of time shows the offence  to  be  as  serious  (if  not  more
             serious) than it was in 2003 and that members  of  the  public
             would still view the Appellant's offending with 'revulsion'.

         102. Members of the public are  entitled  to  know  that  they  are
             protected  against  such  acts  as  those  committed  by   the
             Appellant.  Further, as a matter of deterrence, those who seek
             to remain in the United Kingdom or to enter the United Kingdom
             must be deterred from behaving in a  similar  fashion  and  be
             shown that by committing  such  acts  they  cannot  circumvent
             legitimate immigration control."

At paragraph 103 the First-tier Tribunal Judge simply  said  that  the  fact
    that the conviction was spent had not changed his view.

10. He then went on, at 104, to say that the deportation order was made  on
    24th June 2005.  He noted that the eleventh  anniversary  would  be  on
    24th June 2016 and then said: "Rule 391 makes it clear that  after  ten
    years have elapsed consideration should be given  on  a  case  by  case
    basis to whether the deportation order should be maintained."  Then  at
    paragraph 105 he added: "I have considered the matters raised on behalf
    of the Appellant  both  by  himself  and  his  family  as  to  why  the
    deportation order should be revoked."

11. Ms Robinson's contention is that the passages I  have  just  read  from
    paragraphs 100 to 103 show the judge having taken account of the nature
    of the offending and having come to a conclusion based on  that  before
    taking account of the circumstances of the Appellant rather than, as he
    should have done, looking at matters in the round.

12. I do not accept that argument.  Ms. Robinson's  interpretation  of  the
    decision is an artificial interpretation of the decision with which  we
    are concerned.  The decision must be seen as a whole and construed as a
    whole.  The judge set out the law correctly and  at  some  length.   He
    said that he  was  applying  that  law.   He  carried  out  a  detailed
    assessment of the various factors raised on behalf of the Appellant and
    his family, that  assessment  being  set  out  at  paragraphs  105  and
    following.

13. At paragraph 119 the judge  made  an  express  comparison  between  the
    effect on the family life of the Appellant and the  proportionality  of
    the public interest deriving from the offence and the  relevant  public
    interest.  That is the balancing exercise  that  he  should  have  been
    carrying out and which he was in fact undertaking.  That assessment  of
    the contentions made by and on behalf of the Appellant  continues  from
    paragraph 105 through to paragraph 133 of his judgment.

14. Moreover, at paragraph 134 the  judge  said,  in  terms,  that  he  had
    "looked at all the above factors in an overall and broad  way  and  set
    them  against  the  very  clear  public  interest  in  maintaining  the
    deportation order and I find it is still  appropriate",  he  said,  "to
    maintain the deportation order".

15. The contention of Ms Robinson involves an  artificial  construction  or
    interpretation of this decision.  It is clear that when the decision is
    seen as a whole the judge did not err in law because  he  was  applying
    the public interest and the proportionality  arising  from  it  in  the
    light of the particular circumstances of the particular  Appellant  and
    considering those circumstances with care.  That was the exercise which
    he was required by law to perform.

16. The second line of attack Ms Robinson mounts is based on the  reference
    in paragraph 101 of the decision namely  that  members  of  the  public
    would still view the Appellant's offending with "revulsion". One  needs
    in  considering  this  line  of  argument  to  see  where  that  phrase
    potentially derives from.

17. In the decision of OH (Serbia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] EWCA Civ 694 Lord Justice Wilson, as he then was, set
    out at paragraph 15 a number of  propositions  of  matters  which  were
    relevant in such cases.  One of those was at  (c)  where  he  said:  "A
    further important facet is the  role  of  a  deportation  order  as  an
    expression of society's revulsion at serious  crimes  and  in  building
    public confidence  in  the  treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who  have
    committed serious crimes."  So that was  Lord  Justice  Wilson  in  the
    Court of Appeal in OH (Serbia).

18. However, in the Supreme Court in the case of Hesham Ali v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60  those  propositions  were
    revisited. At paragraph 70 Lord Wilson,  as  he  had  become,  set  out
    paragraph 15(c) of the OH (Serbia) propositions and said this:

    "I regret my reference there to society's revulsion at  serious  crimes
         and I accept Lord Kerr's criticism of it at  paragraph  168  below.
         Society's undoubted revulsion at certain crimes is, on  reflection,
         too emotive a concept to figure in this analysis.  But  I  maintain
         that I was entitled to refer to the importance of public confidence
         in our determination of these issues.  I believe that we should  be
         sensitive to the public concern in the UK about the facility for  a
         foreign  criminal's  rights  under  Article  8  to   preclude   his
         deportation.  ...  Laws serve  society  more  effectively  if  they
         carry public support."

19. Lord Kerr's comments were at paragraph 168.  He  commented  on  the  OH
    (Serbia) propositions saying this:

    "Expression of societal revulsion, the third of the factors applied  in
         OH (Serbia), should no longer be seen as a component of the  public
         interest in deportation.  It is not rationally  connected  to,  nor
         does it serve, the aim of preventing crime and disorder.   Societal
         disapproval of any form of criminal offending should  be  expressed
         through the imposition of an  appropriate  penalty.   There  is  no
         rational basis for expressing additional revulsion  on  account  of
         the nationality of the offender, and  indeed  to  do  so  would  be
         contrary to the spirit of the Convention."

20. It follows that there remained a difference of  emphasis  between  Lord
    Wilson and Lord Kerr  notwithstanding  Lord  Wilson's  acceptance  that
    revulsion as such is too emotive a concept to figure in this  analysis.
    Lord Wilson made it clear that he was maintaining his support  for  the
    third OH (Serbia) proposition shorn  of  the  reference  to  revulsion.
    Shorn of that reference the third OH (Serbia)  proposition  would  read
    thus: "A further important facet is the role of a deportation order  in
    building public confidence in the treatment  of  foreign  citizens  who
    have committed serious crimes."

21. Did First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald's reference in paragraph 101 of
    his judgment to revulsion, a reference which he put in quotation marks,
    taint his approach?   Did  it  mean  that  he  was  taking  account  of
    revulsion or the public revulsion at such offending in a way which Lord
    Wilson now regards as inappropriate?  My conclusion is that he was not.
     Paragraph 101, as each part of this decision must be, must be read  in
    the context of the decision as a whole.  In context it is a description
    of the seriousness of the offence and the relevance or otherwise of the
    passage of time to that seriousness.

22. That reference to revulsion at the end of paragraph 101 is also  to  be
    read in the context of 102. That paragraph begins by  saying:  "Members
    of the public are entitled to know that they are protected against such
    acts as those committed by the Appellant", and it then goes on to  deal
    with the question of deterrence.

23. It is very significant that, when seen in context, paragraph 101  is  a
    consideration and assessment of the gravity of the  offence.  Revulsion
    is not said by the judge to  be  a  factor  being  taken  into  account
    separately.  The judge took account of the gravity of the offence. That
    was an appropriate thing to do. But he did not  treat  revulsion  as  a
    separate element over and above that gravity.

24. It seems to me that what the judge was doing was applying  OH  (Serbia)
    criterion or factor (c) properly because he was having  regard  to  the
    building of  public  confidence.  This  is  made  apparent  by  reading
    paragraph 102 and in particular the opening words thereof. Lord  Wilson
    despite rowing back from the use of the word "revulsion" maintained his
    preference for OH (Serbia) factor (c) as revised. It  follows  that  in
    taking account of that factor the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    erred in law.  It would have been an error of  law  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had allowed taking account of public revulsion to  taint
    his whole approach but it is clear, looking at the decision as a whole,
    that he did not.

25. It follows that neither of Ms McIntosh's arguments, elegantly expressed
    though they were, can be sustained and the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                 Stephen Eyre
Date 24th March 2017

Judge Eyre QC




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 24th March 2017

Judge Eyre QC

