
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00496/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 December 2016                           |On 17 January 2017            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Anna Kay McDonald
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr J Neville of Counsel, instructed by Brent
                    Community Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a citizen of
    Jamaica, born on 17 April 1975.  On 25 October 2002 she arrived and was
    refused leave  to  enter  as  a  visitor.  She  was  granted  temporary
    admission and absconded.  In  August  2010  and  March  2011  she  made
    applications for leave to remain, both  of  which  were  refused.   Her
    appeal against each of these decisions was dismissed.  In 2011 her  son
    was born.

The Original Home Office Decision

 2. On 25 January 2012 the Applicant applied for leave to  remain,  relying
    on the State's obligation  to  respect  her  private  and  family  life
    protected by Article 8 of the European Convention.  In March  2013  the
    Respondent to whom I shall refer as the SSHD  refused  the  application
    without an in-country right of appeal. On 9 April  2015  the  Applicant
    made a further application which on 20 May 2015 the SSHD but with an in-
    country right of appeal.  The SSHD noted the Applicant did not  satisfy
    the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  There was no evidence to show her son was a British
    citizen.  He would be returned with the Applicant to Jamaica where  she
    had three children, the youngest of  whom  was  aged  16.   There  were
    facilities in Jamaica for the treatment of any mental health  condition
    of the type which she stated she suffered from.   Her  claim  that  her
    home  had  been  burned  down  was  not  accepted.   It  would  not  be
    disproportionate for her to return with her son to Jamaica.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 3. On 4 June 2015 the Applicant lodged Notice of Appeal under  Section  82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended, and  in
    particular by the Immigration Act 2014. The  grounds  referred  to  the
    Applicant's poor mental health and that her son had been the subject of
    a Child in Need Plan and a Supervision Order.  It was  in  her  child's
    best interests for her to remain in the United Kingdom.  On  return  to
    Jamaica the Applicant would be destitute and at real risk of  a  mental
    breakdown which would place her son at serious risk so as to engage the
    United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  3   of   the   European
    Convention.  The grounds further asserted the Applicant's child  was  a
    British citizen.

 4. By a decision promulgated on 8 August  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Jerromes allowed the appeal on human rights grounds by way  of
    reference to rights protected by Article 8.

 5. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that:-

    (a)  The Applicant's immigration history was "atrocious".  Her presence
         in the United Kingdom since her arrival in 2002 had throughout been
         precarious.  Her child was not a British citizen and was of an  age
         when it would be reasonable to expect him to go to Jamaica.

    (b)  The Judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the  Applicant  met  the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules by
         reason of the state of her mental  health  because  the  background
         evidence showed there were adequate facilities available in Jamaica
         to treat her.

    (c)  It was in the best interests of the Applicant's  child  to  remain
         with her.  The grounds referred to paragraph 58 of the judgment  in
         EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ. 874.

    (d)  The  Judge  erred  in  taking  into  account  matters  which  were
         irrelevant, namely that there was a higher general risk in  Jamaica
         of domestic violence than in the United  Kingdom.   The  Judge  had
         found the Applicant was not at risk of domestic violence  from  her
         former partner in Jamaica.

    (e)  The Judge had erred in assessing the proportionality of the SSHD's
         decision giving too much  weight  to  the  best  interests  of  the
         Applicant's child.

 6. On 3 November 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Dineen  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that  the  grounds  showed  that  the
    Judge had arguably erred in law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Applicant attended the hearing with her social worker,  Ms  Pauline
    Falconer.  I explained the purpose and procedure of an  error  of  law
    hearing.

Submissions for the SSHD

 8. Mr Nath relied on the grounds for appeal.  He referred to each of them.
     It was clear from the judgment in EV (Philippines) that the fact  that
    the Applicant's son might receive a better education and better medical
    care in the United Kingdom were not sufficient factors to conclude that
    it would be in his best interests for  him  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Respondent in the reasons for her decision  had  referred
    to the background evidence about education,  mental  health  facilities
    and fostering facilities in Jamaica.  The Judge had not taken  adequate
    account of the background information.  This affected  the  reliability
    of her conclusion.  In particular,  at  the  end  of  her  decision  at
    paragraph 44.5 the Judge had not carried out a balancing exercise.  The
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions for the Applicant

 9. Mr Neville relied on his skeleton argument.  The first point challenged
    the decision to grant permission to appeal because he argued the  grant
    had not engaged with the merits of the application  for  permission  to
    appeal, it had merely recited the grounds for permission.  In fact, the
    grounds were no more than a disagreement with the Judge.  He relied  on
    the decision in MR (permission to appeal: Tribunal's  approach)  Brazil
    [2015] UKUT 00029  (IAC).   He  did  not  pursue  this  point  in  oral
    submissions.  In this appeal, the grounds for appeal were  sufficiently
    specific, containing references to particular paragraphs in the Judge's
    decision and when the application is read together with the grant it is
    evident the Judge accepted the grounds contained within  them  adequate
    explanation why there was an arguable  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision.

10. The next item in the  skeleton  argument  and  the  first  item  in  Mr
    Neville's submissions was the mental  health  facilities  available  in
    Jamaica.  Mr Neville made it clear that the Applicant was not  pursuing
    a claim under Article 3 of the Convention on the basis  of  a  lack  of
    mental health facilities.   Her  Article  3  claim  was  based  on  the
    proposition that on return to Jamaica there was a real  likelihood  she
    would experience a  relapse  and  would  then  be  drawn  into  abusive
    relationships, following a pattern  identified  by  Dr  Thomas  in  her
    expert report.  Dr Thomas had gone on to conclude that in the event  of
    a relapse the Applicant would not be able because of her  mental  state
    to obtain access  to  any  treatments  which  might  be  available  and
    suitable for her.  The expert report from Dr Thomas was compelling.  In
    essence, the issue was the Applicant's likely inability to access help,
    rather than the lack of availability in the general sense of any  help.
    In such circumstances the Applicant's  child  would  be  at  risk.   He
    referred to paragraphs 94-101 of Dr Thomas's report.

11. Dr Thomas had found the Applicant:-

         ... is a highly vulnerable  and  suggestible  woman  following  her
         highly traumatic childhood  and  is  therefore  unable  to  protect
         herself adequately from abusive counters and indeed, conversely, is
         drawn to them.  ... ...  (she  upon)  returning  to  Jamaica  as  a
         vulnerable adult with significant  mental  health  problems  and  a
         reported additional specific learning disability  would  be  highly
         dangerous both psychologically and literally in terms  of  risk  of
         harm to both herself and her son as her dependant.

         ... the consequences of removal of  (the  Applicant  and  her  son)
         could be psychologically disastrous.  ...  ...  she  has  struggled
         even within the safety of  the  UK,  with  her  close  friends  for
         assistance.  (She)  has  also  advised  that  Speech  and  Language
         Therapy is not available in Jamaica such that  (her  son's)  speech
         would  likely  deteriorate  and  his   behaviour   problem   worsen
         correspondingly.

    Mr Neville continued the Judge had carefully  considered  the  evidence
    and had conducted a proper balancing exercise at paragraphs  33-36  and
    37 of her decision  and  had  assessed  her  son's  best  interests  at
    paragraph 40.  She had taken into account the jurisprudence adverse  to
    the Applicant in  EV  (Philippines)  and  then  made  her  decision  at
    paragraph 44.  Such an approach was perfectly proper and comprehensive.
     At paragraph 41, she had addressed what might be  termed  the  "public
    interest factors".  In the end, the  SSHD  simply  disagreed  with  the
    Judge's assessment that the Applicant and her child could be removed to
    Jamaica.  It was not the lack of facilities in Jamaica whether  medical
    or educational but that the Applicant's son would be  in  physical  and
    emotional danger on return to Jamaica because  of  the  likelihood  his
    mother, the Applicant, would have a relapse in her mental  health.   Dr
    Thomas had referred to her  tendency  to  become  involved  in  abusive
    relationships as in the past she had been both in Jamaica and here.  In
    Jamaica, her involvement in such a relationship would place  her  child
    at risk.

12. The decision contained no material error of law and should stand.



Response for the SSHD

13. Mr Nath referred to the Judge's assessment of the  Applicant's  child's
    best interests at paragraph 40 of her decision and submitted the thrust
    was that if his best interests would be best  served  by  returning  to
    Jamaica with his mother, he added that the structure  of  the  decision
    where the Judge had reached conclusions at paragraphs 38 and 39  before
    assessing the best interests of the  Applicant's  son  and  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect him to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    structure of the decision was confused which infected the soundness  of
    the Judge's assessment of the proportionality  of  the  decision  under
    appeal which should be set aside.

Consideration

14. I  reserved  my  decision  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    contained a material error of law such that it should be set  aside  in
    whole or in part.  Mr Neville submitted that  at  any  possible  future
    hearing the Applicant would be most unlikely to  give  oral  testimony.
    Indeed, she had not given oral testimony to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Even so, both parties agreed that if there was a material error of  law
    it would be appropriate for the appeal to be heard afresh.

15. I have already dealt with the challenge to the grant of the  permission
    to appeal.  The Judge's use of the  heading  "Conclusions"  immediately
    before paragraphs 38 and 39 of her decision is misleading, in that what
    follows the heading is a consideration  of  the  appropriateness  of  a
    consideration of the appeal under Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules and a self-direction to give appropriate  weight  to  the  public
    interest beyond the best interests of the  Applicant's  son,  following
    the judgment in R (MA (Pakistan) and Others) v  UT  (IAC)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ. 705 adopting the approach in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ.
    450.

16. The Judge referred to the expert report of Dr Thomas. At  paragraph  36
    and at paragraphs 27  and  28  she  had  referred  extensively  to  the
    evidence about the Applicant's mental health, the care plan for her son
    and the progress he had made since being re-united with his mother.  It
    is evident she relied on that report and made no adverse comment  about
    it but rather said she placed weight  on  it.   The  Judge's  reasoning
    might have been more evident had  she  quoted  substantially  from  the
    report of Dr Thomas, rather than just referring to it.  Having read the
    report, the Judge's reference to domestic violence generally in Jamaica
    in the light of the diagnosis of  the  Applicant's  tendency  to  enter
    abusive domestic relations is more readily seen as part and  parcel  of
    her general assessment of the proportionality of the SSHD's decision.

17. Although the Judge has not gathered all the items together in a  single
    paragraph to conduct a balancing exercise,  identifying  those  matters
    which speak against the Applicant and those which speak in her  favour,
    she has with foresight adopted the "balance sheet" approach recommended
    by Lord Thomas at paragraphs 82-84 of the judgment in Hesham Ali [2016]
    UKSC 60.  This is particularly clear from the matters she  mentions  at
    paragraphs 34 and 40.2 of her decision.  She has balanced the interests
    of  the  Applicant's  child  against  the  wider  public  interest,  in
    particular, at paragraph 41.  It is arguable the  Judge  erred  in  not
    making fuller reference to the report of Dr Thomas on which she  placed
    weight.  Had she done so, the logic of her reasoning  in  her  decision
    would have been absolutely clear and evident.  Given the care  she  has
    taken in taking account of all the relevant factors,  the  grounds  for
    appeal  amount  to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    conclusions.  I do  not  find  the  omission  of  extensive  quotations
    (rather than just relying on a reference) from the expert report of  Dr
    Thomas on which the Judge evidently placed weight  and  took  carefully
    into account is sufficient reason to set aside any part or all  of  her
    decision.  Consequently, I conclude  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not contain a material error of law such that it should be
    set aside and so it shall stand.

Anonymity

18. The Judge made an anonymity direction.  There was no request for it  to
    be continued.  Given the  omission  of  any  elements  identifying  the
    Applicant's child who does not bear her surname  in  this  decision,  I
    find there is no reason to continue the anonymity direction.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand and the  appeal  of
    the SSHD is dismissed.

    The appeal of the Applicant is allowed.

    No anonymity direction made.





Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  16.  i.
2017

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

