
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 12 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, instructed by Irvine Thanvi Nata
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A M Black promulgated on 3 March  2017  to  dismiss
    his appeal against a decision of the respondent made  on  8  May  2015,
    refusing his human rights claim on the  basis  that  he  is  a  foreign
    criminal who must be deported as he did not  fall  within  any  of  the
    exceptions to deportations.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Ecuador  who  was  on  9  February  2012
    sentenced to 21 months' imprisonment for the possession  of  possessing
    material for making false identity documents. After his release he  was
    also convicted of assaulting his wife and received  a  community  order
    with a supervision requirement for 12 months

 3. It is accepted that the appellant is married, and that the couple  have
    a child, M who is on the autistic spectrum. There are  also  two  older
    children of the family who are the appellant's wife's children  from  a
    previous relationship. It is the appellant's case that  the  effect  of
    his deportation would be unduly harsh on  his  wife  and  each  of  the
    children.

 4. M has significant care needs and there is an Education Health and  Care
    Plan ("EHCP") in place. His situation is  summarised  at  [17]  of  the
    judge's decision which Mr Haywood accepted omits nothing material.  The
    judge also set out at [50] - [57] further details of M's circumstances.



 5. The judge found that:

      i) The appellant's offences were serious [78];

     ii) The best interests of the children overall was  to  remain  in  the
         family unit [81];

    iii) The effect of the appellant's deportation on the children would not
         be unduly harsh as they could remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with
         their mother [84] - [87];

     iv) The respondent's decision did not required the  children,  who  are
         British Citizens, to relocate outside the EU [86],  and  they  were
         not deprived of the genuine enjoyment of their rights  as  citizens
         of the EU;

      v) Deportation of the appellant is a proportionate  interference  with
         the appellant's and his family's article 8 rights [88];

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) in her assessment that the  appellant's  two  offences  as  serious
         [78], the second offence (assault on his wife) not resulting  in  a
         custodial sentence [grounds,  14  (a),  and  14  (b)]  had  wrongly
         concluded he was involved in the production of false passports, his
         involvement being low level;

     ii) in concluding that the "mere fact of change" in M's life would  not
         lead to unduly harsh consequences, as that was contrary to all  the
         evidence, given the appellant's central role in his care;  and,  in
         concluding that requiring the children to live without him  in  the
         United Kingdom was not unduly harsh [grounds, 15 (a) to (c)];

    iii) in failing properly to engage with the submissions made in  respect
         of Sanade et al v SSHD [2012] UKUT 00048

 7. Permission was granted on all grounds by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive
    Lane on 26 August 2017.

 8. I address the grounds in turn.

    Ground 1

 9. Despite Mr Haywood's submissions to the contrary,  I  do  not  consider
    that the judge could be  said  to  have  erred  in  characterising  the
    appellant's second offence as "serious". There is  no  indication,  nor
    was it submitted, that in  this  context  "serious"  had  any  specific
    statutory meaning nor do I consider that the judge intended the word to
    bear anything other than its ordinary  meaning.   While  the  type  and
    length of the sentence are relevant in assessing the seriousness of  an
    offence, that is not necessarily determinative.

10. In this case, as the judge noted at [70] the offence was  committed  in
    the family home which should be a safe and secure environment  for  his
    wife and children [78];  caused  physical  harm  to  his  wife  in  the
    presence of children [78]; and, as a result of the  appellant  drinking
    too much. She also found, which is  not  disputed,  that  there  was  a
    discrepancy in whether the appellant had or  had  not  ceased  drinking
    since then.  It is not disputed either that the  appellant's  probation
    officer had assessed him a posing a medium risk of harm to his  partner
    [71], which the judge accepted.  She also found [72] that the  risk  of
    harm arises in the home, and that the offending was  not  at  the  more
    serious end of the spectrum [73].

11. I conclude that on these findings of fact which are not  disputed,  the
    judge was manifestly entitled  to  conclude  that  the  assault  was  a
    serious offence when viewed in the context.

12. The challenge to the judge's assessment of the index offence is without
    merit. As was noted in the  sentencing  remarks  quoted  at  [67],  the
    sentencing judge did not believe that the appellant was just a courier,
    but was not satisfied they were intimately involved in  the  production
    of false passports, but that they played  a  role  in  the  process  of
    passport making.  In the light  of  those  comments,  Judge  Black  was
    manifestly entitled to conclude, and gave proper reasons for so  doing,
    that the appellant  was  involved  in  the  production  of  counterfeit
    passports [72].  To suggest that when the judge stated at [78] that the
    appellant was "engaged in the production of false passports" is somehow
    an indication of a finding of more significant involvement is fanciful.
    There is no basis for suggesting that  "engaged"  entails  any  greater
    participation in an activity  that  "involved".   The  judge  was  also
    clearly entitled to note that false passports would  enable  others  to
    commit crimes; that is self-evident.

13. In the circumstances, it cannot  be  argued  that  the  judge  did  not
    properly appraise the nature of the appellant's offending, or attach to
    it impermissible weight.

    Ground 2

14. The core of the challenge to the judge's assessment of  the  impact  of
    deportation on the children, primarily M, is in effect  as  to  weight.
    The passages cited in the grounds at [10] form part of a what is in any
    view a detailed, careful and meticulous consideration of  the  evidence
    relating to M, his condition, the support he receives from  father  and
    school, and the views of professionals concerned with supporting him.

15. The judge cannot be criticised for attaching less weight to  the  views
    of the inclusion leader [56] as  to  the  possible  outcomes;  she  was
    entitled to take the absence of  evidence  as  to  qualifications  into
    account at that point, and it is evident  that  the  judge  did  attach
    weight to what the inclusion leader had observed.

16. While the judge does at [64] accept that it is in M's interest for  him
    not to have change, it cannot be argued that this is inconsistent  with
    the finding that the effect of change taking it together with the other
    factors would  not  be  unduly  harsh.   Merely  because  something  is
    undesirable does not make it unduly harsh.

17. Viewed in isolation, it is arguable that the sentence [80] "I am unable
    to find that mere fact of changed would be such as to suggest  that  it
    would lead to unduly harsh consequences for M" when combined  with  the
    conclusions at [87] indicates that the judge equated and minimised  the
    effect of change.

18. Mr Haywood's submissions on this issue are to the effect that the judge
    appears to have equated and minimised the effect of change on M, having
    observed [80] that change is inevitable. But that is to consider  those
    passages out of context.

19. At [55] to [57], the judge summarises the evidence of the likely effect
    on M of the change precipitated by  the  appellant's  deportation.  She
    also summarises and analyses at [61] the evidence  of  the  independent
    social worker and  concludes  at  [80]  that  "none  [of  the  possible
    outcomes resulting from deportation] can be described as "unduly harsh"
    for M." That is in itself an indication that the judge did  consider  a
    range of possible outcomes capable of having different effects.  It  is
    also evident from the decision at [83] that the judge had regard to the
    effect of changes, and also that M would get support  from  the  school
    and a number of other professionals.

20. It is evident also at [85] that the judge considered  the  difficulties
    inherent in separation from  the  appellant  and  the  difficulties  in
    communicating.

21. While I note Mr Haywood's submission that the situation has now changed
    since the appellant's wife was able to cope with M while the  appellant
    was in prison, equally she now, as the judge notes, has the support  of
    professionals involved in supporting M subsequent to his diagnosis, and
    the issuing of the EHCP.

22. In conclusion, I am satisfied that the judge gave proper  consideration
    to all the evidence put before her, and reached a conclusion  which  is
    sustainable and was open to her on the facts as found.  As  Mr  Wilding
    accepted, another judge may have reached  a  different  conclusion,  as
    indeed might I; that does not mean it involved the making of  an  error
    of law.

23. Mr Haywood did not place much reliance on the Sanade point. It  is,  in
    any event, in the light of SSHD v VM  (Jamaica)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  255
    unarguable, given that the children would remain in the United  Kingdom
    with their mother.

24. In conclusion, for  the  reasons  given  above,  I  consider  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold it.

    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed                                  Date 10 January 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

