

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00871/2017
                                                               HU/00876/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th May 2019                            |On 16th May 2019               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SURESH KHAN KHAND (1)
                            SHILA MALLA KHAND (2)
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals (with permission of Designated FtT Judge
    Woodcraft) against the decision and  reasons  statement  of  FtT  Judge
    Ferguson that was issued on 21 June 2018.

 2. Although the  original  grounds  were  relatively  numerous,  Mr  Mills
    conceded several points.  He conceded that there had been no  challenge
    to Judge Ferguson's findings that the appellants  enjoyed  family  life
    with the father of the first appellant, who had served  in  the  Gurkha
    Battalion, and in this context accepted that the judge had been correct
    to consider historic injustice  as  a  central  factor  when  assessing
    proportionality under article 8 ECHR.  Mr Mills focused on whether  the
    alleged deception in the use of deception in relation  to  obtaining  a
    necessary English language qualification was sufficient to outweigh the
    historic injustice arguments.

 3. I asked Mr Mills to explain in what ways Judge Ferguson  had  erred  in
    assessing the evidence relating to deception.  Mr Mills said it  was  a
    matter for me to decide and did not present any arguments  although  he
    did not concede the issues.

 4. I had no need to hear from Mr Jesurum because having had sight  of  his
    skeleton argument, and having consider the Secretary of State's case as
    set out in the grounds and  Mr  Mills's  submissions,  I  was  able  to
    conclude that there is no legal error in Judge Ferguson's decision  and
    reasons statement.  Judge Ferguson  had  regard  to  all  the  evidence
    relating to deception and carefully decided what weight to give it.  He
    was entitled to his view and mere disagreement with his view  does  not
    reveal legal  error.   There  has  been  no  allegation  any  of  Judge
    Ferguson's findings or reasoning is perverse and, having examined it, I
    can see why; no such allegation would be sustainable.

 5. Because Judge Ferguson's findings are sound,  I  am  satisfied  he  was
    correct to  find  the  allegation  of  deception  is  not  sustainable.
    Therefore, the issue of deception is not a  factor  that  adds  to  the
    public interest.  The only conclusion I can reach, therefore,  is  that
    his decision is correct in law and there is no legal error because  his
    proportionality assessment is more than adequate.

Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons of Judge Ferguson.
I uphold his decision.
The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                                       Date         13 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


