
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00150/2019
                                                               HU/00155/2019
                                                               HU/00161/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th August 2019                   |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                            S R (First Appellant)
                           N M (Second Appellant)
                            S M (Third Appellant)
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pledger, a Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Appellants are all nationals of  Uzbekistan.   SR  was  born  on  3
    November 1970 and the children on 15 July  2004  and  14  January  2008
    respectively.  They arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 June  2014  with
    valid visit visas.  An application was made for  protection  which  was
    refused and  the  appeal  was  dismissed.   A  second  application  for
    protection was made.  That was refused by the  Respondent.  The  appeal
    was dismissed by Judge Brookfield sitting at  Manchester  on  29  April
    2019.  There is no appeal to me in relation  to  the  refusal  of  that
    protection claim.  It is only in relation to Article 8.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Simpson  on  18  June  2019.
    Ground 1 is that the  independent  social  worker's  expertise  (Alison
    Tyrell) had been mischaracterised in that she does  have  the  relevant
    expertise to comment on children and what  their  best  interests  are.
    Ground 2 is that the Section 55 best interest assessment has  not  been
    adequately considered.

 3. The Respondent did not file a Rule 24 notice.  No concession  was  made
    in relation to either points.

 4. Ms Pledger sought to submit an e-mail dated 25 July 2019 from Ms Tyrell
    which expands on her expertise.  Having heard submissions I declined to
    admit that document as  the  Judge  cannot  have  materially  erred  in
    relation to not considering evidence not adduced.

 5. I point out here that Ms Tyrell is plainly an expert within  the  field
    of adult social care.  The question is whether it extends to  children.



Ms Tyrell's report

 6. In paragraph 1.1 of her report of 2 March 2019 Ms Tyrell says:-

         "I am a  qualified  social  worker  trained  in  social  work  with
         children, families and  adults  at  Coventry  University.   I  have
         completed post graduate qualifications  in  Adult  Social  Work  at
         standard and advanced levels, and have progressed to Senior  Social
         Worker in Adult  Social  Care  in  my  employed  role  where  I  am
         currently employed as  a  Best  Interest  Assessor.   Additionally,
         since April 2012 I have been an Independent Social Worker,  engaged
         in assessment work for a range of agencies completing  reports  for
         Courts, Tribunals, Judicial reviews, and other Legal arenas.

         I am registered to practice as a social worker with the Health Care
         Professions Council, and am a member of The British Association  of
         Social Workers.

         I am experienced at assessing people with  No  Recourse  to  Public
         Funds and Unsettled  Immigration  Status.   This  has  been  gained
         through my employed role and independent social work."

    She goes on at paragraph 1.2:-

         "My employed role has provided me  with  wide  ranging  and  varied
         experience  of  assessing  and  supporting  people  with   physical
         disabilities, mental health impairments, learning disabilities  and
         a range of health impairments.

         During my employment as a Social Worker, I have  gained  experience
         in Adult Social Care in the practice areas of Community Social Work
         with Disabled Adults and their families, Community Social Work with
         Older People, Community Social Work with Adults  with  Serious  and
         Enduring  Mental  Health  Impairments,  Hospital  Social  Work  and
         Assessment of Adults and their families with No Recourse to  Public
         Funds"

    and she goes on at paragraph 1.3 to say:-

         "My experience of assessing and supporting people with No  Recourse
         to Public Funds has included engaging  with  those  with  Unsettled
         Immigration  Status,  HIV,  experience  of  trauma   and   torture,
         experience of sexual, physical and psychological abuse, civil/armed
         conflict, enslavement, destitution, forced prostitution and  people
         trafficking.

         This  has  involved  engaging  with  people   from   a   range   of
         nationalities, cultures and  religious  beliefs  and  has  included
         assessing individuals, couples and families with children.

         I have experience of assessing parental skills through my  role  as
         an Independent Social Worker assessing Foster Carers"

    and then she explains what her instructions are and she summarises  her
    conclusions as follows:-

         "2.1 In my opinion, N currently needs support and  intervention  to
             promote his mental health and wellbeing.  As such I anticipate
             that his  current  symptoms  associated  with  reduced  mental
             health would be a  significant  barrier  to  reintegration  in
             Uzbekistan at this time.

         2.2  I would strongly advise that his mental health and  the  risks
             associated with this  be  assessed  by  a  suitably  qualified
             professional before undertaking any  forced  removal  of  this
             young person, and measures put in place to  minimise  risk  of
             significant  self-harm  in  the  event  that  a   removal   is
             undertaken.

         ...

         2.9  The children expressed that they are happy with their  current
             circumstances and arrangements, though clearly N is  suffering
             ongoing symptoms associated with his mental health.

         2.10 In my view it would be in N and S's best interests for them to
             experience stability, security and continuity at this time.

         2.11 Overall it appears that for reasons beyond their control these
             two young people have experienced significant  disruption  and
             changes in their young lives, but have embraced  life  in  the
             United Kingdom which they now see as their home.

         2.12 For these reasons it is difficult to see how it  would  be  in
             their  best  interests  for  their  circumstances  to   change
             significantly at this time."

 7. I have not quoted 2.3 to 2.8 because they are part and  parcel  of  the
    continuity of their experiences relating to schoolfriends, coming  over
    here, going to church and being settled in their community.

 8. The report is lengthy and detailed. I was  pointed  to  the  CV  by  Ms
    Pledger. I was referred to her relevant expertise in  participating  in
    best interest decisions.  It refers to Ms Tyrell undertaking work as an
    independent social worker from 2012.  Predominantly this  involves  the
    assessment of individuals, families and informal carers and preparation
    of formal assessment reports for the judicial arena. In 2016 Ms  Tyrell
    completed a course of study with Bournemouth University and gained  the
    academic qualification to practice as a best interests'  assessor.  Her
    training included Children's Social Care Legislation  and  safeguarding
    of children.  I was pointed to the  Adolescent  Wellbeing  Scale  forms
    relating to the children.

The Judgement

 9. In the decision the Judge deals with the evidence of Ms Tyrell, and  in
    particular at paragraph 9(xiii):-

         "It is advised the second appellant  has  developed  mental  health
         problems in the UK after being bullied in his  previous  school  in
         the UK.  He suffers from panic attacks.  He has not been  diagnosed
         with PTSD (page C64 of the respondent's bundle)  and  the  treating
         mental health practitioner advised in July 2017 that  there  is  no
         evidence of any underlying mental health problems.  He is currently
         attending an eight week course of counselling at  Early  Break  and
         takes medication for anxiety.  He is described as  being  organised
         and confident by the assistant head and SENCO of his  school  (page
         110  of  the  appellant's  bundle)  and  has  formed  a  'fantastic
         relationship' with his head of year.  The second appellant has been
         able to form friendships both in and out of school (page 59 of  the
         appellant's bundle) despite his anxiety.   The  independent  social
         worker who completed the report on the family indicates that in her
         opinion the second appellant requires support to promote his mental
         health and that his reduced mental health would  be  a  significant
         barrier to his reintegration into Uzbekistan, though she is  unable
         to predict how he would respond  to  a  move  to  Uzbekistan.   The
         independent social  worker  advises  that  the  second  appellant's
         mental health be assessed before he is forcibly  removed  from  the
         UK.  The second appellant has expressed a wish to remain in the  UK
         and states he is scared of returning to Uzbekistan".

10. The decision then goes on at paragraph 9(xiv) to  deal  with  a  letter
    from a clinician at Healthy Young Minds regarding the fears that NM has
    on returning to  Uzbekistan  and  notes  that  he  was  referred  to  a
    psychiatrist, and it goes on to say:-

         "There was no report from a mental health  practitioner  to  advise
         that the second appellant's mental health would deteriorate  if  he
         were to be removed to Uzbekistan with his mother  and  sister,  and
         where he would also have the support of his father,  with  whom  he
         maintains regular telephone contact."

11. The Judge continues at paragraph 9(xv):-

         "The third appellant is now 11 years old  and  is  stated  to  have
         suffered from anxiety at bed time and over attachment to her mother
         (page C63 of the respondent's bundle).  The first appellant advised
         that her daughter has seen a psychologist in the UK, but  that  she
         no longer attends appointments  with  a  psychologist  since  April
         2017.  The third appellant is doing well  at  school,  despite  not
         speaking English when she first arrived in the UK, but  feels  that
         she does not get much help in school (page 54  of  the  appellant's
         bundle).  The  third  appellant  has  not  been  diagnosed  with  a
         depressive disorder (page 55 of the  appellant's  bundle)  or  PTSD
         (page C64 of the  respondent's  bundle).   The  independent  social
         worker who  was  commissioned  to  write  a  report  on  the  three
         appellants indicates that the  wellbeing  of  the  third  appellant
         would be improved once there is certainty about  her  future.   The
         mental health practitioner who treated the third appellant  advises
         that worry around their situation relating to residency  is  to  be
         expected (page C64 of  the  Respondent's  bundle).   There  was  no
         report from a mental health practitioner to advise that the  mental
         health of the third appellant would deteriorate if she were  to  be
         removed to Uzbekistan with her mother and her  brother,  where  she
         would also enjoy the support  of  her  father  with  whom  she  has
         regular telephone contact."

12. The Judge went on at paragraph 9(xvi) to say:-

         "I note that the social worker who prepared the report at pages 39-
         77 appears to have significant experience with adults but does  not
         identify any work involvement with children  (pages  68-70  of  the
         appellant's bundle).  Her stated areas of expertise do not  mention
         she has any work experience dealing with children or children  with
         mental health problems.  The only child related  training  she  has
         received appears to be in children's social  care  legislation  and
         the safeguarding children and it is unclear when this training  was
         undertaken or whether she has ever had  the  opportunity  of  using
         this training in her work.  I noted that the social worker does not
         have any qualifications in  psychology  or  psychiatry.   Whilst  I
         accept that she is an expert in relation to adults, I do  not  find
         her CV has established that she has any expertise in  dealing  with
         children or children with mental health problems."

Discussion

13. In relation to Ground 1, I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  adequately
    considered the expertise of Ms Tyrell and was entitled to find that she
    was not an expert in relation to children.  It is abundantly clear that
    the whole focus of her impressive professional and  academic  life  has
    been  focussed  on  adults  who  find  themselves  in  very   difficult
    positions.  That does  not  necessarily  translate  into  working  with
    children and despite the use of Department of Health questionnaires, it
    is not clear that she has anything particular to say  beyond  what  the
    children want.  That forms part of the best  interest  assessment.  The
    best interest assessment is  the  starting  point  for  the  Article  8
    balancing  exercise.   It  is  the  primary  but  not   the   paramount
    consideration.

14. Ms Tyrell stated at paragraph 2.2 that

         "I would strongly advise  that  his  mental  health  and  the  risk
         associated  with  this  be  assessed  by   a   suitably   qualified
         professional".

15. The acknowledgement that NM would need to be  assessed  by  a  suitably
    qualified professional in my judgment further undermines the suggestion
    that the Judge materially erred in law in finding that  Ms  Tyrell  had
    not established her expertise in this field because  if  she  was,  she
    would not need to recommend that. Her report takes the case no  further
    forward.




16. In relation to  Ground  2,  the  Section  55  assessment  is  found  at
    paragraphs 9(xxiv) and (xxv).

17. Paragraph 9(xxiv) sets out the legal test and quotes  extensively  from
    Azimi-Moayed (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT
    197 (IAC).   There is nothing in that which had been  countermanded  by
    subsequent jurisprudence.

18. At paragraph 9(xxv) the Judge deals specifically with the children  and
    states that

         "they have spent the majority of  their  lives  in  Uzbekistan  ...
         which is the country of their nationality and where the  father  of
         the second and third appellants live. There will  therefore  be  no
         interruption to  the  family  life  the  first  appellant  and  her
         children enjoy together.  The first appellant  would  remain  their
         primary carer and she would be able to rely  on  support  from  her
         family and the father of her children to help  them  resettle  into
         life in Uzbekistan. The appellant children would be able  to  enjoy
         stability and continuity  of  social,  educational  and  healthcare
         provision and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of
         the society to which they belong and would enjoy  the  benefits  of
         their citizenship in Uzbekistan."

19. Those findings were clearly open to the Judge. The  grounds  amount  to
    nothing more than a disagreement with those findings.

Notice of Decision

20. In all those circumstances there is no material  error  of  law  and  I
    dismiss the appeals.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
12 August 2019

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any members of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
12 August 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE/COSTS AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award. I  make
no costs award as there was no application.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
12 August 2019
