
                                    [pic]

Upper-Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00102/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On the 23rd January 2017            |On 1st February 2017                |

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

Between:
                                    N.H.H
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal

Representation:
For the Claimant:      Mr Heywood (Counsel)
For the Secretary of State:  Mr Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge James promulgated on the 8th August 2016, in which
      he allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to
      refuse to grant him leave to remain in the UK on Human Rights  grounds
      under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  appealed
      against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  James  for  the
      reasons set out within the Grounds of Appeal.  This  is  a  matter  of
      record and is therefore not repeated in its entirety, but in  summary,
      it is argued that the Judge made a material misdirection  in  law  and
      gave inadequate reasons for his decision. It is argued that the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal on the  basis  that
      paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) applied in the appeal  and  found  that  it
      would be unreasonable to expect the Appellant to leave the UK in light
      of his central role as a supporter for his eldest child.  However,  it
      is argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  that,  the
      Appellant's eldest child was born on the  4th  January  2009  and  was
      therefore not aged 7 years old as at date of the  application.  It  is
      then argued that the required proportionality assessment  inherent  in
      applying the reasonableness test whether  under  the  Rules  or  under
      Section 117 B (6) is fatally flawed  and  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      identify the public interest focused within  the  Rules  and  give  it
      appropriate weight following the Court of Appeal case of  SS  (Congo).
      It is further argued within the Grounds of Appeal that the Judge erred
      in his approach to Section 55 at paragraph  31  of  the  judgment  and
      failed to consider that if neither parent had the right to remain  and
      that was the background which assessment was to be conducted, and that
      the ultimate question was whether it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
      child to follow the parent with no right to remain to the  country  of
      origin following the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  It
      is argued the Judge considered the child first rather than considering
      the family circumstances together following the Upper Tribunal case of
      PD [2016] UKUT 00108 and it is further argued that the Judge failed to
      take  account  of  the  wider  public  interest   considerations   and
      significance cost to  the  UK  allowing  the  family  to  remain,  the
      deliberate overstaying of the parents and their  unlawful  employment,
      when conducting the reasonable assessment as per the Court  of  Appeal
      case of MA v Secretary of State of the Home  Department   [2016]  EWCA
      Civ 705. It was further argued that his findings at paragraph  32  are
      insufficently reasoned given the Appellant had family in  Bolivia  and
      the Appellant had no difficulty working in the UK and that  there  are
      private institutions available in Bolivia for  the  education  of  the
      children.

   2. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Saffer on the 1st December 2016 when he found that it was arguable the
      Judge materially erred in allowing the appeal under Article 8  despite
      not looking at the matter for the length of the Immigration Rules that
      the  Appellant  did  not  meet  and  in  not  looking  at  the  family
      holistically as well as individually when considering the question  of
      reasonableness of returning to Bolivia and in failing to take  account
      of  the  very  significant  cost  of   the   public   purse   in   the
      proportionality balancing exercise. He said that all grounds could  be
      argued.

   3. It was on this basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal. At the appeal hearing,  Mr  Heywood  handed  in  a  Rule  24
      Notice, which I have fully taken account of in reaching my decision.

   4. In his oral submissions, Mr Tufan relied upon the Grounds  of  Appeal.
      He argued that the Judge had said  that  the  appeal  succeeded  under
      paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules but that the  eldest  child
      was not aged 7 years old as at the date of the application. He  argued
      that having failed under the Rules, there would have to be  compelling
      factors for the Judge to allow the appeal under  Article  8  following
      the case of SS (Congo). However, Mr Tufan recognised that the children
      had autism which in fact could be a  compelling  circumstance  in  the
      case. Mr Tufan argued that neither parent was a  British  citizen  and
      the appeal should have been considered on  that  basis  and  that  the
      ultimate question was whether it was reasonable for  the  children  to
      remain in the UK. He argued that even if it was in the best  interests
      of the children remain it may not be unreasonable to  expect  them  to
      leave. He further argued that the Judge should not have  given  weight
      to the oral assessment  of  the  Appellant's  wife  that  schools  for
      children with autism were not available in Bolivia.

   5. In his oral submissions, Mr Heywood argued that the  final  submission
      of Mr Tufan that the  Judge  should  not  have  given  weight  to  the
      evidence of the mother strayed beyond the Grounds of Appeal. He argued
      that the Judge heard evidence from the mother regarding the fact  that
      one school that had previously provided  education  to  children  with
      autism had closed and that the other school did  not  accept  children
      over 7 years of age. He further relied upon  his  Rule  24  Reply.  He
      argued that the Judge had properly  considered  the  position  of  the
      whole family and that the Judge had given clear and  adequate  reasons
      for his findings. He argued that  the  Judge  did  not  need  to  give
      reasons for and against every possible conceivable point that might be
      raised or been relevant. He argued that although the grounds had  said
      that the Judge had allowed the  case  under  paragraph  276  ADE,  the
      jurisdiction was under human rights and the Judge allowed the case  on
      Article 8 grounds. He submitted that the Judge had  specifically  made
      reference  to  the  public  interest  considerations  and  that   when
      considering the case under Article 8 in considering Section 117 B (6),
      the Judge was entitled to take into  account  there  that  the  eldest
      child was a qualifying child who had lived in the  UK  by  that  stage
      over 7 years, having been born in the  UK  but  not  being  a  British
      citizen. He argued that the Appellant's position was  intolerable  due
      to the position of the children and that the  Judge  was  entitled  to
      find that there was no education provision available for the  children
      in Bolivia. He submitted that the decision did not reveal any material
      errors of law.

   6. I reserve my decision on error of law and materiality.

My Findings on Errors of Law and Materiality

   7. The Appellant's eldest boy child was born on the 4th January 2009, and
      his second child a girl, was born on the 25th May 2011. By the date of
      the statement of additional grounds upon  which  the  application  was
      considered on the 9th April 2015, neither child was in  fact  7  years
      old. Pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv), it is a requirement  that
      as at the date of the application an applicant is under the age of  18
      years old and has lived continuously in the UK for at  least  7  years
      and that it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to  leave
      the UK. First-tier Tribunal Judge James therefore did err  in  finding
      that paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) applied. However, I  do  not  consider
      that error to be material in the circumstances of this  case.  As  was
      quite properly conceded by Mr Tufan on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State, the fact that the eldest child was aged 7 years old by the date
      of the hearing before  Judge  James,  could  amount  to  a  compelling
      circumstance that could potentially justify  leave  being  granted  on
      Article 8 grounds  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Pursuant  to
      Section 117 (B) (6) in the case of a person  who  was  not  liable  to
      deportation, the public interest does not require the person's removal
      where the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
      with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
      child to leave the United  Kingdom.  However,  for  those  purposes  a
      qualifying child under Section 117D simply means a person who is under
      the age of 18 and who is either a British citizen or has lived in  the
      United Kingdom for a continuous period  of  7  years  or  more.  Under
      Section 117D, that does not have to be considered as at  the  date  of
      the application, and had to be  considered  as  at  the  date  of  the
      hearing before Judge James, and  as  at  that  date,  the  Appellant's
      eldest child was over the age of 7  years  old  and  therefore  was  a
      qualifying child in that regard..

   8. When considering the proportionality the Judge was  therefore  obliged
      to consider the claim on the basis that the decision was unlawful  and
      contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act has been  in  breach  of
      the Appellant's Article 8 human rights, although  clearly  he  had  to
      consider that issue "through  the  lens"  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      Although the Judge did err in his  consideration  of  the  Immigration
      Rules in the fact that the eldest child was not aged 7 at  that  stage
      of the application, the Judge did properly  consider  the  Appellant's
      Article 8 claim in all other respects, and in particular took  account
      of Section 117 (B) (6) which he was entitled to  do,  given  the  fact
      that the eldest child by that date was over 7 years of  age.  In  that
      regard, the reasoning given by the Judge as to why  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the eldest child to leave the UK given his autism
      and his consideration of that issue between paragraphs 14  and  31  of
      the decision, was well-reasoned, and the reasons are both adequate and
      sufficient, and the Judge made findings which were open to him in this
      regard. The Judge was perfectly entitled to take account  of  all  the
      medical and educational evidence in respect of the  eldest  child  and
      the evidence that the Appellant eldest child required  specialist  and
      high-intensity input in order to address his personal,  emotional  and
      educational development.

   9. The Judge was also entitled to take into account the evidence from the
      Appellant's wife that she had made investigations into the two schools
      suggested by the Respondent in the  refusal  letter  as  being  places
      where would be appropriate  for  children  with  autism  to  study  in
      Bolivia, and was entitled, having heard from her, to find that one  of
      those schools did not accept children over 7 years of age and that the
      other school in La Paz referred to by the Respondent was no longer  in
      operation and was now a private school and that the evidence contained
      within the Country of Origin Information report was by  that  stage  3
      years and 9 months out of date. The Judge having heard from her, found
      her credible in that regard, this was evidence the Judge was  entitled
      to take account of,  despite  the  fact  there  was  no  corroborative
      documentary evidence in that regard. The Judge is entitled to  believe
      a witness, if he finds them  credible  and  accepts  the  evidence  is
      genuine and honestly given and he has given  adequate  and  sufficient
      reasons for his findings, as he did in respect of this issue.

  10. Given the severity of the eldest child's autism and the intensive care
      and input that he requires, and the evidence  regarding  the  lack  of
      such  intensive  education  for  children  with  autism  presently  in
      Bolivia, the Judge was entitled to find that  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable to expect the eldest child to return to  Bolivia.  In  that
      regard, Judge James has clearly taken account at [29]  of  the  public
      interest concerns and the need for an  effective  immigration  control
      and the reasons put forward within the refusal, as he properly  states
      within the decision. He has  taken  account  of  the  public  interest
      concerns affecting the family as a whole and  the  background  of  the
      parents when reaching his decision, as he was required to  do  by  the
      Court of Appeal in the case of MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 1616, to  which  the  Judge  makes
      specific reference at [30]. The background  circumstances  surrounding
      the parents were set out in the refusal notice which the judge says he
      has specifically considered . The Judge has also fully  taken  account
      and applied the decision in the case of  PD  and  Others  (Article  8-
      conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) at  29,  when
      considering the question of reasonableness and as to whether it  would
      be reasonable to expect the eldest child to return to Bolivia and  has
      considered the position of the whole family when considering the issue
      of reasonableness of return.

  11. In such circumstances, even though First-tier Tribunal Judge James did
      err in finding that paragraph 276 ADE (iv)  applied,  given  that  the
      eldest child was not aged 7 at the date of the application, the  Judge
      was perfectly entitled to find that the decision was  disproportionate
      to the legitimate public aim sought to be achieved and was  in  breach
      of the Appellant's human rights under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  taking
      account of, that the  public  interest  did  not  require  a  person's
      removal where he had a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
      with a qualifying child, which he did, and it would not be  reasonable
      to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom under Section 117  (B)
      (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Judge has
      considered the family circumstances together and has applied the wider
      public interest considerations.

  12. Further, although the Judge has not fully and adequately explained his
      reasons in respect of the younger child at [32] as to why her  removal
      would lead to a compromise of her bodily integrity and why there would
      be very significant obstacles to her return and why that would lead to
      unduly harsh consequences for her family, given  his  clear,  adequate
      and sufficient reasons in respect to the first child that it would not
      be reasonable to expect the first child to leave, bearing in mind  all
      of the public interest considerations and the background of the family
      in its entirety, as the Judge has  properly  done,  and  whether  that
      meant that the Appellant's human rights were infringed, the  error  in
      that regard is not material.

  13. In such circumstances the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  James
      does not reveal any material errors of law and is maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  James  does  not  reveal  any
material errors of law and is maintained.

I do make an anonymity order in this case, given that the case does  involve
the consideration of  children.  No  transcript  or  other  report  of  this
judgement may refer to the appellant or any member of his family by name  or
by any other means that may  lead  to  them  being  identified.  Failure  to
comply with this direction may lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                 Dated
24th January 2017
