
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/00862/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 November 2017                        |On 04 January 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                               Narayani Thapa
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed of Counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a subject of Nepal, born on 1 June 1987.  On 21  April
    2015 she applied for entry clearance for settlement as the dependant of
    her father, a former Gurkha soldier  who  was  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his wife, the Appellant's mother, born 11  February  1946.
    The Appellant's father was honourably discharged 29 September 1968  and
    died on 3  August  2016  leaving  his  wife  and  four  sons  and  four
    daughters, including the Appellant.  Her  parents  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2011. All of the children are living in Nepal.

 2. At the time of her application, the Appellant, aged  27,  was  pursuing
    university  studies  in   Kathmandu   where   she   lived   in   rented
    accommodation.  The evidence is that she has now completed her studies.



The Entry Clearance Officer's Decision

 3. On 14 May 2015 the Respondent refused the application.   He  considered
    the Appellant was enjoying  an  independent  life  without  difficulty.
    There was evidence of only one transfer of funds from her father  on  7
    April 2015.   The  Respondent  accepted  the  Appellant's  parents  had
    visited Nepal subsequent to their settlement in the United Kingdom  but
    commented the Appellant had provided no evidence of the visit or  other
    contact with her father since  2011.   The  Appellant  was  not  wholly
    financially and emotionally dependent on her father and so did not meet
    the requirements of, paras 9(5) and 15 of Annex K  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He also noted she had lived apart from  her  parents  for  more
    than two years and so could not satisfy the requirement of para 9(8) of
    Section 2A, at para 13.2 of chapter 15 of the Immigration Directorate's
    Instructions (the IDI).

 4. The Respondent considered the claim by reference to Article  8  of  the
    European Convention and having regard to the historic injustice done to
    Gurkha soldiers.

 5. The Appellant's parents had sought settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom
    when the Appellant was  an  adult  and  in  the  knowledge  that  adult
    children did not automatically qualify  for  settlement  in  line  with
    parents.   The  refusal  of  entry  clearance  did  not   disturb   the
    Appellant's private and family life which she had had since  2011  when
    her parents left her to come to the  United  Kingdom.   The  Respondent
    concluded the decision to refuse entry clearance was  proportionate  to
    the legitimate public objective of protecting the  economic  well-being
    of the country.

Original Grounds of Appeal

 6. On 8 June 2015 the Appellant through her solicitors  lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are lengthy.  Essentially,
    they argue that the Appellant is financially dependent on  her  parents
    and money has been sent  through  friends  and  acquaintances  visiting
    Nepal as well as by wire transfer; has been studying full-time and  not
    taken work.   The  Appellant  remained  emotionally  dependent  on  her
    parents.  Contact had been maintained by  telephone  and  three  visits
    over the previous three years.  She  is  an  unmarried  young  Nepalese
    woman who has continued to live life under her parents' protection  who
    remain responsible for her until she married.

 7. If the Appellant's father had been able to settle in the United Kingdom
    earlier, the Appellant would have come with him  as  his  minor  child.
    The Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules and the IDI
    since but for the historic injustice she would already  be  settled  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Appellant's father had applied promptly  after
    he had been in a position to do so following  the  announcement  on  19
    June 2009 extending the policy  to  include  Gurkhas  who  had  retired
    before 1 July 1997.  On 20 September 2015 the Respondent's decision was
    reviewed by the Entry Clearance Manager.   Effectively,  he  summarised
    the reasons for the original decision and found  no  reason  to  depart
    from it.



Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 8. By a decision promulgated on 24 February 2017 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal C M Phillips dismissed the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   On  20
    September  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shimmin  granted
    permission to appeal because it was arguable the Judge had not made  an
    adequate assessment of the evidence, whether the  Appellant  had  lived
    apart from her parents for more than two years and had failed  to  make
    any specific finding on this.  Further, it was arguable she  had  erred
    in her application of the  principles  of  law  in  relation  to  adult
    dependent children.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The Appellant's mother attended the hearing with her carer.   Mr  Ahmed
    explained that he had been able to speak to her and inform her  of  the
    nature and purpose of the Upper Tribunal hearing and was satisfied  she
    had understood him.  She confirmed her address but  otherwise  took  no
    part in the proceedings.

Submissions for the Appellant

10. Mr Ahmed submitted the Judge had made material errors  of  law  in  her
    consideration of Annex K of the Immigration Rules and in her  treatment
    of the claim under Article 8 of the European Convention.  At para 39 of
    her decision  the  Judge  had  made  findings  on  the  extent  of  the
    Appellant's emotional and financial dependence on her parents, but  had
    failed to deal with what the Appellant had  said  at  para  11  of  her
    statement of 2 February 2017 detailing how her father  enabled  her  to
    meet her living expenses.   Mr  Ahmed  submitted  that  the  manner  of
    financially supporting the Appellant met the requirements of para 15 of
    Annex K.

11. He referred to paras 36-37 and 46 of the  Judge's  decision.   I  noted
    these constitute findings of evidence of only one remittance, of a lack
    of evidence of contact between the Appellant and her parents  and  that
    the Appellant has been leading an independent  life  as  a  student  in
    rented accommodation in Kathmandu.  He then turned to para  51  of  the
    decision and submitted that the Judge's findings  about  the  financial
    dependence of the Appellant on her parents had not addressed para 11 of
    the Appellant's statement about the various ways her parents  had  sent
    her money.  I noted that again para 51 referred to the lack of evidence
    of any financial dependence.

12. He went on to address the issue whether the Appellant had  been  living
    apart from her parents for more than 2 years. He referred to para 8  of
    her statement of 2 February 2017 which stated her parents  had  visited
    her for three months each year. He submitted  this  was  sufficient  to
    meet the requirement that the Appellant should not normally have  lived
    apart from her father for more than two years unless  the  family  unit
    was maintained albeit the Appellant lived away because she was studying
    and returned home during  holidays.   He  noted  para  19  of  Annex  K
    expressly provided that if that condition was not met  the  application
    must be refused under the policy.

13. He argued that it could not have been the  purpose  of  the  policy  to
    prevent an adult child's successful application in  a  situation  where
    her parents had previously left Nepal to settle in the United  Kingdom.
    The Judge had not considered the context of  the  family  life  of  the
    Appellant with her parents in the context  of  the  appropriate  Nepali
    cultural background.

14. He referred to the judgment in Rai v ECO - New Delhi [2017] EWCA  Civ.
    320. The applicant   in which was born in 1956 to a  Gurkha  discharged
    in 1971 and who had come to the United Kingdom in 2010. At the  age  of
    26 the applicant had sought entry clearance.

15. He referred generically to paras 17, 18, 26,  27,  34  and  35  of  the
    judgment in Rai by way of reference.  He continued that at para  39  of
    her decision the Judge  had  made  other  findings  favourable  to  the
    Appellant.  He did not  amplify  this  submission  with  which  I  find
    difficulty because para 39 states:-

         ... the Appellant cannot properly be said  to  have  been  residing
         with the Sponsor or witness from 29 January 2011 when both left  to
         settle in the United Kingdom.  The fact that she is not yet married
         and is said to be unemployed and does not have children of her  own
         is  not  in  itself  or  with  the  evidence  provided   with   the
         application, sufficient to justify a  finding  that  there  is  the
         level of financial or emotional dependency for family life to  have
         continued following the settlement of her  parents  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  The  evidence  does  not  show  that  there  are  factors
         preventing this educated Appellant from finding work in  Nepal  and
         continuing to live there independently.

    Mr Ahmed noted the Respondent had relied on  paras  9(5)  and  9(8)  of
    Annex K and not para 9(9) which stated that  an  applicant  should  not
    have formed an independent family unit.  He suggested that the findings
    in para 39 contaminated the Judge's findings  about  her  living  apart
    from her parents.

16. Turning to the claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention,  Mr
    Ahmed referred to para 55 of the Judge's decision.   He  submitted  the
    Respondent had not relied on para 9(9) of Annex  K;  that  the  Judge's
    finding that the Appellant was living independently  from  her  parents
    because her parents chose to migrate carried little weight in the light
    of the comments made at paras 35-38 of the judgment in Rai.  The  Judge
    had  not   considered   the   "practicalities"   of   the   Appellant's
    circumstances.  Although the Judge had set out part of the head note in
    Ghising (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong: weight) [2013] UKUT  567  (IAC)
    she had erred at para 33 of her decision in finding that Article 8  was
    not engaged because there was no  family  life.   Mr  Bramble  properly
    accepted that the Judge's approach to the issue of family life at  para
    63 of her decision was confused.  The issue was  not  so  much  whether
    there was family life but the materiality of  family  life.   Mr  Ahmed
    continued that the Judge's approach to the assessment under  Article  8
    was in the light of the jurisprudence in Gurkha cases in error.

Submissions for the Respondent

17. Mr Bramble submitted the Appellant  had  been  living  apart  from  her
    parents for more than two years.  Their visits  to  Nepal  for  two  or
    three months did not constitute living together. The Judge was entitled
    to find the Appellant lived an independent life.

18. The Judge had been entitled to come to the  view  at  para  32  of  her
    decision that the Appellant had not shown her late father had been in a
    position to or had supported her.

19. The jurisprudence in Rai was not relevant to the application of Annex K
    but  to  the  assessment  of  a  claim  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Judge had adequately considered paras 9(5)  and
    9(8) of Annex K. Her  conclusion  at  para  55  about  the  Appellant's
    private and family life was sustainable on the evidence and he referred
    to paras 38 and 39 of the judgment in Rai.

20. The Judge was  entitled  to  conclude  the  Appellant  was  leading  an
    independent life.  At para 47 of her decision she had taken account  of
    the extent of the evidence of telephone contact.

Consideration

21. Permission to appeal was granted on three grounds:-

      1) That arguably the Judge's assessment of the  evidence  whether  the
         Appellant had lived apart from her Sponsor for more than two  years
         is adequate, particularly in the light that she failed  to  make  a
         specific finding on this.

      2) That she arguably erred  in  applying  the  principles  of  law  in
         relation to adult dependent children.

      3) That her proportionality assessment arguably failed  to  adequately
         take account of the historic injustice issue.

22. By reason of Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act the Judge  was  entitled  to
    take into account the fact the Appellant's father was deceased  at  the
    date of the hearing.  Appendix K links policy to settlement of an adult
    child with a former Gurkha which for all intents and purposes means the
    child's father.  Annex K was issued on 28 January 2015 and by a letter
    of 9 April 2015 from the Home Office Armed Forces Policy group  to  the
    Ghurkha Satyagrah which was before the Judge, it was  made  clear  that
    there were no plans to extend the policy in  Annex  K  to  cover  cases
    where the former Gurkha sponsor has  died,  explaining  that  this  was
    because the policy was based on the applicant being  dependent  on  the
    former Gurkha.

23. The Judge properly dealt with this issue at para  41  of  her  decision
    explaining why the Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  Annex
    K.  The consequence is that any error which the Judge may have made  in
    relation to her interpretation of any other aspect of Annex K cannot be
    a material error of law.

24. The Judge's finding that the Appellant had  been  living  independently
    since either 2011 or 2013 is contained in para 38 of her  decision  and
    re-iterated at para 46.

25. The second ground upon which permission  was  granted  related  to  the
    application of the  principles  of  law  relating  to  adult  dependent
    children.  The Judge did not address the requirements of  para  317  of
    the Immigration Rules  which  require  an  adult  child  seeking  entry
    clearance to be living alone and in the most exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances.  The Judge's findings on the evidence at  paras  39,  46
    and 57-58 of her decision make it clear that there  was  no  suggestion
    made to her or evidence before her that the Appellant was living in the
    most exceptional compassionate circumstances.  Accordingly, the failure
    to make express reference to para 317 of the Immigration  Rules  cannot
    be a material error of law since the Appellant's appeal was  doomed  to
    failure if it relied on para 317.

26. The final ground for the grant of permission  relates  to  the  Judge's
    assessment of the proportionality of the Appellant's claim outside  the
    Immigration Rules and outside the Respondent's published policies.  The
    Judge heard the  appeal  before  the  Supreme  Court  handed  down  its
    judgment in R (Agyarko) v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  11  but  promulgated  her
    decision two days after the Supreme  Court's  judgment.   She  made  no
    reference specifically to the judgments in Agyarko in either the  Court
    of Appeal or the Supreme Court.  This is not a material matter  because
    at para 42 the Judge stated that in any event she was going to give the
    appeal a full consideration with regard to any claim under Article 8 of
    the European  Convention.   For  the  reasons  already  given,  such  a
    consideration had to be outside the Immigration Rules.

27. At para 60 of Agyarko the Supreme Court stated:-

         ... the ultimate question is how a fair balance  should  be  struck
         between the competing public  and  individual  interests  involved,
         applying a proportionality test.  ... the Secretary  of  State  has
         defined the word "exceptional" as ... as meaning "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in an unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
         for the individual such that the refusal of the  application  would
         not be proportionate".

    Previously, the Upper Tribunal in para 157 of  Ghising  had  identified
    the critical issue to be whether an applicant can demonstrate that  the
    difficulty he faced in gaining entry as a young adult was only  because
    his father had, as a result of the historic injustice, not been able to
    gain entry into the UK sooner.  In The Queen (Gurung and Others) v SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8 at para 98 Dyson MR stated:-

         ... the purpose of the policy as regards adult  dependent  children
         is clearly stated on the face of  the  policy  itself  and  is  far
         narrow than this.  It draws a clear distinction  between  dependent
         children who are under 18 and those who are  over  that  age.   The
         purpose of the policy is not to facilitate the settlement in the UK
         of adult dependent  children.   The  policy  recognises  that  such
         children may be granted leave to enter under Rule 317(i)(f) and  if
         Article 8 requires it.  Otherwise, they are not  granted  leave  to
         enter unless there are exceptional circumstances.

    This still has some relevance in relation  to  Annex  K  issued  on  22
    January 2015 when assessing the  proportionality  of  the  Respondent's
    decision outside the Immigration Rules.

28. The Judge at para 55 found the Appellant had not discharged the  burden
    of proof to show that Article 8 is engaged.  This does not respect  the
    structured  approach  to  the  decision  making  process  for   matters
    concerning Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules  described  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The threshold for the establishment of
    family life is low: see VW (Uganda) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ.009.   The
    Judge erred in law in her approach to Article 8.  The facts as found by
    the Judge clearly demonstrate that there is  family  life  between  the
    Appellant and her mother.  The Respondent's decision is an interference
    with that family life.  The question is  whether  the  interference  is
    sufficiently grave to engage the State's obligations under Article 8.

29. Given the acknowledgment of the historic injustice against the Gurkhas,
    I find that the State's obligations under Article 8 are  engaged.   The
    Respondent in the original decision of 14 May 2014 based the refusal on
    the need "to protect the rights and freedoms of others and the economic
    well-being of the country".  There is no explanation  what  rights  and
    freedoms of others would be infringed had the  Respondent  granted  the
    Appellant entry clearance.   The  justification  by  reference  to  the
    economic well-being of the country follows for the Respondent from  the
    findings made earlier in the decision that the Appellant does not  meet
    the requirements of Annex K.

30. The difficulty which the Appellant faces is the lack of evidence  on  a
    number of matters.  While it is clear that both  her  parents  and  she
    applied for entry clearance promptly after  the  Secretary  of  State's
    policies had been extended so as to include her parents in 2009 and the
    Appellant on 22 January 2015.  However, there is no evidence  that  had
    her father been able to settle in the United  Kingdom  soon  after  his
    discharge from the army, he would have done so.  I also note that there
    was no explanation whether and if so with what result any of her  seven
    siblings had applied for entry clearance and there was  no  explanation
    for this omission.

31. There was a singular lack of evidence of financial support  except  for
    payment  subsequent  to  the  death  of  the  Appellant's  father.   In
    particular, there was no evidence of the transfer to the  Appellant  in
    Kathmandu of her father's army pension referred to in para  11  of  the
    Appellant's statement of 2 February 2017.  There was  no  challenge  to
    the Judge's findings at para 32 on the Appellant's parents' incomes.

32. There was no dispute that the  Appellant's  parents  and  latterly  her
    mother had returned on visits to Nepal.  But there was no  evidence  to
    show how they had spent the time of their visits.  There was nothing to
    show that the bulk of the time  had  been  spent  with  the  Appellant,
    rather than seeing some or all of her other seven siblings.

33. The evidence about the emotional dependency of the  Appellant  and  her
    mother amounted to the Appellant's assertion she is the only  unmarried
    member of the family at  paras  13  and  14  of  her  2  February  2017
    statement, repeated at para 3 of her unsigned  statement  filed  on  23
    November 2017.  Her mother says in her statement  of  2 February  2017
    that the Appellant is her  youngest  daughter  and  her  responsibility
    until she marries; that she is aged and  suffers  from  various  health
    problems and if the Appellant came to the United Kingdom she  would  be
    able to look after the Appellant and that they speak almost  every  day
    and that she, the mother, is lonely.

34. I keep in mind the fact of the  historic  injustice  practised  on  the
    Gurkhas and the steps the Respondent has through her  various  policies
    attempted to address this. I have regard to the  age  and  the  claimed
    frailty of the Appellant's mother, noting that there was no documentary
    medical evidence of this. Looking at matters in the round, I find  that
    on the evidence before the Tribunal the Appellant  has  not  shown  the
    decision of the Respondent causes undue hardship to  the  Appellant  or
    indeed her mother so as to make it disproportionate to the State's need
    to maintain proper immigration control, even taking  into  account  the
    comments in Ghising. Consequently the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

35. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law
    limited to  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    Respondent's decision  with  regard  to  the  Appellant's  claim  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The following decision is substituted:-

    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official                                                        Crest
Date:  03. i. 2018


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT:  FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and no fee award may be made.
Signed/Official Crest                                          Date: 03.  i.
2018


Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
