
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00355/2019
                                                               HU/04274/2019
                                                               HU/04279/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th December 2019                |On 21st January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                Mohammed [S]
                                 Humaira [S]
                                    [Z S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Shah, Solicitor at D J Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated on 7  August  2019,  in  which
    their appeals against the decisions to refuse their human rights claims
    dated 19 December 2018 (in respect  of  the  First  Appellant)  and  20
    February 2019 (in respect of the  Second  and  Third  Appellants)  were
    dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are all nationals of India, comprising  of  husband  and
    wife and their child.  The First Appellant first arrived in the  United
    Kingdom on 19 January 2006 with valid entry clearance as a  student  to
    31 May 2007, extended to 31 July 2008.  The First  Appellant  was  then
    granted leave to remain under the International Graduates Scheme to  25
    July 2009 and as a Tier 1 post-study migrant  to  25  July  2010.   The
    First Appellant then applied for and was granted leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (General) Migrant initially to 30 September 2012 and then to  30
    September 2015 and again to 1 April 2018.  On 27  September  2016,  the
    First Appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant which was refused on 1 December 2016.   On  19  March
    2018, the First Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on the
    basis of 10 years long residence, which was refused by  the  Respondent
    on 19 December 2018.

 3. The Second and Third Appellants were granted leave  to  remain  as  the
    dependents of a PBS migrant (the First Appellant) on 8 July 2015  until
    1 April 2018.

 4. The  Respondent  refused  the  First  Appellant's  application  on  two
    grounds.  First, that he was absent from the United Kingdom between  13
    October 2010 to 8 September 2011, period of 329 days and more than  the
    permitted 180 days absence allowed in a 12 month period.  Secondly, the
    application was refused under paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules
    because it was undesirable to permit the First Appellant to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom in light of his conduct, character  or  associations
    and therefore also refused under paragraph 276B(iii) of the Immigration
    Rules for the same reason.  The conduct was that the First  Applicant's
    earlier application for indefinite leave to remain had been refused  on
    the basis that he had been deceitful  or  dishonest  with  either  HMRC
    and/or the Respondent by failing to declare his self-employed  earnings
    correctly to HMRC and/or  by  falsely  representing  his  self-employed
    income to obtain leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. The Second and Third Appellants applications were refused on the  basis
    that the First Appellant had not been granted leave to remain and  they
    did not otherwise meet  the  requirements  of  either  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain.  In particular, there were no very significant obstacles to the
    Appellants' reintegration into India and the  child  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom for less than  seven  years  and  was  not  therefore  a
    Qualifying Child.  There were  no  exceptional  circumstances  and  the
    Appellants would be returning together as a family.

 6. In a decision promulgated on 7 August 2019, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lawrence dismissed all three appeals on all grounds.   In  relation  to
    long residence, the First-tier Tribunal found that the First  Appellant
    had provided evidence to demonstrate why he was unable to return to the
    United Kingdom  within  180  days  in  2010/11  which  was  capable  of
    reasonably being considered as establishing that  the  absence  was  in
    compelling or compassionate circumstances, such that in accordance with
    the Respondent's policy at the time, discretion could  reasonably  have
    been  exercised  in  his  favour.   However,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered that the First Appellant could not in  any  event  meet  the
    requirements of continuous lawful residence because his leave to remain
    ended following the expiry of his right to administratively review  the
    decision of 1 December 2016 and he did not make a  further  application
    for leave to remain until some 14 months later on 19 March 2018.

 7. In relation  to  the  earnings  declaration  issue  and  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration  Rules,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the Respondent had discharged the burden of proof in showing
    that the First  Appellant  had  been  deceitful  or  dishonest  in  his
    dealings with HMRC and/or the Respondent  in  relation  to  3  separate
    examples of discrepancies between his declared earnings to HMRC and  to
    the Respondent.  That was considered  to  be  relevant  to  the  public
    interest in the First Appellant's removal to be considered as  part  of
    the balancing exercise for the purposes of Article 8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal considers Article 8 in paragraphs 51 to  62  of
    the decision, focusing on private life as the family would  be  removed
    together and there would be no  interference  with  family  life.   The
    Appellants did not meet any of  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for a grant of leave to remain and the weight to be  attached  to
    that private life was limited given that it was established at  a  time
    when their stay in the United Kingdom was precarious.   The  Appellants
    were noted to all speak English and there was nothing to  suggest  that
    they were not financially independent or could not be in the future  if
    entitled to remain lawfully; these factors did not therefore add to the
    public interest in removal.  The child's best interests (one aged  four
    and the second child born in September 2018 under one at  the  time  of
    the hearing) were considered and found to  be  to  live  together  with
    their parents.  The further factors considered are set out in paragraph
    61 of the decision, including the  First  Appellant's  dishonesty;  the
    fact that the First Appellant had made arrangements to pay tax  on  his
    amended declarations to HMRC; the character references and  letters  of
    support for the Appellants; hardship suffered by  the  First  Appellant
    from his bereavement; the Appellant's length of residence in the United
    Kingdom; and any obstacles to  reintegration  in  India.   Overall  the
    First-Tier Tribunal found  that  the  proposed  interference  with  the
    private life  of  the  Appellants  and  the  second  child  was  not  a
    disproportionate interference with their right to respect  for  private
    and family life in accordance with Article 8 of the European Convention
    on Human Rights.

The appeal

 9. The Appellants appeal on  two  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made a mistake of fact in relation to the  Appellant's  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom, in that when his first application for
    indefinite leave to remain was refused on 1 December 2016, he still had
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant to 1 April 2018  and  his
    most recent application for indefinite leave to remain was made  before
    the expiry of his leave.  There was not therefore  a  gap  of  over  14
    months without  leave  to  remain  before  the  application  was  made.
    Further, the First-tier Tribunal failed to make any findings on the gap
    in residence in 2010/2011.   Secondly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in its  consideration  of  the  application  of
    paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules, by failing to  consider  the
    second discretionary stage identified  in  Balajigari  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 673.

10. At the oral hearing, the Respondent indicated at the  outset  that  she
    accepted that the First-tier Tribunal made a mistake of fact as to  the
    Appellant's leave to remain which did not end following the refusal  on
    1 December 2016 but continued in accordance  with  the  last  grant  of
    leave to remain and has continued pending  determination  of  the  most
    recent application and now appeal.

11. On behalf of the  Appellants,  it  was  confirmed  that  there  was  no
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's finding  of  dishonesty  by  the
    First Appellant but the appeal was pursued on the basis that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law in failing to give separate consideration to
    the second stage exercise of discretion  in  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  It was however accepted that all  of  the  relevant
    factors to such a consideration were in any event  taken  into  account
    within the decision of the First-tier Tribunal but only in the  context
    of the proportionality assessment under  Article  8.   It  was  further
    accepted that the factual error in the first ground of appeal would not
    be material to the outcome unless the Appellants were  also  successful
    in establishing an error of law on the second ground.

12. On behalf of the Respondent, it was noted that in relation to the First
    Appellant's absence in 2010/11, the First-tier Tribunal  found  in  the
    Appellant's favour that there were compelling circumstances  preventing
    his return to the United  Kingdom  sooner.   As  above,  the  error  in
    relation to the most recent period of leave  to  remain  was  accepted.
    However, the error was not material to  the  outcome  of  the  decision
    because in substance, the First-tier Tribunal considered  all  relevant
    factors for the exercise of discretion under paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration  Rules,  albeit  in  the  context  of   a   proportionality
    assessment under Article 8.  However, because there was  no  difference
    in the factors to be considered and given the finding of dishonesty, it
    was inevitable that if it was expressly set out, no discretion could be
    exercised in the Appellant's  favour  under  paragraph  322(5)  in  any
    event.  The finding of dishonesty carries  significant  weight  in  the
    public  interest  in  removal,  the  Appellants  could  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and  there  were  no  significant
    obstacles to reintegration identified, nor were there  any  exceptional
    or compelling circumstances to outweigh the strong public  interest  in
    removal.

Findings and reasons

 1. In relation  to  the  first  ground  of  appeal,  as  accepted  by  the
    Respondent, the First-tier Tribunal made a  factual  error  as  to  the
    First Appellant's continuing leave to remain after  the  refusal  on  1
    December 2016  and  therefore,  in  combination  with  the  finding  in
    paragraph 42 as to discretion in the Appellant's favour for  the  early
    period of absence in 2010/11, the First-tier Tribunal erred in  finding
    that the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  10  years
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom for the  purposes  of
    paragraph 276B(i) and (v) of the Immigration Rules.  The factual  error
    is also relevant to the proportionality assessment under Article  8  as
    it is one of the factors taken into account in paragraph  61.6  of  the
    decision, albeit only as a factor which weighed moderately against  the
    Appellants in relation to the public interest.

 2. On behalf of the Appellants it  was  appropriately  accepted  that  the
    errors identified in the first ground of appeal would not  be  material
    to the outcome of the appeal unless the Appellants were also successful
    on the second ground of appeal.  If not, the moderate  weight  attached
    to the factual error in the context of the  proportionality  assessment
    could not materially affect the outcome of the appeal if  removed  from
    the balancing exercise given the very strong public interest in removal
    from the finding of deception by the  First  Appellant  and  against  a
    relatively weak private life in the United Kingdom and no compelling or
    compassionate circumstances or obstacles to reintegration.

 3. The key issue  in  this  appeal  is  therefore  the  second  ground  of
    challenge in relation to the application of  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellants' case is that  the  refusal  of  the
    First Appellant's application under  paragraph  322(5)  is  a  discrete
    issue to be determined away from the assessment  under  Article  8  and
    that that assessment, as confirmed in paragraph 33 of  Balajigari,  has
    two stages.  First, to decide whether the  provision  applies  at  all,
    such that it is undesirable to grant leave to remain in  light  of  the
    matters identified, and if it does, the second stage is to decide as  a
    matter of discretion whether leave should be refused on that basis.  In
    the present case, the Appellant's claim that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    has failed  to  conduct  the  second  stage  discretionary  assessment.
    Although the Appellants acknowledge that cases being successful at  the
    second discretionary stage would be the  exception,  it  was  submitted
    that it was not on the facts of this  case  inevitable  that  the  same
    conclusion would be reached as to the First Appellant's satisfaction of
    the Immigration Rules which would be highly material to the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment.

 4. However, during the course of the oral  hearing  I  asked  Mr  Shah  to
    identify  the  factors  relevant  to  any  second  stage  discretionary
    assessment for the purposes of  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which were in  addition  or  different  to  the  factors  already
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal in the context of Article  8  and
    the proportionality assessment thereunder.  None were identified.

 5. This second ground of appeal is one of form  over  substance  and  when
    considering the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as a whole, whether
    or not the assessment was done specifically under paragraph  322(5)  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  or  in  the  context  of  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8, the  outcome  on  the  facts  and  on  both
    provisions would inevitably be the same and would inevitably not be  in
    the Appellants' favour.  There is a clear and unchallenged  finding  of
    dishonesty and/or deception by the First Appellant in his dealings with
    HMRC and/or the Respondent in the declaration of  his  earnings.   That
    carries very significant weight both against the exercise of discretion
    and for the public interest in removal of  the  Appellants.   There  is
    simply nothing on the facts of  the  case  which  could  even  arguably
    outweigh that issue to form the basis of any exercise of discretion  or
    grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   This  claim  concerns
    only interference with private life of the Appellants  and  the  second
    child and given the age of the children involved, their best  interests
    are only to remain with both parents.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not
    find any significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  to  India  for  the
    family, nor was there any  finding  of  any  significant  private  life
    established in the United Kingdom; nor was there  anything  approaching
    compelling or compassionate circumstances in the Appellants' favour.

 6. There is no error of law on the second ground of appeal as in substance
    the First-tier Tribunal had considered  all  relevant  matters  to  the
    exercise of discretion under paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules,
    even if this had not been expressly referred  to.   On  any  view,  the
    outcome of any express consideration of this point could not be in  the
    Appellants' favour and regardless of this  and  the  factual  error  in
    ground one, the outcome of the appeal was inevitable, that it would  be
    dismissed on human rights grounds.  For these reasons, as a whole,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a  material  error
    of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeals is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date     17th January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

