
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/00383/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12th November 2019                  |    On 26th November 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                          mr Owen Junior Sealanyane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shea, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa born on 31st  October  2000.
    The Appellant had made application for  entry  clearance  to  join  his
    father a person  present  and  settled  in  the  UK.   The  Appellant's
    application was made pursuant  to  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  His application was dismissed on 2nd December 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal A J Parker sitting at Manchester on 28th June 2019.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  22nd  July  2019  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed.

 3. On 22nd July 2019 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds note that the appeal  concerned  two
    issues under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules namely (i)  whether
    the Appellant's mother had died; and or (ii)  whether  the  Appellant's
    father had sole responsibility for his care  and  whether  serious  and
    compelling circumstances existed.

 4. The grounds contended

      i) That the judge in considering the first of  the  above  issues  had
         made a material misdirection by making inconsistent findings as  to
         whether or not the Appellant's mother was deceased.

     ii) That the judge had made  a  mistake  of  fact  by  stating  in  the
         decision that it was accepted that the Appellant's grandmother  was
         deceased where it was clear from the Notice of  Refusal  that  this
         point was not accepted.

    iii) That the decision was tainted by a failure of  the  judge  to  give
         inadequate reasons and/or that the judge had  failed  to  make  any
         consideration as to how the Appellant could succeed under paragraph
         297(i)(f).

     iv) In the light of the above it  was  submitted  that  the  Tribunal's
         conclusions under Article 8 were also affected.

 5. On 16th September 2019  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Easterman
    refused permission to appeal.  Judge Easterman found that the judge had
    not set out the decision in the clearest way  but  that  on  a  careful
    reading it was clear that paragraph 56 was part of the  quotation  from
    the Entry Clearance Manager's review.  Thus Judge  Easterman  concluded
    this is not the judge's conclusion and whilst it does conflict with the
    judge's decision there is  no  error  of  law  in  that  conflict.   He
    concludes that the judge was entitled to accept that the death  of  the
    Appellant's mother, as indeed the Entry Clearance Officer appears to do
    when he says he has seen her death certificate  and  makes  no  further
    comment, and that while it is true that a letter  of  refusal  disputes
    (because of lack of evidence) the death of the  grandmother  the  judge
    had found that the appellant had  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    297(d), which was  open  to  him  on  the  evidence.   He  consequently
    concluded that there was no arguable error of law.

 6. On 30th September 2019 renewed Grounds of Appeal  were  lodged  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds are verbatim, identical to  the  grounds
    lodged initially.

 7. On 2nd October 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission  to
    appeal.

 8. It is on that basis the appeal comes before me to determine whether  or
    not there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I note that this is an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and for the purpose of continuity throughout the  appeal  process
    Mr Sealanyane is referred to here as the appellant and the Secretary of
    State as the Respondent.  The  Appellant  appeared  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Shea.  Mr Shea is familiar  with  this  matter  he  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appeared by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Tan.



Submissions

 9. Mr Tan relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He submits that the judge  has
    failed  to  accurately  recite  evidence  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's mother has died.  I am told that she died in 2006 and  that
    the Appellant has not been able personally to  obtain  a  copy  of  her
    death certificate.

10. He submits that at paragraph 57 there is probably a typographical error
    in the decision and at Section 58 that the judge  has  made  a  finding
    that the Appellant's mother has died and that  he  has  heard  credible
    evidence.  He submits the judge has failed to set out why he found  the
    evidence to be persuasive and that the judge  has  made  findings  both
    against and in favour  of  the  Appellant  in  those  paragraphs.   The
    Secretary of State contends that such  inconsistencies  have  left  the
    issue unresolved and inadequately reasoned.

11. He further goes on to refer to the  position  regarding  the  purported
    death  of  the  Appellant's  grandmother.   I  am  advised   that   the
    Appellant's grandmother thereafter brought the Appellant up  after  the
    death of his mother.  He submits that there are contradictory  findings
    and that the judge has  failed  to  give  clear  and  credible  reasons
    relating to the fact that his grandmother  was  deceased.   He  submits
    that this failing to give adequate reasons constitutes a material error
    of law and he asks me to set aside the decision and to remit the matter
    back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

12. Mr Shea comments that if there are any  errors  firstly  they  are  not
    material and secondly that they are merely discrepancies  on  fact  and
    not law.  He submits that the  judge  came  to  findings  that  he  was
    entitled to make firstly that the Appellant's mother was  deceased  and
    secondly that the Appellant's  grandmother  was  deceased  leaving  the
    child in South Africa alone.  He is very critical  of  the  basis  upon
    which Judge  Perkins  grants  permission  to  appeal  particularly  the
    contention that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was
    confused about the Respondent's case in answer to the Appellant's claim
    that  his  grandmother  died  and  that  the  Appellant  had  explained
    adequately  the  findings  that  the  Appellant's   father   had   sole
    responsibility.  He asked me to find there is no error of  law  and  to
    dismiss the appeal.

Findings on Error of Law

13. The submissions made by the Secretary of State are based on two factual
    requirements that are necessary in order for the Appellant  to  succeed
    under paragraph  297.   Firstly  whether  the  Appellant's  mother  and
    grandmother had died  and  secondly  whether  the  Appellant  has  sole
    responsibility  for  his  care  and  whether  serious  and   compelling
    circumstances exist.  The main thrust however is on the  first  ground.
    The judge heard the evidence and he has made findings of fact.  He  has
    made such findings at paragraphs 58, 63 and  64.   Those  findings  are
    based on his analysis of the factual evidence.  That  factual  evidence
    included an admission by the Entry Clearance Officer that  he  had  had
    sight or at least proof of the death of  the  Appellant's  mother  some
    thirteen years' previously.  Secondly that  there  was  oral  testimony
    that the Appellant's grandmother had died and thirdly, and importantly,
    the Appellant's father and Sponsor Mr Moyo had attended and given  oral
    testimony which the judge found to be credible.

14. I agree entirely with the analysis placed upon  this  matter  by  Judge
    Easterman in that the judge may not have helped matters by not  setting
    out the decision in the clearest way but that the judge has in fact not
    erred in law and that he has made findings of fact that he was entitled
    to and that he was entitled to  accept  the  evidence  of  the  witness
    before him and as a result I find that the Appellant was not leading an
    independent life in South Africa.  The judge fully analysed the factual
    evidence  and  came  to  a  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  met   the
    requirements of paragraph 297(d).  On that basis I  am  satisfied  that
    the submissions made by the Secretary of State amount to  nothing  more
    than a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the  judge  and  that  the
    decision discloses no  material  error  of  law  and  consequently  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date: 25 November 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


