

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/00830/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 July 2018                           |On 19 July 2018                  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (BEIJING)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     Y Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr D. Mill, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Mr D. Jones, instructed by Forward Legal
Services


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should be granted because the case involves child welfare  issues.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and to the respondent.






                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity, I will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    (ECO), represented by the Secretary of State, is the appellant  in  the
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant ("YZ") appealed the  ECO's  decision  date  07  December
    2016 to refuse a human rights claim in the context  of  an  application
    for entry clearance as the dependent child of a person who  is  settled
    in the UK.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver ("the judge") allowed the  appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 29 November 2017. He heard evidence from  the
    appellant's father and her step-mother. He outlined the evidence before
    him and considered the level of involvement that the appellant's mother
    had in her life since her parents separated. The judge referred to  the
    correct legal framework and relevant case law. He  was  satisfied  that
    the sponsor had 'sole responsibility' for the upbringing of the child.

4.    The ECO appealed the First-tier Tribunal  decision  on  the  following
    grounds:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to give adequate reasons for
          his findings.


      ii) It is not clear what weight the judge placed on the step-mother's
          claim that she now had parental responsibility under Chinese law.



Legal framework

5.    Paragraph 297 of the immigration rules sets out  the  requirements  to
      be met by a person  seeking  indefinite  leave  to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents or a  relative  present  and
      settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Paragraph  297(i)(e)  requires  an
      applicant to show that one parent is present and settled in the United
      Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and  has
      sole responsibility for the child's upbringing. The usual  maintenance
      and accommodation requirements also apply.

6.    In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT
      00049 the Tribunal summarised its findings as follows:

         "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be  decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life.  However, where both parents are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have "sole responsibility".

7.    In FO & ors (children: settlement - OM distinguished)  Nigeria  [2006]
      UKAIT 00089 the Tribunal summarised its findings as follows:

         "The Tribunal's remarks in OM about the Immigration Rules  relating
         to the settlement of children (paragraphs 296 to 316 of HC 395) are
         obiter, and are not to be taken as an authoritative  interpretation
         of those rules.  Thus, there is no requirement that  when  a  child
         applies for a settlement visa, there must be presented  a  form  of
         lawful consent from the child's carer or,  failing  that,  a  court
         order.  Nor  is  there  a  requirement  that  a  child  coming  for
         settlement  here  must  be  registered  with  the  Social  Services
         Department of the Local Authority where it is to reside."

Decision and reasons

8.     Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  could  have  given   more
    extensive reasons, I conclude that he  gave  adequate  reasons  in  the
    circumstances of this case.  The judge set out  the  evidence  in  some
    detail outlining the father's responsibilities for the  child  and  the
    extent of the mother's contact with the child.  The facts of  the  case
    are not disputed between the parties.

9.    The judge summarised the evidence in some detail. It is apparent  that
    the force of the evidence showed that the father has had  full  custody
    of the child since he divorced from the appellant's  mother.  He  takes
    all the major decisions in  relation  to  her  life.  He  supports  her
    financially, he is the person  who  decided  where  she  should  go  to
    school, he is the person who decided where she should live, he  is  the
    person who delegated day-to-day responsibility to his mother in China.

10.   In contrast nothing in the mother's evidence suggested  that  she  had
    any responsibility for the child's upbringing. Nothing  in  the  letter
    she wrote, or the conversation she had with the entry  clearance  post,
    suggested that she has anything  other  than  sporadic  and  occasional
    contact with the child and in compliance with the court order  provides
    some minimal financial contribution. There was nothing in her  evidence
    to suggest that she had any responsibility for the  child's  upbringing
    within the meaning considered by the Upper Tribunal in the decision  of
    TD.  There was no evidence to show that she had any responsibility  for
    making decisions in relation to the child's day-to-day  life,  choosing
    where she went to school or any of the other  matters  that  one  would
    normally expect of a parent to be involved in who  is  exercising  some
    responsibility  for  a  child's  upbringing.  In  fact,  she  told  the
    interviewing officer that the child's grandmother took all those day-to-
    day decisions.

11.   The judge took into account all the  different  factors  that  weighed
    for and against each side.  He referred to the decision in TD  and  had
    those principles in mind.   Given  that  the  weight  of  the  evidence
    clearly pointed towards the father having sole responsibility  for  the
    upbringing of the child, this is the kind of case in which the reasons,
    although brief, were at least adequate.  For these reasons, I find that
    the first ground does not disclose any material error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

12.   Insofar as the second ground states that the judge did  not  make  any
    findings regarding the stepmother's evidence, I cannot see how it would
    have made any material difference to the outcome of the appeal  if  the
    judge had made specific findings about the stepmother's claim  to  have
    legal responsibility for the child in circumstances  where  the  mother
    never claimed to have any legal responsibility for the child since  the
    divorce. After having spoken to the sponsor and his wife, the judge was
    clearly satisfied that the  father  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    upbringing of the child.

13.   The First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law. The decision shall stand.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 19 July 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








