
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00059/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 25 June 2021                    |On 06 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              gowry ramalingam
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Zapata Besso, instructed by MTC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born  on  7  October  1972.  She
   appeals, with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
   dismissing her human rights appeal.

2. The appellant arrived in the UK on 29 September 2000 and claimed  asylum.
   Her claim was refused and an appeal against that decision  was  dismissed
   on asylum grounds but allowed on human rights grounds on 13  March  2003.
   Her case was reconsidered on human rights grounds and was  refused  again
   on 24 March 2003. The appellant  was  subsequently  issued  with  an  EEA
   residence card as the dependant of her EEA brother, valid until 11  April
   2010, but a further  application  for  a  permanent  residence  card  was
   refused on 11 October 2010  and  an  appeal  against  that  decision  was
   dismissed on 10 January 2011. On 20 July 2012 the appellant  applied  for
   leave to remain on family and private life grounds, but  her  application
   was refused on 14 August  2013.  A  subsequent  human  rights  claim  was
   considered and refused on 23 October 2014  and  an  appeal  against  that
   decision was dismissed on 21 May 2015.

3. The appellant then made written representations  on  medical  and  mental
   health grounds on 9 July 2015 and  submitted  in  support  a  psychiatric
   report dated 30 April 2015 and  evidence  of  anti-psychotic  medication.
   Further evidence and information was provided in May 2016 and July  2016,
   including  evidence  of  the  appellant  having  taken  an  overdose   of
   paracetamol. The representations were rejected under paragraph 353 of the
   immigration rules on 9 January 2018 as not amounting to  a  fresh  claim.
   However the appellant, in a section 120 statement of  additional  grounds
   dated 8 November 2018, set out a further human rights claim,  accompanied
   by another psychiatric report from the same Consultant  Psychiatrist,  Dr
   Krishna Balansubramaniam, dated 26 October 2018, and evidence from her GP
   confirming  that  she  suffered  from  various  mental  health   problems
   including post-traumatic stress disorder,  schizophrenia  and  depressive
   disorder, arising from her experiences in Sri Lanka, and confirming  that
   she was dependent upon anti-psychotic medication.

4. The appellant's claim was treated as a fresh human rights claim  but  was
   again refused, on 5 December 2018.  The decision gave rise to a right  of
   appeal which the appellant exercised.

5. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul  on  11  November
   2019.  It  was  submitted  before  the   judge   that   the   appellant's
   circumstances had changed since the previous appeal  as  the  psychiatric
   report confirmed that her mental health had  significantly  deteriorated,
   she had attempted suicide and had been admitted to hospital under section
   2 of the Mental Health Act 1983. The appellant's  sister,  who  had  been
   appointed as her litigation friend in her absence and owing to  her  lack
   of capacity, also gave evidence that her (the  appellant's)  relationship
   with her  partner  had  broken  down  in  January  2019  because  of  her
   deteriorating mental health, and that she (the sister) was now her  full-
   time carer and guardian. It was claimed that she could not return to  Sri
   Lanka as a single woman with  mental  health  problems  and  at  risk  of
   committing suicide.

6.  The  judge  made  adverse  credibility  findings,  concluding  that  the
   appellant would have support and access to medication in  Sri  Lanka  and
   that the situation was no different to that before the previous  Tribunal
   which dismissed  her  previous  appeal.  The  judge  concluded  that  the
   respondent's decision was a proportionate one  and  did  not  breach  the
   appellant's human rights and he dismissed the appeal.

7. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
   and was granted on the basis that there was an arguable  failure  by  the
   judge to carry out a thorough analysis of the  medical  evidence  and  to
   consider and make findings on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

8. The matter then came before me.

9. Mr Tufan helpfully conceded that there was a material  error  of  law  in
   Judge Paul's decision in that the judge had  failed  adequately  to  deal
   with the medical evidence. He accepted that the decision had  to  be  set
   aside. In addition, Mr Tufan agreed that  the  appellant's  human  rights
   appeal could be re-made by allowing it without a further hearing, on  the
   basis that she had now been living in the UK for a continuous  period  of
   over 20 years for the purposes of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii).   Mr  Tufan
   pointed out that it  was  accepted  in  the  refusal  decision  that  the
   appellant met the suitability requirements of the immigration  rules  and
   he submitted that she now met the requirements of the  immigration  rules
   on the basis of her private life.

10. Ms Zapata Besso advised me that if I was minded to allow the appeal  for
   that reason there was no need for a further hearing and she  was  content
   for the decision to be re-made on that basis.

11. I am entirely in agreement with both parties that Judge Paul's  decision
   has to be set  aside  in  its  entirety  -   not  least  because  of  the
   inadequate consideration of the medical evidence, but also on  the  basis
   of the challenge in the second ground of appeal to  the  judge's  adverse
   credibility findings. I am grateful to Mr Tufan  for  the  concession  he
   made. In accordance with that concession I set aside the judge's decision
   and I re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal on  Article
   8 human rights grounds on the basis that the  requirements  of  paragraph
   276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules are met, that the public interest
   does  not,  therefore,  require  her  removal  and  that  it   would   be
   disproportionate for her to be required to return to Sri Lanka.

DECISION

12. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The  decision  is  set  aside.  The
   decision is re-made by allowing the appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights
   grounds.



Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  25 June 2021

