
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00210/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th May 2019                     |On 20th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     f n
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by City Heights Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant was born in July 1978 and is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.
    She appeals against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach,
    promulgated on 12 February 2019,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    refusal of indefinite leave for remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The grounds of appeal submit that the judge  erred  for  four  reasons.
    Firstly, the decision and findings as to  the  Appellant's  credibility
    were vitiated by procedural impropriety, namely there was a failure  to
    recognise that the Appellant was a vulnerable  witness.  Secondly,  the
    judge erred in law in considering whether the conflicting accounts  put
    forward by the Appellant were due to her mental  health.  Thirdly,  the
    judge erred in failing to appreciate  that  dishonesty  was  needed  to
    justify the Secretary of State's decision.  Fourthly, the judge did not
    follow the three-stage approach to the burden of proof in  relation  to
    the allegation of dishonesty and thereby erred in law.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher
    on 3 April  2019  for  the  following  reasons;  "The  grounds  seeking
    permission have been drafted by Counsel  who  did  not  appear  at  the
    hearing. They assert that the judge erred in failing to recognise  that
    the Appellant was a vulnerable witness, that she erred  in  failing  to
    consider whether the conflicting accounts advanced by the Appellant may
    be attributable to  her  mental  health  issues,  that  she  failed  to
    appreciate that dishonesty  was  necessary  in  order  to  justify  the
    Respondent's decision and that she  failed  to  apply  the  three-stage
    approach to the burden of proof in establishing  dishonesty.  There  is
    nothing in the decision to show that the Appellant  was  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness. Arguably this amounts to a defect in  process.  The
    use of the word arguably in paragraph 59 of the decision suggests  that
    the correct standard of proof may not have been applied in  determining
    the issues of dishonesty. It is also arguable from that paragraph  that
    the judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the  shifting  burden  in  the
    allegations of dishonesty."

4.   It was agreed at the  hearing  that  the  Appellant  should  have  been
    treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness  and  there  had  been   procedural
    impropriety giving rise to an error of law in the  decision.  Mr  Malik
    submitted that the Appellant had been deprived of a  fair  hearing  and
    therefore the appeal should be remitted. It was through no fault of the
    Appellant that she would be deprived of an  avenue  of  appeal  if  the
    appeal was not remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Conclusions and reasons

5.   There was nothing in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  Judge's  decision  to
    show that the judge followed the  practice  direction  'First-tier  and
    Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable adult and Sensitive Witnesses' and the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal as to vulnerable  witness  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) v the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1123.  Although I accept that there was no submission made  by
    counsel representing the Appellant at the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there
    was evidence before the judge to show that the  Appellant  should  have
    been treated as a vulnerable witness. I find that the  judge  erred  in
    law in failing to consider this issue of her own motion. There were  no
    findings on this point in the decision and therefore the  judge  failed
    to demonstrate she took into account the Appellant's vulnerabilities in
    assessing credibility.
6.   I am of the view that the failure to  consider  whether  the  Appellant
    was a  vulnerable  witness,  given  that  the  judge  acknowledged  the
    psychological assessment in which the Appellant set out  a  history  of
    childhood abuses and familial difficulties leading to depression and  a
    history of previous suicide attempts, amounts to an error of law.

7.   The judge referred to the psychological assessment by  Dr  Sreenan,  at
    paragraph  49,  and  acknowledged  that  the  Appellant  had   received
    cognitive behavioural therapy and was in  receipt  of  medication.  The
    judge stated: "The appellant's evidence was that  counselling  had  now
    ceased  but  that  she  was  still  taking  medication.  Dr   Sreenan's
    conclusion was that the appellant was suffering from a  high  level  of
    anxiety as a result of her visa status and that this  was  one  of  the
    'primary drivers'  for  her  symptoms  of  anxiety  and  reactive  mild
    depression. He did not conclude that the Appellant was  suffering  from
    Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. The assessment  also  did  not  suggest
    that the Appellant was unable to contradict or challenge  people  where
    she felt that she had not done as they should have done on her  behalf.
    Nor does it state that at the time of submitting her  tax  returns  she
    was suffering particular issues or was unable to properly  engage  with
    the process."

8.   However, having acknowledged that assessment, the judge ought  to  have
    considered whether the Appellant should  be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
    witness and, following AM (Afghanistan), it was incumbent on the  judge
    to make a finding on such a point. Her failure to do so gives  rise  to
    an error of law such that the very comprehensive decision must  be  set
    aside and reheard.

9.   I find that paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statement  of  25  September
    2012 is satisfied.  The Appellant has in essence  been  deprived  of  a
    fair hearing at the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to be remade. It was not a case  where  the  judge  relied  on
    overwhelming evidence to substantiate her finding  that  the  Appellant
    was not credible and there was evidence which supported the Appellant's
    account. Her credibility on matters in issue was  finely  balanced  and
    her vulnerability may well have affected the assessment of  credibility
    had the judge considered it in examining the  evidence.  Unfortunately,
    although the  judge  set  out  the  psychological  assessment  and  the
    findings, the judge does not demonstrate in  her  credibility  findings
    that she has considered how that assessment  might  have  affected  the
    Appellant's  ability  to  give  evidence.  The  judge  relied  on   the
    assessment in her Article 8 findings at paragraph 61.

10.  I find that the judge erred in law and I set  the  decision  aside.   I
    remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach. None of  the
    judge's findings are preserved.


Notice of decision

Appeal allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

