
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00103/2015
     HU/00104/2015
     HU/00105/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th July 2016                        |On 16th September 2016              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS



                                   Between

                            Tt (FIRST Appellant)
                            n (SECOND Appellant)
                             R (THIRD Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Salam, Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana and the  first  Appellant  is  the
    mother of the second and third Appellants.  Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI2008/269 as  amended)
    I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or court  directs
    otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly
    identify the Appellant, or the children. For  the  avoidance  of  doubt
    this order also applies to the Appellant  and  to  the  respondent.   A
    failure to comply with this order  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The background to the proceedings can be  summarised  as  follows.  The
    first Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  28  January  2006  as  a
    visitor with leave valid until 28th July of that  year.  The  Appellant
    did not return to Ghana and it is not in dispute that she has  remained
    unlawfully since that date in  the  UK.    During  the  course  of  her
    residence,  two  children  were  born,  namely  the  second  and  third
    Appellants in 2009 and 2007 respectively.   The  Appellant's  case  was
    that she had lived initially  with  her  partner.   However  after  the
    breakdown of that relationship, she began living with  her  half-sister
    who has provided support and accommodation to the first  Appellant  and
    her dependant children from September 2010.

 3. On 27th January 2015 the first Appellant applied for  leave  to  remain
    under the family/private life ten year route but that was refused  with
    no right of appeal on 6th March 2015.  A further application  was  made
    on 10th April 2015.   The  application  was  refused  in  a  notice  of
    immigration decision dated 1st May 2015.  The decision  made  reference
    to leave to remain as  a  parent  under  the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Appendix FM.  The decision letter at paragraph  15  took  into  account
    that the Appellant had two children who were born in the  UK  and  that
    the eldest child had lived in the UK for at least seven years preceding
    the date of the application.  It was further accepted  that  the  first
    Appellant had sole responsibility for those children and therefore  met
    the eligibility requirements under Appendix FM on the basis  of  family
    life as a parent. Thus consideration was given to EX1 of  Appendix  FM.
    In that regard the Secretary of State accepted that the first Appellant
    had sole parental responsibility for the children and that  the  eldest
    child had lived in the UK for at least seven years but did  not  accept
    that it was unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK  as  it
    was considered that the children were young enough to adapt to life  in
    Ghana where the first Appellant would be able to support them.

 4.  Consideration was given to the first Appellant's  private  life  under
    276ADE noting that she had entered the United Kingdom in 2006  aged  25
    and had been resident in the UK  for  nine  years  since  her  arrival.
    However she failed to meet the requirements of 276ADE(1) as she had not
    lived continuously in the UK for two years nor that there would be very
    significant obstacles to her reintegration into Ghana  if  required  to
    leave the United Kingdom, a country where she had spent  her  formative
    years.   As to the children, it was  stated  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    decision letter that they failed to meet  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and
    that notwithstanding that they were under the age of 18 years  and  the
    eldest child had lived continuously in the UK for at least seven years,
    it was not considered unreasonable for them to  leave  the  UK  on  the
    basis that they were young enough to adapt to life in Ghana along  with
    their mother.

 5.  The decision also considered any exceptional circumstances for a grant
    of leave outside the Rules and took into  account  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The Secretary of  State
    considered  the  documentation  provided  relating  to  the  children's
    private life and that whilst it was accepted that they had lived in the
    UK since they were born, it was considered they were  young  enough  to
    adapt to life in Ghana, they had not yet spent their formative years in
    the UK and that their mother could return with them and support them in
    that country. As to education, at paragraphs 22 to 24, the Secretary of
    State considered that the children could access education in Ghana  and
    that they were not at a critical stage of their education [24].  It was
    noted at paragraph 25 that as regards  the  first  Appellant's  private
    life, it had been built up in the knowledge of the restriction  on  her
    visa and that she had no legitimate expectation to form a private  life
    in the UK.  Thus it was  considered  reasonable  to  expect  the  first
    Appellant and her children to return to Ghana as a family unit  and  to
    enjoy family life there.  Consequently the application was refused.

 6. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 10th September 2015. In a  decision  promulgated
    on 23rd September 2015 the First-tier Tribunal dismissed their appeals.



 7. The First-tier Tribunal found that  the  first  Appellant  had  a  poor
    immigration history having remained illegally in the UK for nine  years
    and having accessed education and health services she was not  entitled
    to.  The judge found that she had had two children during the time  she
    had been resident in the UK and that she was a well-educated woman  who
    could speak fluent English.  The judge found that little  weight  could
    be attached to the private life she had established in  the  UK  having
    lived there illegally.

 8. As to the children, the  judge  found  that  there  was  a  functioning
    education system in Ghana and that the  first  Appellant  had  accessed
    education in Ghana and  had  studied  to  degree  level  and  that  the
    children would be able to benefit in the same  way.   The  judge  found
    that there was no evidence that  they  would  be  denied  education  in
    Ghana.  As to the children's needs, the  judge  took  into  account  at
    paragraphs 9 and 10 that the third Appellant was receiving play therapy
    at school but did not find that there was any evidence  to  demonstrate
    that that was necessary for his  proper  development  or  that  he  was
    assessed as a child with any "special needs".  The  judge  however  did
    accept that they were settled in schools and had made friends but  that
    they could return to Ghana with the assistance of their mother and that
    there was no evidence to suggest that the  removal  would  harm  either
    child.  Consequently the judge found that it was in the best  interests
    of the children to return to their home country and the care  of  their
    mother and therefore that the Appellants did not  satisfy  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph EX(1) as it was reasonable to  expect  both  children  to
    relocate to Ghana.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein on 20th April 2016.

10. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal to  decide  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point
    of law.  I had the opportunity of hearing submissions from each of  the
    parties which are set out  in  my  Record  of  Proceedings.   Mr  Salam
    submitted that the written grounds  had  merit  and  in  particular  in
    relation to ground 1 that the judge did not make any reference or place
    weight upon the importance of the length of the children's residence of
    seven years.  He submitted that  this  had  been  referred  to  in  the
    decision letter but had not been part of the analysis in the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  He further made  reference  to  the  respondent's
    IDIs set out in the bundle at page 558 which set  out  further  factors
    relevant to the issue of reasonableness of return.  Thus  he  submitted
    that the error made by the judge  was  material  when  considering  the
    overall decision made on the  issue  of  reasonableness  of  return  to
    Ghana.

11. As regards the second ground as set out at paragraph 15 of the grounds,
    Mr Salam relied upon the report set out at page 450-457 of the  bundle.
    He made reference to the  behavioural  difficulties  indicated  by  the
    documents and the effect upon him. He  submitted  that  the  child  had
    never been to Ghana having been born in the UK and thus was  integrated
    in the UK and that that was a relevant consideration  when  considering
    the issue of reasonableness of return in the  context  of  his  special
    needs. He further submitted that he had no relatives in Ghana and there
    was no support system in place. As to evidence of integration, he  made
    reference to the  evidence  relating  to  their  education,  the  third
    Appellant's special needs and also the family tries that he had in  the
    UK with the Appellant's half sister with whom they had lived.

12. Mr Bates on behalf of the Secretary of State accepted that there was no
    mention of the seven  years'  residence  of  the  children  within  the
    determination but submitted that this was not a material error and that
    it was important to look at the substance of the decision and  not  the
    form. He submitted that the judge was clearly aware that  the  children
    had been in the UK for seven years.   He  further  submitted  that  the
    judge considered the issue of education and specifically considered the
    lack of access to play therapy.  It was open to the judge to find there
    was no prognosis given or any diagnosis of any specific condition  also
    there was no suggestion that the child would not be able  to  adapt  to
    life in Ghana.  Thus the findings made by the judge upon the  issue  of
    reasonableness were open to the judge to make. Thus there was no  error
    of law.

13. At the conclusion of the submissions I gave a short judgment as to  why
    I had reached the  conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disclosed the making of an error on a point of law and  should
    be set aside.

14. My reasons for reaching that decision can be summarised as follows.  As
    regards the second ground relied upon by Mr Salam, the judge failed  to
    have regard to the evidence from  the  social  worker,  I  reached  the
    conclusion that this ground had no merit. The grounds make reference to
    the First-tier Tribunal's failure to make reference  to  the  "detailed
    letter from a social worker at pages 452-457" (see paragraph 15 of  the
    grounds).  However, the evidence in the  bundle  made  reference  to  a
    referral being made in respect of the third Appellant for play  therapy
    (see page 455) and that the report in the bundle and referred to in the
    grounds, whilst written by a social worker, was plainly in the  context
    of the play therapy and not in the context as  a  child  with  "special
    needs" . The judge made specific reference to this at  paragraph  9  of
    the determination and on the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the findings at paragraph 10 were open to the judge to  make  that  the
    third Appellant did not suffer from any diagnosed condition nor had  he
    been assessed as a child with "special needs"  (see  referral  form  at
    page 50).  Consequently I found no error of law in the judge's approach
    when dealing with that part of the evidence.

15. However, I consider that the First-tier Tribunal did err in law in  its
    overall approach to the issue of reasonableness and return to Ghana  as
    set out at paragraphs 14 and 16 of the grounds advanced by Mr Salam.

16. The third Appellant had been in the UK since his  birth  and  therefore
    had lived here for a period of over seven years.   The decision  letter
    made a number of references to the length of  residence  of  the  third
    Appellant and the relevance of this to the  decision  under  challenge.
    As set out in the jurisprudence and in the decision, the  relevance  of
    seven years' residence for a child is of significant weight.    In  the
    decision of E-A, the Upper Tribunal considered the effect of a  "period
    of substantial residence" by a child at [39]:

         "Absent other factors, the reasons  why  a  period  of  substantial
         residence as a child may become  a  weighty  consideration  in  the
         balance of competing considerations is that in the course  of  time
         such roots are put down, personal identities developed, friendships
         are formed and links are made with the community outside the family
         unit. The degree to which these elements of private life are forged
         and therefore the weight to be given to the passage of  time  would
         depend on the facts in each case."

17. In  the  decision  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions  affecting
    children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal
    returned to the issue of the likely nature of any private  life  formed
    by a young child at paragraphs 13.  At [13(iii)] -  13(iv)]  the  Upper
    Tribunal said this:

         "(iii) ... residence in a country other than the  state  of  origin
             can  lead  to  the  development  of   social,   cultural   and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to dispute, in
             the absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the  contrary.  What
             amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
             present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
             period.

         (iv)  Apart from the terms of published  policies  and  Rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from aged 4 is  likely  to  be
             more significant to a child than  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focused on their parents  rather
             than their peers and are adaptable."

18. Whilst the decision in Azimi-Moayed is  a  case  determined  after  the
    policy DP/96 being repealed, the Court  of  Appeal  distinguished  this
    case in the decision of MA and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705  at  [71]  to
    [73]  and stated that the test can no longer  be  "compelling  reasons"
    because that was not the  language  of  Section  117B(6)  or  paragraph
    276ADE and that it set the bar "too high".  However the decision in  MA
    makes it plain that the length of residence of seven years is a  matter
    of significant relevance and weight.   Thus the older jurisprudence has
    recently been reaffirmed in the decision of MA & Others (as cited)  the
    judgment given on 7 July 2016.  In MA the Court of Appeal at paragraphs
    [46] to [49] placed importance on the length of residence  of  a  child
    and the fact that a child had been in the UK for seven  years  must  be
    given significant weight (see [46]).  Furthermore,  the  decision  made
    reference to the position that where a child had been  in  the  UK  for
    that length of time, the starting point  is  that  the  child's  status
    should be legitimised unless there was a good reason not to do so  (see
    [103]).  When applied to the analysis in the present case,  whilst  the
    judge did make reference and  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    children  at  paragraph  [14]  the  judge  made  no  reference  to  the
    significance of the seven year residence of the second Appellant at any
    point in the determination. Whilst Mr Bates on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State in accepted that was the position but submitted  that  it  was
    not material because it could be inferred from the judge's decision,  I
    do not consider that that can be said.  There was no reference  in  the
    determination as to that significant factor or what  weight  it  should
    have in the analysis of the concept of reasonableness and  the  failure
    to have regard to such a significant  factor  is  in  my  judgement  so
    fundamental that it undermined the decision as a whole.

19. I therefore reached the conclusion that the decision  could  not  stand
    and should be remade.

20. At the hearing I informed the parties that I had found there  to  be  a
    material error of law for the reasons that I  had  given  above  and  I
    proceeded to hear submissions from both parties as to the  remaking  of
    the appeal on the evidence as it stood.

21. However, having considered the submissions  and  looked  again  at  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal and having  regard  to
    paragraph 7.2(a) and 7.2(b) of the Practice Direction I have  concluded
    that it is not possible to remake the decision  on the findings of fact
    and upon the evidence as they presently  stand.   The  decision  of  EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874 as set out in the decision of MA (as cited) at paragraph  [48],
    makes it plain that part of  determining  the  best  interests  of  the
    children relates to the extent to which they have become distanced from
    the country to which it is proposed that they are to be retuned and how
    renewable their connections with that country may be. Furthermore,  the
    IDIs exhibited at page 557 in the  bundle  also  make  reference  to  a
    number of relevant considerations which included the wider family  ties
    in the UK and the extent of those ties to the relevant  children.   The
    First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant's half-sister who
    had also provided a witness statement concerning her relationship  with
    the second children. There was also evidence as to the links in the  UK
    as opposed to those in Ghana. However, there is  no  reference  in  the
    determination concerning that evidence.  Thus  there  are  no  findings
    that have been  made either as to the extent of their ties  in  the  UK
    nor upon the issue concerning the extent to  which  the  children  were
    distanced from their country of Ghana, whether there were any social or
    cultural links and the considerations set out in the IDIs. These cannot
    be remedied by the submissions that I have heard  from  both  advocates
    that require findings of fact to be made from oral evidence relating to
    this issue from the parties including that of the witness.

22. I therefore reach the decision that the appropriate course is that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal when  all  matters
    relevant to the issue of reasonableness of return, including the length
    of residence of the children should be considered.  Both  children  now
    have been in the UK for over seven  years  and  as  the  issues  to  be
    determined relate to their  best  interests,  in  my  judgement  it  is
    necessary for there to be the opportunity to hear  up-to-date  evidence
    concerning  their  best  interests  when  considering  the   issue   of
    reasonableness of return.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

24. Anonymity direction made.


Signed [pic]
                                Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds                   16th September 2016



