

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00494/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2017                  |On 19th September 2017               |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President

                                   Between

                         MOHAMMAD MUBEEN AGHA ASLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

Appellant:        Mr E Wilford, of counsel, instructed by G K Associates
Respondent:   Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. The Appellant is a national of Kenya, aged 50  years.   The  underlying
    decision in this appeal is that of the  Respondent,  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State")  refusing  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR claim  advanced  in  response  to  a  formal
    "minded to deport" notification prompted by his convictions in  respect
    of sundry offences spanning the period 1983 to  2003.   The  stand  out
    convictions were those made on 13 October 1988 when the  Appellant  was
    sentenced to 19 years imprisonment, reduced to 17 years on  appeal,  in
    respect of four counts of abducting a woman by force, three  counts  of
    rape, robbery and theft.


 2. The Secretary of State's decision maker stated:


         "Your deportation is conducive to the public good and in the public
         interest because you have been convicted of an  offence  for  which
         you have been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  at  least
         four years.  Therefore, in accordance with  paragraph  398  of  the
         Immigration Rules, the public interest  requires  your  deportation
         unless there are very compelling circumstances over and above those
         described in the exceptions to deportation set  out  at  paragraphs
         399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.




    This was  followed  by  a  relatively  detailed  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's relationships with his spouse  and  his  daughter  aged  14
    years.  The omnibus conclusion made was that  the  aforementioned  test
    had not been satisfied.




 3. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:


   a) The proportionality balancing exercise  conducted  by  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal ("FtT") was arguably unlawful on account of failing  to  take
      into account the length and lawfulness of the Appellant's presence  in
      the United Kingdom.


   b) While the elapse of time between the Appellant's last  conviction  and
      the initiation of the deportation action may have been  the  strongest
      factor in the balancing equation, the FtT:


             "...  appears to have dealt with  delay  as  something  of  an
             afterthought without explicitly  considering  that  delay  can
             reduce the weight of the  public  interest  considerations  in
             deterrence and expressing society's revulsion for  the  crimes
             committed (see MN-T (Columbia) - v  -  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
             893)."




 4. Bearing in mind the terms of the grant of permission to appeal,  it  is
    appropriate to highlight the following passages in the decision of  the
    FtT:


   a) The Appellant's criminal record was noted in [6].


   b) In the Appellant's oral evidence the issues  which  featured  included
      the length of his sojourn in the United Kingdom and the  date  of  his
      last conviction (2003): [15].


   c) The length of his sojourn was noted again  in [29].


   d) The main landmarks in the Appellant's criminal record  were  rehearsed
      in [30].


   e) At [41] the Judge stated  "I  accept  that  most  of  the  Appellant's
      criminality occurred many years ago".


   f) At [42] the Judge explicitly acknowledged the factor of the  Secretary
      of State's delay in  activating  the  deportation  process  and,  once
      again, rehearsed  some  of  the  landmark  dates  in  the  Appellant's
      criminal history.


    The FtT expressed its omnibus conclusion in these terms:


         "Having carefully considered all the evidence I do not accept  that
         the Appellant's circumstances are exceptional or  compelling.   The
         scales are heavily weighted in favour of  deportation  and  I  find
         that there are no compelling or exceptional circumstances which are
         necessary to outweigh the public interest in removal."




 5. It is appropriate to emphasise that the function of  this  Tribunal  is
    not to decide whether this  appeal  should  be  allowed  or  dismissed.
    Rather this Tribunal is required to decide whether within the terms  of
    the grant of permission to appeal the decision of the FtT  is  infected
    by a material error of law.  I have  already  drawn  attention  to  the
    terms of the grant of  permission  to  appeal.   These  are  accurately
    condensed in the skeleton argument of  Mr  Wilford  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  The central issue of  law  is  whether  the  FtT  correctly
    prepared  the  scales  in  conducting  the  Article  8  proportionality
    balancing exercise.

 6. The first ground of appeal complains that the judge failed  to  include
    in the balancing exercise a series of material factors.  First of  all,
    the length of the Appellant's sojourn in the United Kingdom which dates
    from 1980.  Second, his age at the outset  of  that  period  (12)  and,
    third, the lawful nature of his residence.  The  second  limb  of  this
    ground complains that the  judge  confined  his  consideration  of  the
    factors  which  could  combine  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
    deportation  to   the   Appellant's   family   circumstances   and   he
    particularised those of  the  children,  the  spouse,  the  Appellant's
    mother and also the Appellant's ability to relocate to Kenya.

 7. It must be said that the key passages in the decision of  the  FtT  are
    extremely brief.  I do not overlook all  that  precedes  them  but  the
    crucial exercise is confined to two compact paragraphs which simply did
    not do justice to the depth, reach and reality of the case  before  the
    Tribunal.

 8. It is trite law that when  any  tribunal  embarks  upon  an  Article  8
    proportionality balancing this must entail identification of all of the
    material facts and factors, engagement with the evidence pertaining  to
    them and an attribution of the weight which they do or do not  attract.
    I accept the criticism that the Article 8  balancing  exercise  in  the
    present case was inadequate.  The material factors already  noted  were
    not identified and weighed.  This undermines the  exercise  critically.
    The key passages in the decision are conclusionary in nature.  They are
    singularly devoid of  the  necessary  detail  and  analysis  which  the
    factual matrix of this case demanded.

 9. The second ground of appeal  is  linked  closely  to  the  first.   The
    balancing exercise required of the FtT  clear  and  careful  engagement
    with the facts pertaining to what was on any showing a standout feature
    of the factual  matrix,  namely  the  Secretary  of  State's  delay  in
    initiating deportation action against the Appellant.  This delay was of
    extraordinary, egregious dimensions.  It is common case that it was  of
    twenty years'  duration.   The  brief  sentence  at  the  beginning  of
    paragraph 42 of the determination falls manifestly short  of  what  was
    required in the factual matrix of the present case.  There was a  clear
    failure to properly consider this key factor.

10. The question ultimately arising is not what the outcome of this  appeal
    might be in the context of the Tribunal omitting these clear errors  of
    law.  The materiality of the errors is beyond any  plausible  argument.
    Had they been avoided the outcome could have been different.

11. I say finally that there  is  no  dispute  in  this  appeal  about  the
    governing legal principles.  Thus while there has been some emphasis on
    the part of the Secretary of State in the submissions of Mr Wilding  on
    the correct approach in law to the question of  delay  that  is  rather
    beside the point for the reasons which I have endeavoured  to  explain.
    In the abstract, protracted delay on the part of the Secretary of State
    in initiating deportation or removal action can in  principle  outweigh
    the potent public interest in deportation.  For the  reasons  explained
    by the Court of Appeal in the case MN-T (Columbia) and in particular at
    paragraphs 41 and 42, with the adjustment to be inserted in wake of the
    decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Hesham Ali that is not  in
    dispute.  The capacity of delay of a protracted nature on the  part  of
    the Secretary of State to  outweigh  this  potent  public  interest  is
    enhanced  and  strengthened  where   it   is   accompanied   by   other
    counterbalancing   factors.    Again   that   is   an   uncontroversial
    proposition.  There is a further uncontentious  principle  namely  that
    every case is unavoidably fact  sensitive.   Thus  factual  comparisons
    between the instant case and other decided cases will normally entail a
    relatively arid exercise.  Ultimately the  question  for  the  Tribunal
    properly directing itself will be whether the Appellant's  criminality,
    which is of an undeniably grave nature, should be  determinative  in  a
    properly structured and conducted proportionality  balancing  exercise.
    It is the defects in structure which have given rise to  my  conclusion
    that the two grounds of appeal in this case are made out.

12. In reconsidering the appeal the FtT will be alert  to  the  explanation
    proffered on behalf of the Secretary of State  for  this  extraordinary
    period of delay. This is found in paragraph 37 of the decision  letter.
    I confine myself  to  the  observation  that  it  is  rather  bare  and
    unparticularised  and  is  unlikely  to  qualify  as  an  adequate   or
    acceptable explanation.  That per se will not be determinative  either.
    However the reason why one explores the explanation of delay in a  case
    of this nature is that it is a factor which  may  be  material  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise.

13. For the reasons I have given this appeal succeeds to the limited extent
    that errors of  law  having  been  demonstrated  quite  clearly  in  my
    judgment the decision of the FtT must be set  aside.   This  means  the
    following:

      i) The appeal is remitted  to  the  FtT  and  will  be  reheard  by  a
         differently constituted panel.


     ii) I am not minded to give any further case management directions.


    iii) No question of preserving findings of fact arises.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                    Date:  13 September 2017

