
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00225/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 25 November 2020                |On 03 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           keshan troy fairweather
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, instructed by Consult Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face to
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all  issues
   could be determined in a remote hearing.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Fairweather's
   appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights  claim  following
   the making of a deportation order against him. For the purposes  of  this
   decision, I shall hereinafter refer to the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
   respondent  and  Mr  Fairweather  as  the  appellant,  reflecting   their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  on  22  November  1989.  He
   entered the UK on 6 August 2000, aged 10 years, with six months leave  to
   enter as a visitor and joined his father who had left Jamaica for the  UK
   four years previously after separating from his mother. The appellant was
   granted indefinite leave to remain on 4 February 2003, as  the  dependant
   of his father. His mother came to the UK in 2001 and they  were  reunited
   shortly after.

4. On 26 November 2004, aged 15  years,  the  appellant  was  cautioned  for
   possessing an article with a blade and on 13 July 2005 he  was  cautioned
   for handling stolen goods. On 14 November 2007 he was  convicted  on  two
   counts of possession of cannabis and on 4 September 2010 he was convicted
   for driving whilst disqualified. On 7 October 2010 he was  convicted  for
   failing to surrender to custody. On 3 November 2010 he was convicted  for
   driving whilst uninsured and on 22 February 2013  he  was  convicted  for
   committing an act with intent to pervert the course of  justice  and  for
   using a vehicle whilst uninsured. He was given  a  7  month  sentence  of
   imprisonment and disqualified from driving for 12 months. On 14  December
   2016 he was convicted of wounding/ inflicting grievous  bodily  harm  and
   was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment which was suspended for 18 months.

5. On 5 December 2014 the appellant was notified of an intention to  make  a
   deportation order against him under section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act
   1971, on the grounds that his deportation was deemed to be  conducive  to
   the public good. On 2 February 2015  he  was  served  with  a  Notice  of
   Decision to refuse a human rights claim, certified under section  94B  of
   the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. On 11 February 2015 the
   appellant became the subject of a Deportation Order.

6. Written representations were made on the appellant's behalf  on  6  March
   2015 and 9 September 2015 setting out an Article 8 claim on the basis  of
   his family and private life in the UK with particular  reference  to  his
   relationship with his partner and his son, C, born on 6 February 2010.

7. Following the judgment in Kiarie and Byndloss,  R  (on  the  applications
   of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  UKSC  42,  the
   certified decision was withdrawn and a  fresh  decision  was  made  on  6
   October 2017 to refuse his human rights claim.

8. In that  decision,  the  respondent  referred  to  information  from  the
   Metropolitan  Police  which  was  considered  to  demonstrate  that   the
   appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to the public  good  due
   to his affiliation with people known to be linked to  gang-related  crime
   in the London area. The respondent noted in  particular  the  appellant's
   affiliation with the Beaumont Crew based in Waltham Forest  Borough.  The
   respondent also had regard,  in  addition  to  the  appellant's  criminal
   convictions, to his  non-convictions  for  offences  relating  to  actual
   bodily harm, possessing an offensive  weapon,  robbery,  handling  stolen
   goods, attempted robbery, malicious wounding, possession of cannabis  and
   possession of a firearm and considered him to be a  persistent  offender.
   The respondent accepted that the appellant's son C was under 18  and  was
   British, but did  not  accept  that  he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship with him. It was noted that they did not live together.  The
   respondent accepted that it would be  unduly  harsh  for  C  to  live  in
   Jamaica with the appellant but did not accept that  it  would  be  unduly
   harsh for C to remain in the UK without the appellant if he was deported.
   The respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship with C's mother and considered that he could  not
   meet the requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the  immigration  rules.  As
   for the appellant's private life, the respondent did not accept  that  he
   could meet the requirements  of  paragraph  399A  since,  whilst  it  was
   accepted that he had been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of  his
   life, it was not accepted that he was socially and culturally  integrated
   in the UK or that there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
   integration in Jamaica.  The respondent did not consider there to be very
   compelling circumstances outweighing the appellant's deportation.

9. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart on  2  December  2019.  The  judge
   heard from the appellant,  his  partner,  his  mother  and  his  mother's
   partner. The appellant denied any association with gangs and said that he
   knew some of the people concerned as he had been at school with  some  of
   them, but he had distanced himself from  those  people.  He  had  changed
   whilst in  prison.  He  was  working  in  the  UK  and  he  had  a  close
   relationship with his son and his one-year old daughter. He had been with
   his partner for 13 years, although they  had  had  their  ups  and  downs
   during that time. He had been living  with  his  partner  and  their  two
   children since July 2018.

10. The judge had regard to the 16  incidents  recorded  in  a  Metropolitan
   Police statement and to the appellant's explanation for them.  The  judge
   found there to be a pattern of offending which was more  than  antisocial
   behaviour and involved violence and intimidation and considered there  to
   be a reasonable assumption that the appellant  was  involved  in  a  gang
   rather than just a benign group of friends. The judge did  not  consider,
   however, that the appellant was a  middle  to  high  level  member  of  a
   criminal gang as claimed, but she found that there had been a pattern  of
   offending which had escalated to serious violence in more  recent  years,
   with the last conviction  being  on  14  December  2016.  She  noted  the
   appellant's  frequent  use  of  his  step-brother's  name   when   giving
   information to the police and to his history of serious  violence  toward
   women. She noted that the sentence for the last conviction had included a
   10 year restraining order. On the totality  of  the  evidence  the  judge
   accepted that the appellant had been involved in criminal activity in the
   UK which had caused serious harm or the potential to cause  serious  harm
   and to cause fear in the community and the general public.

11. Turning to the appellant's relationships with his partner and  children,
   the judge noted that he did not live with  them,  but  with  his  father.
   However she accepted that he had family life in the UK on  the  basis  of
   his relationship with  his  partner  and  children  and  that  he  had  a
   significant involvement in the children's lives. She considered  that  it
   would be unduly harsh to expect the children to relocate to Jamaica  with
   the appellant, but did not consider that it would be unduly harsh for the
   children to remain in the UK with  their  mother  if  the  appellant  was
   deported. The  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  lawfully
   resident in the UK for most of his life and  that  he  was  socially  and
   culturally integrated in the UK but found there to be no very significant
   obstacles to his  integration  in  Jamaica.  The  judge  found  that  the
   exceptions to deportation did not therefore apply. However, she concluded
   that  the  appellant  had  dissociated  himself  from  the  lifestyle  of
   involvement with gangs, that there was no evidence that he  was  involved
   in the usual gang related offending, that his offences were  not  on  the
   most serious scale, that he was genuinely remorseful for  his  offending,
   that he did not pose a serious future risk to the  public  and  that  the
   public interest did not require his deportation. She accordingly  allowed
   the appeal.

12. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal. Permission was refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
   granted in the Upper Tribunal on 20 February 2020 on the basis  that  the
   judge had arguably failed to give adequate weight to the public  interest
   in deportation.

13. The matter then came before me to decide if the judge had erred  in  law
   and both parties made submissions.

14. Mr Lindsay relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  which  he  stated  were
   twofold, namely that the judge had  failed  adequately  to  consider  the
   public interest in the appellant's deportation and  that  the  judge  had
   erred  in  her  consideration  of  'very  compelling  circumstances'.  He
   focussed on the first of those and submitted that the judge had failed to
   consider the three reasons given in the deportation decision  as  to  why
   the appellant's deportation was conducive to the public good.  The  three
   reasons were: at [21], that the appellant posed a serious future risk  to
   the public; at [22], that he was  affiliated  with  people  known  to  be
   linked to gang-related crime in London;  and  at  [31],  that  he  was  a
   persistent offender. With regard to the first, the judge  had  failed  to
   consider the high risk the appellant posed to women with whom he was in a
   relationship, given his past domestic violence against former and current
   partners. As for the second, the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  which
   evidence showed that the appellant had disassociated himself  from  gangs
   other than his own evidence  and  had  failed  to  make  any  credibility
   findings in that regard. With regard to the third, the judge had made  no
   finding as to whether the appellant was a persistent offender at the time
   she made her decision.

15. Mr Chohan submitted that the judge had considered all of  those  matters
   and had given reasons for reaching the conclusions that she did. She  had
   identified the very compelling circumstances outweighing deportation. The
   respondent's grounds of  appeal  were  simply  a  disagreement  with  her
   decision.

16. In response Mr Lindsay submitted that the judge had explained, at  [131]
   to [133], which circumstances she considered to be very  compelling,  but
   they were not sufficient to allow the appeal.

Discussion and Findings

17. This is a case where it is important to distinguish between an error  of
   law and what is in fact a disagreement with the judge's decision. That is
   particularly so, as the judge undertook  a  detailed  assessment  of  the
   evidence and set out  the  statutory  provisions  at  each  step  of  her
   findings and indeed Mr Lindsay agreed that that was the case.

18. It seems to me that ultimately  the  Secretary  of  State's  case  falls
   within the latter category of a disagreement  and  that,  whilst  another
   judge may have reached  a  different  decision,  Judge  Bart-Stewart  was
   entitled to reach the decision that she did on the evidence available  to
   her. Mr Lindsay focussed on the ground asserting a failure by  the  judge
   to give adequate consideration to the  public  interest  in  deportation.
   However it seems to me that the judge had the public interest  very  much
   in mind and  it  is  clear  from  her  conclusion  at  [133]  that,  when
   considering all the evidence and relevant factors together, she  gave  it
   the weight that was required.

19.  Mr  Lindsay  submitted  that  the  deportation  decision   gave   three
   particular reasons why the appellant's deportation was conducive  to  the
   public good and that the judge failed to consider all three. The first of
   those was the serious risk the appellant posed to the  community  in  the
   future, as referred to at [21] of the decision  letter.  Contrary  to  Mr
   Lindsay's assertion, however, that was a matter carefully  considered  by
   the judge throughout her decision, where she had particular regard to his
   history of violence towards women with whom he was involved  and  to  the
   risk to his children of witnessing domestic  violence.  Furthermore,  she
   undertook, at [120] to [126], a detailed assessment of the OASys and  BBR
   reports and the nature of the appellant's offending, concluding with  her
   express findings at [132] and [133] as  to  the  risk  he  posed  in  the
   future. I therefore disagree entirely with Mr Lindsay that that was not a
   matter properly considered by the judge, whether or  not  her  conclusion
   was one with which the Secretary of State agreed.

20. The second  reason  was  the  appellant's  affiliation  to  gang-related
   crime. However, again, that was a matter which the  judge  considered  in
   detail and in response to which she  made  clear  and  cogently  reasoned
   findings. At [74] the judge found that the pattern of  behaviour  by  the
   appellant, as set out in the Metropolitan  police  statements,  raised  a
   reasonable assumption that the appellant was involved in  a  gang  rather
   than just a benign group of friends. However, at [87] she found there  to
   be no evidence to show that the appellant continued to be associated with
   those individuals and she went on to find that the subsequent offences he
   had committed were unrelated to gang activity. That is apparent from  the
   judge's findings at [94] and subsequently  at  [119],  [130]  and  [132],
   where she rejected the Secretary of State's claim that the appellant  was
   a high to mid-level leader of criminal gangs or that he was  involved  in
   serious crime and found  no  evidence  of  him  being  involved  in  such
   activity.

21. As for the third reason for the decision being made  by  the  respondent
   that the appellant's deportation was conducive to the public good, namely
   that he was a persistent offender, again I find  myself  in  disagreement
   with Mr Lindsay's submission that the judge failed to  make  findings  in
   that regard. Mr Lindsay directed me to the judge's reference, at [73], to
   the appellant's pattern of  offending  and  to  him  previously  being  a
   persistent offender, and submitted  that  she  had  failed  to  make  any
   finding as to whether he was a persistent offender at  the  time  of  her
   decision. However the judge gave a clear indication that the  appellant's
   pattern of gang-related offending  ended  after  2011,  and  I  refer  in
   particular to [86] and [87] in that regard. At [94] she referred  to  his
   offending thereafter, up until his last offence in March 2015,  taking  a
   different form, namely  using  his  step-brother's  name  and  committing
   domestic violence, and at [120] she again considered the pattern  in  his
   offending and the nature of that offending. At [132] the judge summed  up
   her findings on the appellant's offending. Whether or not the judge  made
   a specific finding on whether the appellant was currently  a  "persistent
   offender", the fact remains that she had  full  regard  to  the  pattern,
   nature and seriousness of his offending and took that into  account  when
   making her decision and she made her decision within the  relevant  legal
   framework in paragraph 398 of the immigration rules.  Mr  Lindsay  relied
   upon the case of Chege ("is a persistent offender") Kenya [2016] UKUT 187
   in submitting that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  make  relevant
   findings, but I find there to be nothing in the judge's assessment of the
   appellant's case to be contrary to the principles and  guidance  in  that
   case.

22. Accordingly I do not find that the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  are
   made out in relation to the judge's assessment of the public interest. As
   for the  second  ground,  the  judge's  assessment  of  "very  compelling
   circumstances", it seems to me that this ground has more  arguable  merit
   than the first, given  that  the  judge  considered  an  accumulation  of
   factors  at  [126]  and  [130]  to  [133]  rather  than  any   particular
   significantly outstanding feature of his life.  Interestingly,  that  was
   not the ground upon  which  Mr  Lindsay  focussed  or  made  his  initial
   submissions. Nevertheless, it is clear from the judge's self-direction at
   [119] and [129] that she had regard to the relevant statutory  provisions
   in section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and
   to the relevant elevated threshold for  'very  compelling  circumstances'
   and that that was what she had in mind  when  assessing  the  appellant's
   overall circumstances. The judge  found  that  the  accumulation  of  the
   appellant's young age at which he came to the UK, together with his close
   family ties in the UK and lack of family ties  and  support  in  Jamaica,
   when set against his offending history and the lack of risk he  posed  to
   the public, were very compelling circumstances. Whilst  it  may  be  that
   another judge could have reached a different conclusion in that regard, I
   do not consider that Judge Bart-Stewart can be said to have erred in  law
   by concluding as she did.

23. Accordingly I find that the judge's decision to  allow  the  appellant's
   appeal was one which was open to her on the evidence available,  that  it
   was made in  accordance  with  the  relevant  legislative  framework  and
   caselaw and that it did not involve any material errors of law.



DECISION

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law requiring the decision to be  set  aside.  The
   decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
   therefore stands.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Date: 26 November 2020
