
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00485/2017
                                                               HU/00501/2017
                                                               HU/00507/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 30 October 2018                   |on 8 November 2018                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     ALK
                                     BM
                                     TM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Read instructed by Iras & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




      1. The appellants are a mother and her two children, all nationals  of
         the DRC, born on 8 February 1966, 2 August 1995 and 10  July  1997.
         They are three of four appellants before the  First-Tier  Tribunal,
         the fourth, MM born on 19 September 2000,  not  being  a  party  to
         these proceedings for the reasons set out below.
      2.  The  First-Tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the  above
         appellants on human rights grounds but allowed  the  appeal  of  MM
         under the Immigration Rules. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
         another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal, the relevant part of  the
         grant being in the following terms:


             (iii)    Altogether there appeared arguable error  of  law  in
             the inconsistent evaluation of  the  Appellants  and  Sponsors
             combined family and private life, with arguably the appearance
             of inconsistency of weight as between the Appellants  deriving
             there appeared  from  a  narrow  finding  concerning  the  4th
             Appellant   meeting   the   IRs,    while    when    assessing
             proportionality  there  appeared  alone  in  respect  of   the
             Appellant mother and  two  older  Appellant  siblings  finding
             against them for failure to meet the IRs, again  on  a  narrow
             ground, but nevertheless concluding also concerning them, that
             although  the  HO  decision  had  not   been   shown   to   be
             disproportionate,   to   split    the    family    would    be
             "unconscionable";


             (iv) In omitting to  dispose  of  the  4th  Appellant's  human
             rights  appeal  which  compounded  by   an   application   for
             permission to appeal  only  in  respect  of  the  above  three
             Appellants, there arises arguably the unresolved status of the
             minor Appellant MM's appeal, HU/00511/2017.  Oddly  given  the
             differential outcomes between the Appellants there appeared to
             have been no cross-appeal on behalf of the Respondent.



Error of law


      3. The Judge makes a  key  finding  at  [42]  of  the  decision  under
         challenge in the following terms:


             42.  I accept that this is a  close-knit  family  with  all  3
                  children living at home in  the  UK  with  their  parents,
                  financially supported by the hard-working  sponsor.  I  am
                  satisfied that they share family life together.  It  would
                  be unconscionable in my view to split the family  and  the
                  Home Office policy in that regard suggest that there would
                  need to  be  strong  grounds  to  justify  separating  the
                  family.


      4. The Judge concluded that the 4th appellant, MM, met the Immigration
         Rules for Leave to Remain and allowed his appeal on that basis. The
         appeals of the remaining appellants  were  not  allowed  under  the
         Rules and in relation to Article 8 ECHR the Judge finds:


             43.  However,  in  considering  whether  the  appeals  of  the
                  remaining appellant should be allowed  outside  the  Rules
                  pursuant to article 8 ECHR  family  and  private  life,  I
                  accept that article 8 is engaged, but not  satisfied  that
                  in applying the Razgar stepped assessment,  of  which  the
                  proportionality balance exercise is the key consideration,
                  that the decision is disproportionate. That is because  in
                  balancing on the one hand the rights of the appellants and
                  the sponsor and on the other the legitimate and  necessary
                  aim of  protecting  the  economic  well-being  of  the  UK
                  through immigration control, I find that the Secretary  of
                  State  has  demonstrated  that   the   decision   is   not
                  disproportionate.  Article  8  is  not   a   shortcut   to
                  compliance with the  Immigration  Rules.  The  appellant's
                  claim  to  be  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of   the
                  Immigration Rules  for  LTR  under  Appendix  FM  and  the
                  financial threshold provisions, but failed or neglected to
                  submit the correct  documentation,  all  of  which  should
                  reasonably have been available. I cannot see that  it  can
                  properly be disproportionate to require  them  to  make  a
                  fresh application, taking care  to  submit  the  specified
                  evidence required under Appendix FM - SE.


      5. The Judge had before him in relation to MM an appeal under both the
         Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR. In allowing the appeal  under
         the Rules the Judge  was  not,  arguably,  required  to  go  on  to
         consider the article 8 aspects although it may have been preferable
         if this aspect had been disposed of briefly, if only to avoid later
         criticism. It was accepted by the advocates that it can be inferred
         from the finding under the Rules that the Judge  would  have  found
         any  interference  with  a  protected  right  disproportionate   in
         relation to MM and to have allowed the appeal on article 8  grounds
         too.
      6. Whilst, as the Judge finds, the appellant's may be able to  make  a
         fresh application for leave to remain supported by the documents to
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules,  the  issue  before
         the Judge was a human rights appeal.
      7. The advocates support the finding of the Judge  that  it  would  be
         unconscionable to split up this family unit.  The  Judge  fails  to
         adequately analyse the findings under article 8 in  relation  to  a
         decision that allows MM to remain in the United Kingdom but  leaves
         the other family members vulnerable to a decision that they  should
         be removed. I find the failure of the Judge to consider matters  as
         a whole and to properly analyse the appeal outside the  Immigration
         Rules amounts to material error sufficient to  warrant  the  appeal
         being set aside.
      8. The  advocates  agree  the  decision  can  be  re-made  today,  the
         respondent's representative accepting the reality of this  case  in
         light of the finding relating to MM and lack of evidence to justify
         any alternative finding, that the remaining family  members  should
         be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  their
         removal will be a disproportionate  interference  with  the  family
         life they enjoy with MM and with each other.
      9. I therefore substitute a decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
         rights grounds in relation to the above-named appellants.




Decision

     10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
         the decision of  the  original  Immigration  Judge.  I  remake  the
         decision as follows. These appeals are allowed.




  Anonymity.


     11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


         I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 31 October 2018












