
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00259/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 November 2016                   |On 10 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                Omaima Bakour
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran of Alex Moran, Legal Representatives
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Syria born on  30  January  1995.  On  15
    March 2014 in Sarakeb in Idlib  where  they  had  both  been  born  she
    married Anas Zakaria, a Syrian national whose date of birth is given as
    1 January 1987.

 2. On 23 November 2011 the Respondent refused the Appellant's  application
    for entry clearance under paragraph 352A of the  Immigration  Rules  to
    join her husband who had left Syria on or about 5 April  2014,  some  3
    weeks after the wedding, and who had had been recognised in the  United
    Kingdom as a 1951 Convention refugee.

 3. On 23 November 2015 the Respondent under reference 1408562 refused  the
    Appellant entry clearance because she was not  satisfied  the  marriage
    between her and her husband who is her sponsor was subsisting.

The First-tier Tribunal proceedings

 4. On 29 December 2015 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds assert the Appellant's marriage is subsisting and  request  the
    appeal be determined on the basis of the papers in  the  Tribunal  file
    and without a hearing. The bulk of them address the issue  whether  the
    marriage  was  genuine  which  the  Respondent  had  already  accepted.
    Reference was made to  the  submission  of  further  evidence,  and  in
    particular mention was made that the  Appellant  and  her  husband  had
    maintained contact on a regular basis by  use  of  WhatsApp  calls  and
    messaging.

 5. On 23 May 2016 the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Row was
    promulgated dismissing the appeal, principally on grounds of an absence
    of any evidence of contact between the Appellant and her husband either
    before or after the marriage. This included the absence of any evidence
    of the contact referred to in the Grounds of Appeal.

 6. On 6 October 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers granted the
    Appellant permission to appeal in the light of what the  Appellant  had
    said about the failure to  file  with  the  Tribunal  evidence  of  the
    WhatsApp calls. The Grounds asserted that  the  failure  to  file  such
    evidence was that of the Appellant's then solicitors.

The Upper Tribunal proceedings

 7. By the time of the hearing a copy of the WhatsApp call records  between
    the Appellant and her husband  for  the  periods  16  December  2014-21
    January 2015 and 9 January-8 June 2016 were in the Tribunal file.

 8. It is not the function of the Tribunal to determine the dispute between
    the Appellant and her former solicitors as to why and who is  to  blame
    for the WhatsApp call records not being before Judge Row. The  fact  is
    that they are now available and the consequence is that the hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal through no-fault of the Judge does not bear the
    hallmark of justice having been not only been done but seen to be done.
    For this reason referred to in the Permission to Appeal,  I  find  that
    there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 9. The parties agreed, in my view rightly  and  properly,  that  the  sole
    issue was the subsistence of the Appellant's marriage and that  in  the
    light of the other evidence the production of records of the  extensive
    daily contact between the Appellant and his wife was sufficient on  the
    balance of probabilities to establish that the marriage  had  been  and
    continued to be subsisting. In  the  circumstances  in  response  to  a
    question from me, each representative confirmed there was no  objection
    to proceeding to deal with the substantive appeal and that  he  had  no
    further submissions.

10. Accordingly, I allow the appeal on immigration grounds.

11. I was informed that after  making  her  application  in  Istanbul,  the
    Appellant had returned to Idlib. I am aware that  this  city  has  been
    fought over by competing factions in the Syrian civil  war  from  early
    days and that it has changed hands on a number of  occasions.  In  this
    light, I would request the Respondent to use all reasonable  endeavours
    to  ensure  the  early  issue  to  the  Appellant  of   the   requisite
    documentation to enable her to travel to the United Kingdom to join her
    husband whom she has not seen since some 3 weeks after their wedding on
    15 March 2014.

Anonymity

12. There was no request for an anonymity order  or  direction  and  having
    considered the appeal I find there is no need for one.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

The 1st-tier Tribunal decision contained  an  error  of  law  such  that  it
cannot stand. The following decision is substituted: -

     The appeal of the Appellant is allowed on immigration grounds


Signed/Official Crest  Date 09. xi. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Notice to the Respondent: Fee Award

The appeal has been allowed and so I have considered  whether  a  fee  award
should be made. It  was  not  suggested  that  the  evidence  of  continuing
contact  between  the  Appellant  and  her  husband  was  produced  to   the
Respondent  who  therefore  had  reason  to  find  the  marriage   was   not
subsisting. The appeal has been allowed on basis of this later evidence  and
in these circumstances it is not appropriate to make to make a fee award.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 09. xi. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
