
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00877/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th February 2018                          |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                     POA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Record, Chambers of C. Record
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by POA, who is  a  child  and  a  citizen  of  Ghana,
    against a decision of Judge Kaler to dismiss his appeal against refusal
    of his application for entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    stepson of a British citizen.  The appeal as it was constituted  before
    Judge Kaler, included an appeal by POA's mother to whom I  shall  refer
    as 'BOT'.

 2. The application of POA was considered by the Respondent under paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules.  This required proof that the husband  of
    BOT was the 'parent' of POA.  It also included a requirement  that  BOT
    had had sole responsibility for his upbringing.

 3. In considering the application under the Rules, Judge  Kaler  concluded
    that BOT had  met  all  the  requirements  of  the  relevant  Rule  for
    admission to the United Kingdom and allowed her appeal on  this  basis.
    She then considered POA's appeal under paragraph 297 of the Immigration
    Rules and concluded that BOT had not had sole  responsibility  for  his
    upbringing. This was due  to  the  fact  that  POA  continued  to  have
    fortnightly contact with his biological father in Ghana.  Finally,  the
    judge considered POA's appeal under Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms
    and concluded that the decision to exclude him from the United  Kingdom
    was proportionate for the reasons  that  are  quoted  at  paragraph  12
    (below).

 4. The Grounds of Appeal argue that (a) the term 'parent' under  paragraph
    297 should be construed so as to include a 'stepparent'  (and  thus  to
    include the husband of BOT) and (b) the mere fact that POA's biological
    father had contact with him ought not to have stood in  the  way  of  a
    finding  that  POA's  mother  had  had  sole  responsibility  for   his
    upbringing, especially given the fact that his  biological  father  was
    content for him to live with BOT and her husband in the United Kingdom.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 18th
    October 2017 in the following terms:

         "The  Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Ghana,   appealed   against   the
         Respondent's decision to refuse his application for entry clearance
         to join his stepfather in the UK together with his mother.   First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Kaler  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  Appellant
         applied for entry clearance together with his mother  to  join  the
         Sponsor, his mother's  husband  and  his  stepfather,  leaving  his
         father behind in Ghana.  Judge Kaler  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
         Appellant's mother but dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  As far as
         I am aware the Respondent has not sought to challenge the  decision
         in  respect  of  mother's  appeal.   Given  the  decision  in   the
         Appellant's mother's appeal and the questions that this raises,  in
         particular that stated at paragraph  28  of  the  grounds,  I  find
         arguable merit in the grounds  raising  Article  8  considerations.
         The first two grounds are of less arguable  merit,  but  I  do  not
         exclude them.  All grounds may be argued."

 6. Paragraph 28 of the grounds, to which Judge Kebede referred,  reads  as
    follows:

         'The effect of the IJ determination is that  the  mother  would  be
         forced to choose between living with her husband  and  living  with
         her child.'

    The first two grounds (those which Judge  Kebede  considered  had  less
    merit) were the ones to which I have already alluded, namely, that  the
    definition of a 'parent' ought  to  be  extended  under  the  Rules  to
    include a 'stepparent', and the fact that POA continued to have contact
    with his biological father in Ghana  ought  not  to  have  precluded  a
    finding of 'sole responsibility' for his upbringing by BOT.

 7. It is easy to lose sight of the fact that  since  5th  April  2015  the
    Tribunal  has  been  confined  to  hearing  appeals  from  refusal   of
    applications based upon the private and family life on the sole  ground
    that the original decision is unlawful under Section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998. It follows that POA was  required  to  establish  that
    refusal of his application for entry clearance is contrary to his right
    to respect for private and family life under  Article  8  of  the  1951
    European Convention of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. Where  an
    application is  made  under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    fulfilment of its requirements is usually  regarded  as  sufficient  to
    demonstrate that the applicant has also established a right to enter or
    remain in the UK under Article 8. This is because  the  stated  aim  of
    Appendix FM is to strike the appropriate balance  between  private  and
    public interests  (see  GEN.1.1  of  Appendix  FM).   In  other  cases,
    however, fulfilment of the requirements  of  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rule is merely a factor to be considered in the overall  assessment  of
    the applicant's rights under Article 8.  This is because Article 8 does
    not impose a general obligation upon the signatory state to respect the
    choice by family members of the country in which to enjoy family  life.
    (Abdulaziz and Others v United  Kingdom  [1985]  ECHR  7).   In  short,
    Article 8 simply imposes an obligation upon a signatory state to permit
    family life within its territory where it cannot reasonably be expected
    to be enjoyed elsewhere.

 8. It follows from the above that the question of whether  the  definition
    of a 'parent' under the Immigration Rules includes a  'stepparent'  was
    wholly immaterial to the  Article  8  assessment  that  the  judge  was
    required to undertake.  This is because the concept of  a  'stepparent'
    is one that focuses upon the relationship of the  person  with  one  or
    other of the biological parents of  the  child,  whereas  the  critical
    question for Article 8 purposes is whether the person has a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with the child akin to  that  of  a  parent.  I
    therefore hold that the judge did not make a material error of  law  in
    this regard.

 9. As far as the second ground is concerned, it seems to me to  have  been
    within  the   reasonable   parameters   of   the   concept   of   'sole
    responsibility' for the judge to have found  that  fortnightly  contact
    between POA and his biological father amounted to participation in  his
    upbringing and that it was not therefore  the  sole  responsibility  of
    BOT.

10. However, for the reasons that I have previously given, neither of these
    matters was critical to the question of whether the  exclusion  of  POA
    from the United Kingdom is contrary to his rights under  Article  8  of
    the Convention. Rather, they  were  simply  factors  to  be  considered
    within an overall assessment under  Article  8  and  the  principles  I
    summarised at paragraph 7 (above). However, before I turn  to  consider
    the judge's approach to that  assessment,  it  is  first  necessary  to
    consider whether the fact that the appeal of BOT  was  allowed  is  one
    that carries  with  it  the  necessary  implication  that  her  marital
    relationship with the Sponsor could not reasonably be  expected  to  be
    enjoyed outside the United Kingdom.  In my view it did not.

11. For the reasons considered at paragraph 7 (above),  fulfilment  of  the
    requirements for entry clearance under Appendix FM is  usually  treated
    as also establishing a right to enter the United Kingdom under  Article
    8 of the Convention.  However, the fact that it is the  policy  of  the
    Secretary of State to grant leave to enter to those  who  are  able  to
    meet the suitability and eligibility requirements of Appendix  FM  does
    not in my judgement inevitably lead to the conclusion that their family
    life cannot reasonably be enjoyed  elsewhere.  I  therefore  reject  Ms
    Record's submission that such a finding was  implicit  in  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal of  BOT.  For  the  same  reason,  I  also
    conclude that the judge's decision in the appeal of BOT  did  not  have
    any significant bearing upon the question of whether POA's rights under
    Article 8 were infringed by his exclusion from the United Kingdom.

12. The judge's assessment of POA's Article 8  claim  is  contained  within
    paragraphs 16 and 17 of her decision:

         "16. I bear in mind the  five  tests  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.
             Family  life  has  not  been  established  in  the  UK.    The
             Appellants wish to live  here  with  the  Sponsor.   Presently
             family life with him is being enjoyed through modern means  of
             communication and visits by the Sponsor.   The  decision  does
             interfere with the right to establish family life in  the  UK,
             but the parties do not have an unfettered right  as  to  where
             family life may be enjoyed.   The  Sponsor's  origins  are  in
             Ghana.  The decision is lawful as it  is  made  in  accordance
             with the  Immigration  Rules.   It  is  in  pursuance  of  the
             legitimate aim of  maintaining  a  fair  but  firm  policy  of
             immigration control.  In assessing  the  balance  between  the
             public interest and the rights of the Appellants under Article
             8(2), I have kept in mind the provisions of  Section  117B  of
             the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         17.  The second Appellant  has  a  father  in  Ghana  who  has  not
             abrogated his responsibilities.  The  Sponsor  and  the  first
             Appellant have chosen to enjoy family life in the UK with  the
             second Appellant, but it has not  been  demonstrated  that  it
             would be unreasonable for family life to be enjoyed in  Ghana.
             The Sponsor is originally from  Ghana  and  he  travels  there
             often.  I do not find that there are any factors that tilt the
             balance of proportionality in the second Appellant's favour."

    The above reasoning might equally have been applied  to  BOT.  However,
    given the concession made by the  Secretary  of  State  in  GEN.1.1  of
    Appendix FM, I can understand why the judge felt constrained  to  allow
    her appeal. This does not however lessen the cogency of  her  reasoning
    in dismissing the appeal of POA. It was in my view open to the judge to
    conclude that the Sponsor,  BOT,  and  POA,  could  all  reasonably  be
    expected to enjoy their family life in Ghana, with  the  added  benefit
    that POA would continue to  enjoy  his  fortnightly  contact  with  his
    biological father. It was not  therefore  the  case,  as  suggested  at
    paragraph 28 of the Grounds of Appeal, that BOT would  have  to  choose
    between living with her husband and her son.

13. It is also said in the Grounds of Appeal  that  the  dynamics  of  this
    particular family are by no  means  unusual  amongst  second  families.
    However, neither are  the  problems  to  which  they  gave  rise.  Such
    problems are in  my  judgement  primarily  a  matter  for  the  parties
    themselves to resolve, and there cannot be any  legitimate  expectation
    that they will be resolved at the expense of immigration controls  that
    are designed to preserve the economic well being of the country.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 2nd March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 2nd March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly

