
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00692/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 July 2017                           |On 2 October 2017                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     LA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan,  born  in  1987.   He  made  an
    application for leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  but  that
    application was refused by  the  respondent  in  a  decision  dated  22
    December 2015.

 2. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego ("the FtJ") on  13  April  2017.   He
    dismissed the appeal.

 3. The further background to the appeal is that the appellant was  granted
    entry clearance on 26 March 2010 (for what purpose is not  clear),  and
    entered into a religious marriage with a  woman,  NH,  in  April  2012.
    They married under UK law in October 2012. She now has indefinite leave
    to remain.

 4. Previously, the appellant had applied for, and been refused,  leave  to
    remain as a student.   After  his  marriage  he  made  a  human  rights
    application which was refused. He appealed against  that  decision  and
    that appeal was dismissed. He then applied in February 2014  for  leave
    to remain as a spouse.  That application was also refused, on 10  April
    2014.  He lodged an unsuccessful application  for  judicial  review  of
    that decision.

 5. On 8 June 2015 the appellant and  his  wife  had  a  son,  AA.   On  16
    November 2015 the appellant made the  human  rights  application  which
    resulted in the decision of 22 December 2015.

    The respondent's decision

 6. The respondent's reasons for refusing  the  application  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds included that  the  appellant  had  used
    deception in relation to an English language test  taken  on  18  April
    2012.  It was therefore concluded that he did not meet the  suitability
    requirements of the Rules.

 7. The respondent decided that it would be reasonable for the  appellant's
    child to leave the UK, paragraph EX.1(a) not  being  applicable.   This
    was because it was concluded that it would be reasonable for the  child
    to leave the  UK,  the  child  being  only  6  months  old,  and  being
    accompanied by his parents, both of whom have experience of  living  in
    Pakistan and who would be able to care for him and help him  to  become
    accustomed to life there.

 8. Similarly, there were no insurmountable obstacles to  his  relationship
    with his wife continuing in Pakistan where she  had  previously  lived,
    including during her formative years.

 9. The respondent concluded that there were no very significant  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into Pakistan and therefore he could not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

    The FtJ's decision

10. The FtJ heard evidence from the appellant and NH.  He said  that  there
    was only one issue of fact that was in dispute and that was whether the
    appellant had used deception in the TOEIC test.  He said that there was
    no specific evidence provided  by  the  respondent,  nor  even  generic
    evidence, on this issue.  He noted that the  appellant  spoke  in  good
    English, and he found that there was no reason "from the hearing today"
    to find that he used a proxy test taker in 2012.

11. He found that the appellant had been an overstayer since 9  April  2012
    and met his wife when he was here illegally.  She  knew  at  all  times
    that he had no right to be in the UK and they  married  less  than  two
    weeks after, to her knowledge, he was ordered to  leave  the  UK.   Her
    reason for marrying was to try to enhance his chance of staying.

12. He found that both the appellant and his wife are fit and  healthy  and
    able to work,  and  both  speak  English.   There  was  family  support
    available in Pakistan  from  the  family  of  the  appellant,  and  the
    appellant has a management diploma.  He concluded that  there  were  no
    obstacles of any significance to his or their return to  Pakistan.   NH
    had been in the UK since she was about  17  but  had  familiarity  with
    Pakistan.  There were no health or other issues with their  child,  who
    at the time of hearing was 19 months old.

13. Nevertheless,  he  found  that  their  child  is  entitled  to  British
    citizenship.  He had been told, but had not  been  shown,  his  British
    passport. The appellant and his wife tried to speak to him  in  English
    but the mother tongue for both is Urdu and that is  the  language  that
    they speak at home amongst themselves.  The  appellant  has  family  in
    Pakistan, being his mother and two siblings whom he described as  being
    "well set up" in life.  The FtJ concluded that the  appellant  had  not
    severed all connection with Pakistan because he is in contact with  his
    family there.  He found that his  wife  does  not  need  his  full-time
    assistance to look after a healthy child of 19 months.

14. He further found that there were no very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant returning to Pakistan, referring to paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).
    There were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant  and  his  wife
    continuing their family life in Pakistan, his wife being a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, speaking the language and being familiar with its culture.

15. So far as their child is concerned, he said that his primary need is to
    be cared for by his parents.  Where the child is cared  for  "does  not
    matter, so long as he is not in hardship".  He found that the child  is
    a citizen of Pakistan as both his parents are citizens of Pakistan.  He
    concluded that it was reasonable for him to grow up in the  country  of
    his parents' birth, in the culture of which he will  in  any  event  be
    raised.  He referred to the decision in MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705, which he had previously recited in detail.

16. He also referred to s.55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009, referring to the child's best interests.  He found that those
    best interests are not the only or primary consideration.  He  referred
    to the child's age, and stated that the child's best interests  are  to
    be with his parents, whether in the UK or Pakistan.  He noted that  the
    system of education may be better in the UK but he  would  nevertheless
    be able to be educated in Pakistan.  His parents are  fit  and  healthy
    and able to work.

17. In terms of proportionality, he took into account that the relationship
    between the appellant and his wife  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the
    appellant's immigration status was  precarious.   He  referred  to  the
    provisions of s.117A-B and D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  That the appellant has a good character and
    speaks English are neutral factors, the FtJ said.  He found that  there
    was no right for the appellant to choose the country in which  to  live
    his married life.  He also referred to the  importance  of  maintaining
    immigration control, and cited the decision  in  Hesham  Ali  (Iraq)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60, again  which
    he had quoted in detail earlier in his decision.

18. He found that the appellant's wife  does  not  earn  over  �18,600  per
    annum, and concluded that Chikwamba v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 40  did not  apply.   Although  the  appellant's
    child is  entitled  to  British  citizenship,  the  child  is  of  dual
    nationality.  He found that the respondent was entitled to decide  that
    their family life, including that of the child, can  be  lived  in  the
    country of which all three  are  citizens.   Alternatively,  the  child
    could remain in the UK with his mother and thus would not be  compelled
    to leave the UK.  The FtJ  made  reference  to  the  decision  in  Ruiz
    Zambrano (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09,  again  which  he
    had quoted earlier in his decision.  He noted  that  it  would  not  be
    ideal for there to be separation of the family, but  that  that  was  a
    matter for the child's parents to decide.  He  again  referred  to  the
    knowledge of the appellant and his wife of the appellant's  immigration
    status when they married,  concluding  that  they  had  to  accept  the
    consequences.

19. He referred to the decision in SF and others (Guidance, post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC) and what was said  at  [11]  about  the
    Tribunal applying similar or identical processes in relation to matters
    such as "reasonableness" as those employed by the Secretary  of  State.
    However, he said that this was not a course followed by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan).

20. At [61] the FtJ said that the appellant's  child  is  not  required  to
    leave the UK, as his mother could stay, and she has the right, but  not
    the obligation, to remain in the UK.   Referring  to  the  respondent's
    guidance,  he  noted  that  it  states  that  it  would  "usually"   be
    appropriate to grant leave to an appellant in these circumstances,  but
    not necessarily always.  He referred  to  the  appellant's  immigration
    history as being a weighty matter, and the  importance  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control.  He concluded  that  the  appellant  had
    deliberately failed to leave the UK when required  to  do  so  and  had
    married within two weeks of being served with  notice  that  he  should
    leave.  He then made and lost a human rights  application  and  despite
    his appeal being dismissed, he still did not leave  the  UK.   He  said
    that it  does  not  become  "a  fait  accompli"  that  someone  in  the
    appellant's situation should  be  allowed  to  remain  "by  the  simple
    expedient of having a child".  He concluded that the decision that  the
    appellant's removal  is  proportionate,  was  in  accordance  with  the
    respondent's guidance but alternatively, [12] of SF and others  clearly
    envisaged a departure from the guidance.

21. He found that even if the decision that the appellant should leave  the
    UK was not in accordance with Home Office guidance, on  the  facts  the
    appellant's case is distinguishable from SF and others for two reasons.
     Firstly, the child in SF and others was the youngest sibling  but  the
    only British citizen, and there was an issue of sibling separation that
    is absent from the appellant's case.  Secondly, it was  found  in  that
    case to be unreasonable for the child to leave the UK.  In the case  of
    this appellant's child, that child  is  still  very  young  and  it  is
    reasonable for him to leave the UK as  part  of  a  nuclear  family  of
    three.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

22. The grounds of appeal are not altogether coherent, but I shall  attempt
    to summarise  them.   In  essence,  it  is  contended  that  the  FtJ's
    conclusion that it was proportionate for the appellant's child to leave
    the UK was in error.  It is suggested that the FtJ's analysis of SF and
    others was incorrect.

23. Reference is made in  the  grounds  to  the  respondent's  guidance  in
    relation to whether it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the UK.  It is contended that the FtJ's  reasons
    for concluding that it would be reasonable are flawed.  The decision in
    PD and Others (Article 8-conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT
    108 (IAC) is relied on in terms of what the  word  "reasonable"  means.
    It is argued that the word "reasonable" in paragraphs 276ADE, EX.1, and
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act is to be given its normal meaning and it does
    not import any sort of exceptionality threshold.

24. It is also argued that there has been "no consideration"  of  the  best
    interests of the child.  Various unfocused propositions are advanced in
    that respect in the grounds.  It is suggested that the FtJ  had  failed
    to consider s.117 of the 2002 Act "properly".

25. In submissions on behalf of the appellant it was  initially  said  that
    the grounds were relied  on.   However,  my  having  pointed  out  that
    aspects of the grounds are rather unfocussed, it was then said that  it
    was "Article 8" that was relied on.  I indicated to Mr Singh on  behalf
    of the appellant that I would assess the appeal on  the  basis  of  his
    submissions only, rather than in terms of the grounds generally, unless
    any aspect of  the  grounds  was  specifically  relied  on.   Mr  Singh
    accepted that as the basis of his submissions.

26. He relied on the respondent's guidance, reproduced in the  decision  in
    SF and others.  It was submitted that the  FtJ  failed  to  apply  that
    guidance, and the principle in that case.  There were no strong reasons
    to depart from the guidance.  Given that the  appellant's  child  is  a
    British citizen, it would be unreasonable to expect his parent to leave
    the UK.  The FtJ's attempt to distinguish this case from SF and  others
    was wrong.

27. Reference was made to [45] of the FtJ's decision,  being  the  argument
    advanced on behalf of the appellant in reliance on SF and others.   The
    respondent's decision that the  suitability  requirements  were  to  be
    applied against the appellant was found to be incorrect, and  therefore
    the respondent's guidance in terms of "reasonableness" meant  that  the
    appeal should have been allowed.  The respondent's guidance had  to  be
    applied unless there were exceptional circumstances.

28. It was then suggested that the Secretary of State did not know  at  the
    time of the decision that the appellant's child was a British  citizen.
    However, as I pointed out, that fact is referred to in the respondent's
    decision at [43] and [45].

29. On behalf of the respondent the 'rule 24' response was relied  on.   In
    effect, it was argued that the FtJ was entitled to dismiss  the  appeal
    having regard to the appellant's blatant disregard for the  Immigration
    Rules.  Alternatively, the child  could  remain  in  the  UK  with  his
    mother, as the FtJ had suggested.  The FtJ did  take  the  respondent's
    guidance into account.  Although a different judge may have come  to  a
    different conclusion, that does not establish an error of law.

    Conclusions

30. At [15] of the decision letter it is said that it is accepted  that  if
    the appellant met the suitability requirements of the Rules,  he  would
    meet the eligibility  requirements  of  paragraphs  R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii).
    The FtJ resolved the suitability issue in the appellant's favour,  that
    issue having arisen in relation to the allegation of deception  in  the
    obtaining of an English language qualification.

31. However, the respondent did not  accept  that  paragraph  EX.1  applied
    because it was concluded that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's child to leave the UK.  As already indicated, it is not the
    case, as was suggested on behalf of the appellant before me,  that  the
    respondent did not appear to recognise that the appellant's child was a
    British citizen.  Recognition of that fact is  evident  from  [43]  and
    [45] of the respondent's decision.

32. In SF and others, the respondent's guidance, found in  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction - Family  Migration -  Appendix  FM,  Section
    1.0(B) "Family Life as a Partner or Parent and Private Life - 10  year
    Routes" dated August 2015, is set out.  That  decision  refers  to  the
    guidance document as being an "important" document containing important
    guidance about whether it would be unreasonable  to  expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the UK.  The relevant parts of the guidance,  as
    set out in SF and others, are as follows:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
         Zambrano.

         ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

         .    criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;

         .    a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any  separation.  If
         the decision maker is minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where  appropriate,  advice
         may be sought from the Office of the  Children's  Champion  on  the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to  inform  the
         decision."

33. The contention on behalf of the appellant  before  me  in  submissions,
    that the FtJ's decision fails to engage  with  that  guidance,  is  not
    correct.  The FtJ referred to it in detail at [60]-[64].   Whether  the
    FtJ's decision was taken in conformity with the  guidance,  is  another
    matter.

34. The respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain, in fact, does  not
    itself refer to the guidance.  Formerly, this could  have  resulted  in
    the FtJ deciding that the respondent's decision was not  in  accordance
    with the law.  That is no longer a permissible ground of appeal.   What
    SF and others  decides  however,  is  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance should be taken into account by a tribunal, where it  applies.
    Although I note the headnote to that decision, it is worth quoting [12]
    from which the headnote is drawn.  There it is said as follows:

         "12. On occasion, perhaps where it has more  information  than  the
             Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a case
             is exceptional, the Tribunal may find a reason  for  departing
             from such guidance. But where there is  clear  guidance  which
             covers a case where an assessment has to be  made,  and  where
             the guidance clearly demonstrates  what  the  outcome  of  the
             assessment would have been made by the Secretary of State,  it
             would, we think, be the normal practice for  the  Tribunal  to
             take such guidance into account and to apply it  in  assessing
             the same consideration in a case that came before it."

35. I do not propose to attempt to summarise the respondent's guidance, for
    such a summary would inevitably fail to reflect all the elements of the
    guidance.  Suffice to say, it is clear that the British citizen  status
    of a child is of great significance.  In addition,  the  conduct  of  a
    parent or primary carer is also to be taken into account,  in  the  way
    set out in the guidance.

36. It is apparent that the FtJ was  well  aware  of  the  content  of  the
    guidance, albeit that he did not quote it verbatim.  He was fully aware
    that the appellant's child is a British citizen,  with  all  that  that
    entails.  None of the submissions on behalf of the  appellant  indicate
    that any material fact was left out of  account  by  the  FtJ  when  he
    considered whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the UK, or indeed  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  for  him  to  be
    separated from  the  appellant.  Similarly,  no  extraneous  factor  is
    identified as having been taken into account by the FtJ.

37. The FtJ quite properly referred to the appellant's immigration history,
    which the guidance allows for.  He was entitled to conclude as  he  did
    at [61] that the immigration history of the  appellant  was  a  weighty
    matter.   He  found  that  the  appellant  "deliberately  flouted"  the
    direction for his removal by failing to leave the UK in July 2012  when
    his application for leave to remain as a student was refused.  Not only
    did he not leave, he had married within two weeks of being served  with
    that notice to leave, and despite having  had  a  human  rights  appeal
    refused, he still did not leave (in 2014).

38. He referred to the fact that  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    spouse, and the birth of his son, occurred "in the  certain  knowledge"
    that he had no right to be in the UK and had been ordered to leave.  He
    referred at [47] to the appellant's  wife's  reason  for  their  having
    married two weeks after he was ordered to leave, as  being  to  try  to
    enhance his chance of staying in the UK.

39. Finally, the FtJ did not  in  fact  regard  it  as  necessary  for  the
    appellant's British citizen child to leave the UK  because  he  pointed
    out that he could stay in the UK with his mother.  As he said  at  [59]
    it was for the parents to consider what was the better choice for their
    son.  He plainly referred to, and  had  regard  to,  the  child's  best
    interests.

40. The contention that the FtJ failed  to  engage  with  the  respondent's
    guidance is manifestly not made out.

41. I am not satisfied that there is any error of law on the  part  of  the
    FtJ,  whose  decision  was  taken  in  full  conformity  with  relevant
    authority and applicable guidance. His decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a of law.  Its decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  therefore
    stands.











Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

In order to  protect  the  anonymity  of  the  child  referred  to  in  this
decision, unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Upper   Tribunal   Judge    Kopieczek                               29/09/17


