
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/00562/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd June 2017                             |On 20th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         ms donna lyn caslila pasion
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 14th  July  1974.
    The Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on a multi-entry student
    visa on 18th January 2010 valid until 31st May 2011.   Her  immigration
    history thereafter is set out in a notice served by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 30th June 2015.  On 29th April 2015 a  decision  was  made  to
    refuse an application for leave to remain on the grounds  that  removal
    would not place the United Kingdom in breach of  its  obligation  under
    the Human Rights Act 1998 and to give directions under  Section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 for the removal  of  the  Appellant
    from the United Kingdom.  That decision was confirmed by way of  Notice
    of Refusal dated 16th May 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Isaacs sitting at Hatton Cross on  12th  September  2016.
    In  a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  4th  October  2016  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and
    on human rights grounds.

 3. The Appellant, on 18th October 2016 lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 9th February 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Andrew
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Andrew  noted  that  the  grounds
    complained as to the judge's decision in relation to Article 8 and that
    he was satisfied that there was an arguable error of law in that regard
    in that the judge did  not  consider  the  Razgar  questions,  did  not
    consider  Section  117B  and  he  did  not  consider  the  question  of
    proportionality.  Further, in relation to  EX.2  no  consideration  had
    been given as to whether there would be  significant  difficulties  for
    the Appellant's partner in continuing family life outside the UK.

 4. On 24th February 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.

 5. The Appellant's appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Kekic  sitting
    at Field House on 21st April 2017.  In a decision and reasons dated 4th
    May 2017 Judge Kekic found that there were material errors  of  law  in
    the decision, set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    the decision to be remade by the Upper Tribunal at a later date.

 6. The judge did not, I am advised by the legal representatives, in making
    the finding that there was a material error of law  give  any  specific
    directions.  However in reaching  her  decision  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic at paragraph 14 of her findings and conclusions on the  error  of
    law set out the basis upon which she set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  What  however  appears  to  be  accepted  by  the
    parties is that the factual matrix of this case  remains  the  same  in
    that the relationship between the Appellant and her Sponsor Mr Lawrence
    was genuine and subsisting since 2011  and  that  they  enjoyed  family
    life.  The issue as Judge Kekic pointed out, was  whether  that  family
    life could continue in  the  Philippines  or  whether  there  would  be
    insurmountable obstacles so doing and reliance was  placed  on  EX.1(b)
    and EX.2 of Appendix FM.  However at paragraph 14 of her decision Judge
    Kekic concluded that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  take
    account of  some  of  the  factors  listed  in  Mr  Lawrence's  witness
    statement which formed part of the evidence before her and that she had
    apparently failed to  appreciate  that  Mr  Lawrence  had  never  lived
    outside the UK, that his home was here, that he  had  a  twin  brother,
    that he had no connection with the Philippines, was unfamiliar with its
    culture and language and that as a middle aged man  he  is  fearful  of
    uprooting himself and starting a new life in a foreign country.   Judge
    Kekic concluded that all those factors were set out  at  length  in  Mr
    Lawrence's statement and that the judge had also given no regard to the
    fact that the relationship was formed when the Appellant  was  lawfully
    in the UK.

 7. Judge Kekic concluded that had the judge considered these  matters  and
    had she  focused  on  whether  Mr  Lawrence  would  face  very  serious
    hardships in moving to the Philippines to continue his relationship and
    had she conducted a balancing exercise taking account of matters  under
    Section 117B as she was required to do if she had proceeded to a second
    stage analysis, she may have reached a different  outcome.   For  those
    reasons she found that  her  omissions  were  material  and  that  they
    amounted to errors of law and set aside her decision.

 8. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to reconsider.  The
    Appellant appears by her  instructed  Counsel  Mr  Khan.   Mr  Khan  is
    familiar with this matter having appeared before Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kekic at the last hearing.  The Secretary of State appears by his  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Jarvis.

 9. At paragraph 15 of her findings  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic
    firstly commented that further oral evidence and submissions  would  be
    of assistance when determining whether  the  Rules  had  been  met  and
    whether or not family life could be continued in  the  Philippines  and
    secondly that the matter should be relisted for hearing before her at a
    date to be arranged.  Two matters flow from  those  findings.   Firstly
    this matter is listed before me and not Judge Kekic.  It is the view of
    both legal representatives that I should hear the appeal  and  secondly
    they are both satisfied this matter can be dealt with by  consideration
    of documents within a supplementary bundle,  which  I  have  given  due
    consideration to, and by taking on board submissions made by both legal
    representatives.  Mr Khan indicated  he  does  not  wish  to  call  for
    further oral testimony from the Appellant or the Sponsor and Mr  Jarvis
    indicates he has no further basis upon which he wishes to cross-examine
    them.  I am  consequently  satisfied  that  the  appeal  can  therefore
    proceed before me on a rehearing and be by way of submission  only  and
    that the factual matters agreed previously are ones  which  will  stand
    and which I will take into account.

Submissions/Discussions

10.  Mr  Jarvis  submits  the  legal  test  to  be  considered  is  one  of
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the  UK  and
    he acknowledges that  the  law  is  now  to  be  found  in  R  (on  the
    application of Agyarko) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11.  He acknowledges that if an Appellant fails to meet the
    requirements under the Immigration Rules of paragraph EX.1 then  he/she
    may still succeed if there are compelling circumstances.  He reminds me
    of the view expressed at  paragraph  48  of  Agyarko  that  the  public
    interest is in the removal of persons who are in the UK  in  breach  of
    immigration laws in  all  but  exceptional  circumstances  sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh the individual's interest in family life with  a
    partner in the UK unless there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family
    life with that partner continuing outside the UK.  He points  out  that
    the insurmountable obstacles test is a demanding one and  submits  that
    in this case it has  not  been  breached.   He  acknowledges  that  the
    parties are devoted to each other and that there would be disruption to
    family life but that none of these factors show that in this case  that
    the test has been met.  Further so far as considering the case  outside
    the Rules he submits that it is very difficult to see how the Appellant
    can win and the approach adopted in Agyarko indicates this.  Further he
    contends that reliance upon Section 117B does not assist the  Appellant
    even if she is financially independent in that it does not add  to  her
    claim to private life or  detract  from  the  public  interest  and  he
    submits that the section does apply because since  2012  the  Appellant
    has not lawfully been in the UK.  It is consequently his argument  that
    the Appellant does not meet the required threshold and that this is not
    a Chikwamba case because the Immigration Rules are not met.   He  asked
    me to dismiss the appeal.

11. Mr Khan in response submits that the Supreme Court  has  not  addressed
    the issue of compelling circumstances in Agyarko and refers me  to  the
    requirements  to  be  met  for  entry  clearance  as  a  partner  under
    Immigration Rule EC-P.1.1 and that the Appellant meets the  suitability
    requirements for entry clearance to be found at Section  S-EC  and  the
    financial requirements set out at paragraph E-ECP.3.1.  In  support  of
    that he takes me to  the  documents  in  the  Appellant's  supplemental
    bundle to be found at pages 20 to 40A.  Further he  contends  that  the
    Appellant meets the English language requirements referring me  to  the
    English language certificate to be found in  the  supplementary  bundle
    and points out again  that  the  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor is not challenged.   Therefore,  he  submits,
    that the Appellant is bound to succeed providing she can  overcome  the
    insurmountable  obstacles  test.   He  submits  that  if  I  give   due
    consideration to paragraphs 32 to 41 of Agyarko that there will  be  no
    public interest to be achieved in refusing the appeal and therefore  it
    should succeed.  His argument therefore is that given that  the  appeal
    could succeed under entry clearance it would not  be  proportionate  to
    remove the Appellant from the  UK  and  that  she  should  consequently
    succeed outside the Rules although the main thrust of his  argument  is
    that the Appellant actually succeeds under the  Rules  relying  on  the
    test of compelling circumstances.

12. Mr  Jarvis  in  response  submits  that  reference  to  the  compelling
    circumstances test is incorrect and that the view expressed by Mr  Khan
    is inconsistent with the law in that providing a  sensible  reason  has
    been given as to why an appeal  might  not  succeed  then  the  correct
    approach is to move away from Chikwamba and it follows that  Mr  Khan's
    arguments are both wrong and would negate  public  interest  under  the
    Rules.

Findings and Analysis of the Law

13. The Supreme Court in Agyarko considered whether the  requirements  that
    an applicant who formed a relationship with a British citizen whilst in
    the UK unlawfully must demonstrate  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  be
    granted leave to remain in  the  UK  under  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    compliant with Article 8 of the European Convention  of  Human  Rights.
    The court held that the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse  the
    illegal Applicant's  leave  to  remain  despite  their  having  British
    partners was lawful and the  court  viewed  the  test  of  there  being
    "insurmountable obstacles" to  a  continuing  relationship  should  the
    right to remain be refused to be a stringent one.  However it did  hold
    that the Immigration Rules are compatible with Article 8 of the ECHR as
    this provision requires there to  be  a  fair  balance  struck  between
    competing  public  and  individual  interests  involved,   applying   a
    proportionality test and the  policies  adopted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  In the same way the  balance  would  involve  the  question  of
    whether there are "exceptional circumstances" precluding refusal of the
    right to remain and that this is within the remit of the  Secretary  of
    State.

14. It is clear from Agyarko that interpretation of  the  phrases  such  as
    "insurmountable obstacles" both have to be looked  at  practically  and
    realistically  and  that  the  test  is  a  stringent   one.    Further
    precariously formed family life must be interpreted  to  mean  that  it
    will be likely only in exceptional circumstances that the  non-national
    family member's removal results in a breach of Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    It is against this background that it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the
    circumstances of this case.  It is accepted that the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor are in an ongoing relationship and have been for several years.
     It is  accepted  after  some  argument  that  the  Sponsor  meets  the
    requirements for provision of  financial  support.   The  Secretary  of
    State submits that there is no  actual  expectation  that  the  parties
    should separate meaning that they would go to another country  to  live
    together.  It is submitted by Mr Khan that the insurmountable obstacles
    test is met in  that  the  Sponsor  has  his  home  here,  that  he  is
    unfamiliar with the language of the country where he would be  required
    to relocate to, that he has his parents and two brothers here, that  he
    has spent all his life here, that his culture is here  in  the  UK  and
    that he would lose his job with little immediate prospect of  obtaining
    further employment if he leaves the  UK.   The  question  is  therefore
    whether family life can continue in the Philippines  or  whether  there
    will be insurmountable obstacles to doing so and reliance is placed  on
    EX.1(b) and EX.2 of Appendix FM.  I agree with the  view  expressed  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic when finding a material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge namely that EX.1.(b)  applies
    because the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
    British citizen.  EX.2 of Appendix FM goes on to define  insurmountable
    obstacles as being:

    The very significant difficulties which will be faced by the  Applicant
    or their partner in continuing their family life together  outside  the
    UK and which could  not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious
    hardship for the Applicant or their partner.

15. Each case is fact-sensitive.  I take on board the issues listed  in  Mr
    Lawrence's witness statement namely that he had never lived outside the
    UK, that his home is here, that he has a  twin  brother,  that  he  has
    elderly parents here, that he has no connection with  the  Philippines,
    that he is unfamiliar with its culture  and  language  and  that  as  a
    middle aged man he is fearful of uprooting himself and starting life in
    a foreign country.  I acknowledge this is a case where the relationship
    was formed when the Appellant was lawfully in the UK.  However  I  find
    myself despite all these factors constrained by an analysis of the case
    law.  It is clear from many authorities  reiterated  Agyarko  that  the
    insurmountable obstacles test is a stringent one.  I am  not  satisfied
    that the above reasons put forward both in witness  statements  and  by
    applying a proportionality test that  in  this  case  circumstances  in
    which refusal would result would be an unjustifiably harsh  consequence
    to the Appellant.

16. Taking into account all these additional factors referred to  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kekic I still find as  a  matter  of  law  the  decision
    reached by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, Judge Isaacs was correct  and
    that this is a couple who are relatively free of practical ties to  the
    United Kingdom.  They have  no  children  here.   They  have  no  adult
    dependants and they do not own a  home.   The  Sponsor  has,  as  Judge
    Isaacs concluded, training in a career  which  is  flexible.   In  such
    circumstances taking into account all the other factors mentioned above
    I find that there are no insurmountable obstacles to them relocating to
    the Philippines and that the Appellant does not meet paragraph EX.1(b).
     Further I agree with the submission made by Mr Jarvis that this is not
    a Chikwamba scenario considering that the Immigration Rules are not met
    and I further conclude this is not  a  case  amounting  to  exceptional
    circumstances which mean the  Appellant's  case  should  be  considered
    outside the Rules.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed both under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  the
European Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 17th July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
