
[pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: HU/00502/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 March 2018                   |On 22 March 2018                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                        Miss RUVIMBO RENEILO NAKHOZWE

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr M A Rana, Counsel

                                          (instructed by Sabz Solicitors
LLP)

For the Respondent:      Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction




      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  Designated
           First-tier Tribunal Judge  McCarthy  against  the  decision  and
           reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore who had dismissed the
           Appellant's  entry  clearance  appeal  (made  on  human   rights
           grounds) in a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  9  November
           2017.




      2.    The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 15  March  1999
           and thus already an adult by the time her appeal was heard.   As
           noted already, the appeal lay  on  human  rights  grounds  only,
           although that question had to be approached through the lens  of
           the Immigration Rules, as the judge did.  The judge  found  that
           the Appellant had been left in the care of her aunt at  the  age
           of  two  when  her  mother  and  sponsor  left  Zimbabwe.   Sole
           responsibility had not been shown to have  been  exercised,  the
           evidence was deficient in various ways and there were no serious
           or compelling family or other considerations.




      3.    Permission to appeal was granted to the Appellant by  Designated
           Judge McCarthy because he considered that the judge had arguably
           erred by  failing  to  consider  the  fact  of  the  Appellant's
           sponsor's chemotherapy treatment and its impact on  her  ability
           to travel.  It was arguable that  this  made  exclusion  of  the
           Appellant disproportionate in Article 8 ECHR terms.




      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice opposing the appeal was filed by the Respondent.







      Submissions




      5.    Mr Rana for the Appellant (who had appeared  below)  applied  to
           adduce  evidence  which  had  not  been  before  the  First-tier
           Tribunal judge.  This evidence was said  to  relate  to  current
           circumstances.  The tribunal declined to admit  fresh  evidence,
           not available to the trial judge, as it  could  not  affect  the
           determination of whether there had  been  a  material  error  of
           law.  Such evidence could be considered  in  the  event  that  a
           rehearing was found necessary.




      6.    Mr Rana also sought to expand the grounds of appeal  to  include
           what he submitted was an obvious R v the Secretary of State  for
           the Home Department, ex p Robinson  [1997]  3  WLR  1162  point,
           namely the relationship between the Appellant and her  two  half
           siblings in the United Kingdom.  The tribunal demurred that  the
           point was obvious, let alone material.   There  had  been  ample
           opportunity to seek permission  to  appeal  on  any  potentially
           material issue arising from the judge's  decision  and  reasons,
           and it was too late to raise what on its face was a weak point.




      7.    Mr Rana went on to submit that there was a complete  absence  of
           any mention of the Appellant's sponsor's  medical  condition  in
           the  determination.   The  judge  had  faithfully  recorded  the
           existence of such evidence and also the submissions made on  the
           point, but then had said nothing further.  That was  a  material
           error of law and the decision and reasons should  be  set  aside
           and remade.  This issue was explored further  in  dialogue  with
           the tribunal, by reference to the  medical  evidence  which  had
           been before the trial judge.




      8.    Ms Isherwood for the Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
           material error of law.  The medical evidence had not shown  that
           the Appellant's  sponsor  was  unable  to  travel  to  Zimbabwe.
           Indeed, the evidence showed that the sponsor  had  made  a  good
           recovery from a  potentially  serious  situation.   The  onwards
           appeal should be dismissed.




      9.    Mr Rana reiterated the submissions he had made earlier by way of
           reply.  There were no adequate reasons.







      Discussion - no error of law




      10.   It is the case that the trial judge recorded  both  the  medical
           evidence which referred to the Appellant's  sponsor's  operation
           and subsequent chemotherapy, and the submissions made by counsel
           for the Appellant, yet made no clear reference to that  evidence
           in his decision and reasons.   The  remainder  of  the  decision
           addressing  the  other   issues   is   careful   and   thorough.
           Ordinarily, such a failure would amount to an  obvious  material
           error of law, which would necessitate a rehearing.




      11.   Nevertheless, error of law though that was, it was  not  in  the
           event material as it had no bearing at all on the judge's secure
           primary  finding,  namely  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
           demonstrate that her sponsor had sole  responsibility  for  her.
           The judge gave full  and  detailed  reasons  for  reaching  that
           finding.  They are unimpeachable and must stand.




      12.   The difficult point is whether the judge's references  to  there
           being no compelling family or other  considerations  which  made
           the  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  (see  [29]  of  the
           decision) and that there were no exceptional circumstances  (see
           also [29]) were  sufficient  to  address  the  evidence  of  the
           sponsor's condition as it stood at  the  time  of  the  hearing.
           (The tribunal has no need to go into  the  specific  details  of
           that condition here, which would be intrusive.)   There  was  no
           medical  report  for  the  judge  to  consider,  however  brief.
           Instead there were a series of medical notes.  These showed that
           the Appellant had been operated on as a medical  emergency,  had
           recovered well and was receiving chemotherapy as a  conservative
           and preventative measure.   There was  no  suggestion  that  the
           Appellant  was  unfit  to  travel  reasonably  soon   or   faced
           significantly reduced life expectancy.   Nothing to the contrary
           was identified to the tribunal either at first  instance  or  in
           the Upper Tribunal.




      13.   Thus, highly desirable though fuller reasons from the judge  may
           have been, it was open to him to find on that evidence  that  it
           neither amounted to a compelling consideration or an exceptional
           circumstance.  The medical evidence  was  insufficient  to  have
           warranted such  a  conclusion.   That  of  course  by  no  means
           suggests that sympathy is not due to  the  Appellant's  sponsor,
           but appeals cannot be decided  on  sympathy,  only  on  evidence
           which can properly be found to be compelling or exceptional  for
           these purposes.




      14.    For  these  reasons,  the  tribunal  finds  that  limited   and
           inadequate reasons provided by the judge did not to  a  material
           error of law.  The outcome of the appeal  would  have  been  the
           same, as the evidence fell short of  what  was  required  for  a
           different result.  The onwards appeal must be dismissed.







      DECISION




      The onwards appeal is dismissed




      The original decision and reasons stands unchanged








      Signed
      Dated  20 March 2018







      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell

