
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
HU/00868/2016

                                                   HU/00879/2016

                                                   HU/00884/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham|          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 2nd November 2017                  |          On 24th November 2017       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                              Fatoumatta Dampha
                                Lamin Dampha
                               Bubacarr Dampha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - GAMBIA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr N Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Royal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of  Gambia.   They  are  siblings  born
    respectively on 19th December 2000, 29th December 2002, and  2nd  March
    2005.  They applied for entry clearance  to  come  to  the  UK  as  the
    children of the Sponsor, their father, Lang Dampha.  Those applications
    were refused for the reasons given in Notices of  Decision  dated  11th
    December 2015.  The Appellants appealed, and their appeals  were  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham
    on 12th June 2017.  She decided to dismiss  all  the  appeals  for  the
    reasons given in her Decision dated 14th  June  2017.   The  Appellants
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 8th  September  2017  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained  a  material
    error on a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The issue in the appeal initially was whether the Appellants  satisfied
    the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) of HC 395.   The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal because she was not satisfied that the Sponsor had
    the sole responsibility for the upbringing of the Appellants.  This was
    because owing to the inconsistencies in the evidence the Judge was  not
    satisfied that the Appellants' mother lived far away from them  in  the
    Gambia.  The Judge went on to consider the Appellants' Article  8  ECHR
    rights.  The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  as
    she found the decision of the Respondent  to  be  proportionate  mainly
    because she  found  there  was  insufficient  income  to  maintain  the
    Appellants adequately.  The Judge  did  not  consider  the  Appellants'
    Article 8 ECHR rights outside of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  she
    found no exceptional circumstances pertaining to the Appellants.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Ahmed argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in coming to  these  conclusions.   He  referred  to  his  Skeleton
    Argument and argued that the Judge had not considered all the  relevant
    factors in deciding that the Sponsor had not  had  sole  responsibility
    for the upbringing of the Appellants.  According to the  Decision,  the
    Judge made only a brief analysis  of  the  evidence  relating  to  this
    subject.  She had made no finding on the fundamental point  as  to  who
    had made the important  decisions  concerning  the  upbringing  of  the
    Appellants.   The  Judge  had  not  made  any  consideration   of   the
    alternative provision contained in paragraph 297(f) as to whether there
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  made
    the exclusion of the Appellants undesirable.  Mr Ahmed went on  to  say
    that the Judge should not have  considered  the  Sponsor's  ability  to
    maintain the Appellants adequately in the UK as this had  not  been  an
    issue in dispute at the hearing.  In any event, the Judge had erred  in
    law in her finding in this respect because she had used the net  income
    of the Sponsor and had not considered his savings.  Finally,  Mr  Ahmed
    submitted  that  there  had  been  no  proper  consideration   of   the
    Appellants' Article 8 rights outside of the Immigration Rules.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    there had been no such errors  of  law.   The  Judge  directed  herself
    appropriately and made findings open to her upon the evidence.  She had
    dealt with the issue of sole responsibility.  She  had  been  right  to
    consider the maintenance of the Appellants in the context of Article  8
    ECHR rights as this was required by  the  provisions  of  Section  117B
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The net income available
    to the Appellants was the correct test.  The Judge correctly calculated
    that the income available for the maintenance  of  the  Appellants  was
    less than the relevant Income Support levels.  Finally,  as  the  Judge
    found that there were no exceptional circumstances  pertaining  to  the
    Appellant, she was right not to consider the Appellants' Article 8 ECHR
    rights outside of the Immigration Rules.

 6. I find no material error of law in the decision of the  Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  It is apparent from what the  Judge  wrote
    at paragraph 7 of the Decision that  she  did  not  find  credible  the
    Sponsor's evidence as to the issue of sole responsibility.  This was  a
    decision open to the Judge on the evidence before  her  and  which  she
    satisfactorily  explained  by  referring  to  inconsistencies  in   the
    evidence.  This being the case, it cannot be said that  the  Appellants
    had discharged the burden of proof of showing that the Sponsor had  had
    sole responsibility for their upbringing.  It is true  that  the  Judge
    did not specifically refer to the  alternative  provision  set  out  in
    paragraph 297(i)(f) of HC 395, but this does not amount to  a  material
    error of law because  the  Judge  found  that  there  was  no  adequate
    maintenance for the Appellants in the UK and that  therefore  paragraph
    297(v) was not satisfied.  The Judge correctly calculated  the  ability
    of the Sponsor to adequately maintain the Appellants by using  his  net
    income.  The Judge took into account the Sponsor's savings at paragraph
    11 of the Decision.

 7. There was no error  of  law  in  the  Judge  taking  into  account  the
    inability of the Sponsor to adequately maintain the Appellants  in  the
    Article 8 ECHR proportionality assessment.  As Mrs Aboni said, this  is
    a requirement of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  Finally, as  the  Judge
    found no exceptional circumstances and therefore it was not an error of
    law for her to fail to deal with the Appellant's Article 8  ECHR  human
    rights outside the Immigration Rules in accordance with the decision in
    MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

 8. For these reasons I find no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 23rd November 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

