
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00194/2015
                                                               HU/00195/2015
                                                               HU/00196/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2016                      |On 23 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                      v

                                     S N
                                     A N
                                     R N
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Bellara, counsel instructed by Clearview
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     This is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department against a decision made  by  Judge  of  the  First  tier
         Tribunal Davies on 24 November 2015, allowing  the  appeal  by  Mrs
         Nauman and her two daughters against a decision refusing them entry
         clearance as the dependants of a PBS migrant.  I  shall  henceforth
         refer to the former Appellants as the Claimants. The first Claimant
         is a national of Pakistan, born on [ ] 1978. The second  and  third
         Claimants are daughters of the marriage,  which  took  place  on  1
         November 2005, born on [ ] 2007 and [ ] 2009 respectively.

    2.     The applications for entry clearance were made on 27 April  2015
         and refused on 11 May 2015 on the basis that the main Claimant  did
         not meet the requirements of paragraph  391C(d)  and  (e)  viz  the
         marriage was subsisting and the parties intended to live with  each
         other permanently.

    3.     The appeals came before Judge of the First tier Tribunal  Davies
         for hearing on 24 November 2015, when he heard  evidence  from  the
         Sponsor and in a decision  promulgated  on  30  November  2015,  he
         concluded that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was  not
         in accordance with the law because there was no evidence whatsoever
         at the date of the application for the Respondent to conclude  that
         the first Claimant was not the Sponsor's wife nor that  the  second
         and third Claimant were not his children; the Sponsor had indicated
         the existence of his wife and children in his application for entry
         clearance to the United Kingdom as a student  and  gave  clear  and
         reliable evidence that he has  visited  them  in  Pakistan  on  two
         occasions since he came to the United Kingdom. The Judge  expressly
         found at  [13]  that  the  whole  of  the  Sponsor's  evidence  was
         credible. He found at [14] that the Claimants satisfied him that at
         the date of application they met the requirements of the Rules. The
         Judge further found at [15] in the alternative that the  Claimant's
         Article 8 rights were breached by virtue of the  decision  and  did
         not further the public interest in relation to immigration  control
         nor that it was in any way proportionate.

    4.     The Secretary of State for the Home Department sought permission
         to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in-time on  3  December  2015.  The
         grounds in  support  of  the  application  assert  that  the  Judge
         misdirected himself in law on material matters, in particular, that
         owing to the amendments to the NIAA 2002 on 5 April 2015, the  only
         available ground of appeal  open  to  the  Claimant  was  that  the
         decision was unlawful on human rights grounds and it was  not  open
         to the Judge to allow the appeal on the basis that the decision was
         not in accordance with the law. It was further  asserted  that  the
         Judge failed to provide adequate  reasons  as  to  why  the  appeal
         should succeed with reference to  Article  8  of  ECHR.  The  Judge
         failed to engage with the delay in registration of  the  children's
         births and the absence of evidence of a subsisting relationship and
         the evidence that there was post dated the decision.  Moreover,  no
         regard was had to the statutory considerations pursuant to  section
         117B of the NIAA 2002.

    Hearing

    5.     At the hearing before me, Mr Duffy made submissions in line with
         the grounds of appeal and invited me to set aside the decision.

    6.     In his submissions,  Mr  Bellara  on  behalf  of  the  Claimants
         submitted that the First tier Tribunal Judge did have  jurisdiction
         pursuant to section 82(1)(b) of the NIAA 2002.  He  submitted  that
         the Sponsor showed the First tier Tribunal Judge his full  passport
         which has exit and entry stamps prior to the application being made
         in April 2015 and the Judge had regard to those. He submitted  that
         at [13] the Judge took into account that the Sponsor  mentioned  in
         his previous application to enter the United Kingdom as  a  student
         that he was married with children and that this goes to credibility
         and family life and it was open to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
         evidence was credible. In respect of the Article 8 claim at [15] Mr
         Bellara accepted that perhaps the findings could have been expanded
         upon but his submission was that the evidence and law have been set
         out quite correctly and the Judge clearly  found  family  life  was
         established and looked at proportionality. He submitted that  there
         was no material error of law.

    7.     Mr Duffy replied briefly that the Judge erred  in  allowing  the
         appeal under the Rules; he did not take account of  the  fact  that
         the Sponsor  is  here  with  limited  leave  and  this  was  not  a
         settlement  application,   which   must   have   some   impact   on
         proportionality and he failed to consider s117B of the  NIAA  2002,
         which must also undermine the Judge's assessment. At [15] the Judge
         finds family life was established  but  does  not  make  any  other
         findings and arguably he does not even engage with  proportionality
         because he has allowed the appeal wrongly inside the Rules.

    Decision

    8.     The primary ground of appeal is that relating  to  jurisdiction.
         The version of section 84 of the NIAA 2002 in force since  5  April
         2016 provides that: "(2) An appeal under section 82(1)(b)  (refusal
         of human rights claim) must be  brought  on  the  ground  that  the
         decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."
         The notices of refusal make no reference to the  limited  right  of
         appeal but simply refer to the right of appeal pursuant to  section
         82(1) of the NIAA 2002.  The  version  in  force  at  the  date  of
         decision, pursuant to section  15  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,
         provides for the right of appeal to the First  tier  Tribunal  only
         where the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection  or
         human rights claim or has revoked protection status. By  virtue  of
         2015 No. 371 (C. 18) The Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No.  4,
         Transitional and Saving Provisions and Amendment)  Order  2015  the
         amendments that came into force on 6 April 2015  do  not  apply  to
         decisions made after that date  in  respect  of  applications  made
         before that date. However, the Claimants  made  their  applications
         for entry clearance on 27 April 2015, after the coming  into  force
         of the amended section 82 of the NIAA 2002. Thus it is clear  as  a
         matter of law that the jurisdiction  of  the  First  tier  Tribunal
         Judge extended only to whether or not the Claimants  could  succeed
         on human rights grounds.

    9.     It follows that the First tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  law  in
         allowing the appeals on the basis that the decision  by  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer was not in accordance with the law as  there  was
         no jurisdiction to allow the appeals on that basis.

    10.    The First tier Tribunal Judge further allowed the appeals in the
         alternative on the basis of Article  8  of  ECHR.  However,  in  so
         doing, the Judge failed to have regard to or make any  findings  in
         respect of the mandatory statutory provisions set  out  at  section
         117B of the NIAA 2002, regarding the public interest in  Article  8
         cases, which makes reference to the ability to  speak  English  (2)
         and be financially independent (3). I further agree with  Mr  Duffy
         that the Judge's reasons as to the proportionality or otherwise  of
         the decision are inadequate. The only consideration  given  by  the
         Judge to Article 8 and proportionality is at [15] of  the  decision
         and there is a complete lack of both reasons and analysis as to why
         the Judge found that the decision was not proportionate, but simply
         a finding that he was satisfied that family  life  was  established
         between the Sponsor and the Claimants.

    Notice of decision

    11.    For the reasons set out above, I find that the decision of First
         tier Tribunal Judge Davies contains material errors of law so  that
         it cannot stand. The appeal by the Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department is allowed with the effect that it is remitted  back  to
         the First tier Tribunal for a re-hearing de  novo  before  a  Judge
         other than First tier Tribunal Judge Davies.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

22 August 2016

