
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/00676/2018
     HU/00680/2018
     HU/00682/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 November 2018                            |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  Mr g p g
                                   mrs m a
                                 master a g
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Symes, Counsel instructed by Shah Jalal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nepal who appealed under Section  80  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002   against   the
    respondent's decision dated 5 December 2017 to refuse  the  appellant's
    leave to remain in the UK.  In a decision promulgated on 2  July  2018,
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  O'Hagan  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellants appeal with permission on the following grounds:

         Ground 1 - Qualifying child.  It was argued that the  judge  failed
         to identify what the  powerful  reasons  were  which  overcame  the
         starting point that leave should be granted to a  qualifying  child
         as identified by Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

         Ground 2 - It was submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         found the family's residence to have been precarious at all  times.
         It was submitted that the judge failed to apply Agyarko [2017] UKSC
         11, at paragraph 53 which provided that:

             "One can, for example, envisage circumstances in which  people
             might be  under  a  reasonable  misapprehension  as  to  their
             ability to maintain a family life in the UK, and  in  which  a
             less stringent approach might therefore be appropriate."

Background

 3. The first appellant was born in 1977 and is now 40 years old.  His wife
    the second appellant was born on 23 July 1980 and  is  now  37.   Their
    eldest child, the qualifying child A, was born on 27 March 2008 and was
    10 years old at the date of hearing.  The second child AG was born on 2
    March 2016 and is 2 years old.  The first appellant entered the  UK  on
    21 December 2009 as a student with leave valid from 11 December 2009 to
    31 July 2012.  The second appellant entered the  UK  on  24  July  2010
    having been granted leave as a dependant and has remained  ever  since.
    The third appellant entered the United Kingdom on 25 March 2011 and was
    granted leave as a dependant and has lived in the UK since  that  date.
    The fourth appellant was born in the United Kingdom and has  lived  his
    entire life here.  Following an initial grant of  leave  the  appellant
    was twice granted further leave his last leave due to expire on  6  May
    2017, the first appellant having  submitted  an  application  two  days
    prior to his expiration of this leave in the form  of  a  human  rights
    application.   It  was  not  disputed  that  the  appellants  had   not
    overstayed and had an unblemished immigration history.

Submissions

 4. Mr Symes submitted that the critical issue was  one  of  standing.   He
    relied on pages 47 and 50 of the appellants' bundle which contained the
    qualifying child's school reports which included that in 2015  evidence
    that  the  qualifying  child  was  doing  well  and  making  'fantastic
    progress'.  At page 50, in 2016, this was being built  on  and  he  had
    made  very  strong  friendship  groups  and  was   good   at   building
    relationships and had a wide variety of friends to play with.

 5. Mr Symes relied on paragraph 5 of the grounds for permission to  appeal
    (which  cited  paragraph  46  of  MA  (Pakistan)  and  submitted   that
    significant weight should have been given to this  evidence.   Although
    the judge at [18] acknowledged that anxious  consideration  was  to  be
    given to  the  evidence,  at  [30]  to  [33]  the  judge  rejected  the
    contention that qualifying child did not speak Nepalese  and  found  at
    [34]  that  the  qualifying  child  had  formed  a  certain  level   of
    friendships but found that his best interests were likely to  lie  with
    his parents.  Mr Symes submitted that what the judge did  not  do,  was
    apply MA (Pakistan ) and the judge failed to state  what  the  powerful
    reasons were to justify departure.  In respect of ground  2,  Mr  Symes
    relied on what was said in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58, in  approving  what
    was said by Sales LJ I the court of Appeal, that  although  a  tribunal
    should have regard to the consideration that little  weight  should  be
    given to private life, it is possible that this may be overridden in an
    exceptional case by particularly strong features of the private life in
    question. It was Mr Symes' position that the judge was  wrong  to  hold
    precariousness against the family unit.

 6. Mr Symes made submission on KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  He  submitted
    that Paragraph 6 of that case poses the correct test:

         "The appellant's case in short, is that in determining  whether  it
         is reasonable to expect a child to  leave  the  UK  with  a  parent
         (under Section 117B(6)), or whether the effect  of  deportation  of
         the parent on the child would  be  "unduly  harsh"  (under  Section
         117C(5)) the Tribunal was concerned only with the position  of  the
         child, not with the immigration history and conduct of the parents,
         or any wider public interest factors  in  favour  of  removal.   By
         contrast the Secretary of State argues that both provisions require
         a balancing exercise, weighing any  adverse  impact  on  the  child
         against  the  public  interest  in  proceeding  with   removal   or
         deportation of the parent."

 7. Mr Symes submitted that it was slightly unhelpful that the case focused
    on paragraph 117C but he conceded that paragraph 18 indicated  that  it
    must  be  considered  where  the  parents,  apart  from  the   relevant
    provision, are expected to be; since it would  normally  be  reasonable
    for the child to be with  them.   Looking  at  [34]  and  [35]  of  the
    decision and reasons, Mr Symes submitted that the judge had not  looked
    at what the powerful reasons were although he accepted that  the  judge
    had looked at the qualifying child's integration and friendships.

 8. It was Mr Symes' submission that there was a threshold error  and  that
    on reconsideration KO would have to be looked at.   He  submitted  that
    against the appellant was that there was no real expectation of status,
    but in their favour was that the actions of the parents  could  not  be
    held against the child in assessing reasonableness.

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that at [26] the judge cited MA (Pakistan) and at
    [28] indicated that he had to take into account that the  matters  were
    intensely fact sensitive but that the starting point  was  that  unless
    there were powerful reasons to the contrary, leave should be granted.

10. Mr Whitwell submitted that it also had to be considered, that  at  [26]
    the judge directed himself as to Section 117B.  The judge  went  on  to
    look at all the factors including finding at [33] that  the  qualifying
    child speaks both English and Nepalese, at [34] that his  private  life
    is family centric; although he has friends and  will  have  the  social
    integration that most children of that age will have  achieved,  he  is
    still at an age (10) where the primary focus of his life will be within
    his family.  The third part the  judge  looked  at  was  at  [35],  the
    qualifying child's schooling, noting at [38] that there  will  be  some
    disruption but it will be limited and  that  he  is  still  in  primary
    education and several years away from sitting GCSEs/A levels.  At  [40]
    the judge finds that the  qualifying  child's  best  interests  are  to
    remain in the UK but did not consider that  the  weight  of  that  best
    interests is any greater than any other child of that age.

11. Mr Whitwell relied on the judge's findings at [41] and  indicated  that
    the relevant  test  was  the  one  considered  in  EV  (Philippines)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874;  the
    question was how emphatic the answer  is  in  relation  to  those  best
    interests.

12. In respect of KO (Nigeria) Mr Whitwell submitted that the Supreme Court
    found that the best interests' assessment has to be  conducted  in  the
    real world.  At paragraph 12 of KO, the Supreme Court referred  to  the
    respondent's guidance and that  the  best  interests  of  children  are
    generally to remain with their parents.   Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that
    this is precisely what the judge took into consideration.  Paragraph 17
    of KO (Nigeria) considered that guidance  and  where  the  parents  are
    expected to be and the conclusion at [19] was that the best  interests'
    assessment must be conducted on the basis of the facts as they  are  in
    the real world.

13. It was Mr Whitwell's submission that the judge took  into  account  the
    private  life  and  education  and  considered   both   the   children,
    considering the younger child at [42].  He submitted that, although  it
    was not clear to what extent the powerful reasons test survived KO, the
    judge's reasoning was sufficient to  provide  those  powerful  reasons,
    specifically that the answer to the best interests assessment, in  this
    case, was not a particularly emphatic one.

14. In relation to ground 2, Mr Whitwell relied on paragraph 53 of  Agyarko
    and submitted that the paragraph in question was not  talking  about  a
    younger child, as in this case and the circumstances in this  case  are
    not  ones  where  the  family  might  have  been  under  a   reasonably
    misapprehension as to their ability to maintain life in  the  UK  might
    have expected to have remained.

15. Mr Whitwell submitted that page 74  of  the  respondent's  guidance  is
    relevant and these are factors which Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the
    judge took into consideration: for  example,  who  will  the  child  be
    living with, whether there are wider ties, whether they can integrate.

16. In reply Mr Symes submitted that looking at pages  74  and  75  of  the
    respondent's guidance, the factors also include  whether  the  children
    has attended school in the country of return, which these children have
    not.  Mr Symes further submitted that there was nothing in the  judge's
    findings about the disruption to their schooling, at [33] and [35], and
    essentially the judge had viewed this from the wrong prism.

Conclusions

17. I am satisfied  that  the  judge  followed  the  correct  approach  and
    directed himself correctly including to MA (Pakistan).  This is  not  a
    case where the judge found that it was reasonable for the  children  to
    depart because of any wrong doing  by  their  parents  but  rather,  as
    identified by the Supreme Court at paragraph 51 of KO  (Nigeria),  this
    was also a case where the:

    'parents' conduct was relevant in that it meant that they had to  leave
    the country.

    ...it was in that context that it had to be considered whether  it  was
    reasonable for the children to leave with them.  Their  best  interests
    would have been for the whole family to remain here.  But in a  context
    where the parents had to leave, the natural expectation would  be  that
    the children would go with them, and there was nothing in the  evidence
    reviewed by the  judge  to  suggest  that  that  would  be  other  than
    reasonable.'

18. Similarly, in the case  before  me,  the  judge  found  that  the  best
    interests would have been for the children to remain in the UK, but  in
    the context where the parents had  to  leave,  as  although  the  judge
    accepted that  the  family  have  an  unblemished  immigration  history
    ([49]), they have no other right to be in the UK other than their claim
    under Article 8, the natural expectation therefore would  be  that  the
    children would go  with  them.   There  was  nothing  in  the  evidence
    reviewed by the judge which would suggest that  it  would  be  anything
    other than reasonable.

19. The judge applied the correct  approach  to  both  the  best  interests
    assessment and the consideration of reasonableness and considered  that
    in the real world, where it was reasonable for the qualifying child  to
    relocate, including given his relative young age and that the level  of
    social integration was that which most children of his age  would  have
    achieved but that his life and primary focus will have  been  with  his
    family.   There  was  no  substantive  challenge  to  those   findings,
    including that the best interests of children is to be in the  care  of
    their parents in general.

20. There was also no error in that reasonableness assessment, in the judge
    taking into consideration that with the  support  of  his  parents  the
    qualifying child A could adjust to life in Nepal and  the  judge  fully
    took into consideration, including at [35]  that  whilst  he  may  lack
    confidence it is not uncommon for children to have to relocate and make
    new friends.  It is implicit in the judge's findings that he took  into
    account that the children had not attended school  in  the  country  of
    return.  The judge took into account (contrary to Mr Symes' submission)
    that removal could be detrimental to the child's  education  (at  [36])
    but found, and there was no challenge  to  that  finding,  that  whilst
    there would be some disruption it would be limited including given that
    he was still in primary education and several years away from GCSEs and
    A levels.

21. I am of the view that the judge followed exactly the approach which  is
    now advocated by KO (Nigeria) taking  into  account  all  the  relevant
    factors when assessing reasonableness (including as set out in the non-
    exhaustive  list  in  the  respondent's  guidance)  and  assessed   the
    situation of both the qualifying child and the appellants  in  general,
    in the real world.  In those circumstances, there were powerful reasons
    for the appeals not to succeed.

22. In respect of the second ground this was not  pursued  with  any  great
    force and I agree with Mr Whitwell that this is not a  case  where  the
    appellants  could  ever  have  any   misapprehension,   reasonable   or
    otherwise, about their ability to maintain a family  life  in  the  UK.
    Although Mr Symes relied on Rhuppiah and it is true  that  the  'little
    weight'  provision  may  be  overridden  in  an  exceptional  case   by
    particularly strong features of the private life  in  question,  as  is
    evident  from  the  judge's  findings,  this  was  not  a   case   with
    particularly  strong  private  life   features,   notwithstanding   the
    qualifying child.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  21 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed, no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  21 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
