
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00442/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 26 August 2021                         |On: 3 September 2021           |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             latjor james mayul
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was Microsoft Teams.  A  face-to-
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all  issues
   could be determined in a remote hearing.

2. The appellant is a citizen of South Sudan, born on 2 September  1972.  He
   appeals, with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
   dismissing his human rights appeal.

3. The appellant applied, on 5 November 2019, for entry clearance to the  UK
   under Appendix FM of the immigration rules on the  basis  of  his  family
   life with his partner, Nyibol Dim Deng, with whom he wished to settle  in
   the UK. The appellant had previously been issued with a family visit visa
   from 19 July 2012, but had been refused entry clearance as a spouse on 24
   October 2017.

4. The respondent refused the application  on  4  December  2019  under  the
   financial  and  English  language   eligibility   requirements   of   the
   immigration rules. With regard to the former, the respondent  noted  that
   the appellant had insufficient funds as cash savings in  the  six  months
   prior to  his  application  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  under
   paragraph E-ECP.3.1 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules. With  regard
   to the latter the respondent noted that the appellant's IELTS certificate
   had expired as it was only valid for two years before his application and
   therefore the appellant could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  E-
   ECP.4.1 of Appendix FM. It was considered  further  that  there  were  no
   exceptional circumstances which would render refusal a breach of  Article
   8.

5. The appellant appealed against the refusal decision and  his  appeal  was
   heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wilson  on  4  March  2021.   The
   appellant's sponsor and  his  sponsor's  brother  and  sister  gave  oral
   evidence at the  hearing  before  the  judge.  It  was  accepted  by  the
   appellant that he could  not  meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the
   immigration rules on the basis of his cash savings, but  he  relied  upon
   overseas income - namely dividends and access  to  retained  profits  and
   assets - from his companies, primarily South Flight Services Limited,  an
   aviation company. It was further accepted by the appellant that  overseas
   income would not normally count towards the  requirements  of  E-ECP.3.1,
   but reliance was placed upon paragraphs GEN.3.1 and GEN.3.3  and  it  was
   submitted that since there were exceptional circumstances  sufficient  to
   engage GEN.3.1, the appellant could rely on that income as  amounting  to
   "sources of income, financial support or funds" under paragraph  21(A)(2)
   of Appendix FM-SE. Those exceptional circumstances included the fact that
   the appellant's children were British citizens and that the  older  child
   was autistic. The appellant submitted  that  the  financial  requirements
   were therefore met under paragraph GEN.3.1. The appellant also submitted,
   in relation to the English language requirements,  that  the  immigration
   rules did not provide  a  two-year  limit  on  the  validity  of  a  test
   certificate.

6. The judge accepted that the witnesses were all credible.  He  also  found
   that it was in the best interests of the children for  the  appellant  to
   enter and remain in the UK and for them to be brought up by both parents,
   but he found that that was not sufficient to tip  the  balance  when  the
   requirements of the immigration rules were otherwise not met.  The  judge
   accepted that the appellant was the owner operator of an aviation company
   in which he and the sponsor held shares and that they drew an income from
   the company but he did  not  accept  that  the  income  was  sufficiently
   reliable for the purposes of paragraph 21A(2)(c). Accordingly  the  judge
   did not accept that the financial requirements of the  immigration  rules
   were met, pursuant to GEN.3.1 or otherwise. Although the  judge  accepted
   that the evidence produced by the appellant was sufficient to satisfy the
   English language requirements of the immigration rules he did not  accept
   that the requirements of GEN.3.2 were met as he did not consider that the
   respondent's decision resulted in "unjustifiably harsh consequences"  for
   the appellant, the sponsor and their children. As for Article  8  outside
   the rules, Judge Wilson concluded that the public  interest  in  refusing
   the appellant's application outweighed the family's Article 8 rights  and
   that the decision was therefore proportionate and lawful. He  accordingly
   dismissed the appeal.

7. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on
   the basis that Judge Wilson had erred by according  more  weight  to  the
   financial issues than to the best interest of the children. Reliance  was
   placed upon  the  decision  in  SD  (British  citizen  children  -  entry
   clearance) Sri Lanka [2020] UKUT 43 and it was asserted  that  the  judge
   had erred by distinguishing the appellant's circumstances from that case.
   It was also asserted that the judge's conclusions about  the  appellant's
   overseas income was contrary to the clear wording of paragraph 21A(2)  of
   Appendix FM-SE.

8. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 4 May  2021  on  the
   following basis:

"It is arguable that having found that it was in the best interests of the
children that the appellant be granted leave to enter, it is not entirely
clear what the reasons were for tipping the proportionality balance against
the appellant."

9. The respondent opposed the appeal in her Rule 24 response and the  matter
   then came before me.

10. The hearing was held remotely and the appellant's legal  representatives
   joined in order to explain  that  they  had  not  received  a  notice  of
   hearing, that they had been unaware of the  hearing  and  that  they  had
   therefore  not  instructed  counsel  to  represent  the  appellant.   The
   Tribunal's records showed, however, that the notice of hearing  had  been
   properly served by email on 20 July 2021. I enquired of Mr Walker  if  he
   had a position  to  take  on  the  appeal  such  that  I  could  consider
   proceeding in the absence of counsel for  the  appellant  as  opposed  to
   adjourning the hearing. Mr Walker advised me that, whilst he was aware of
   the rule 24 response, he considered the grant of permission  to  be  made
   out and that the judge had erred in law for the reasons set  out  in  the
   grant of permission. He also indicated that, on the basis of the evidence
   available, the appeal  could  be  allowed  and  he  would  not  have  any
   objection to me allowing  the  appeal  in  the  appellant's  absence  and
   without adjourning the hearing. There was naturally no objection to  that
   course  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  I  therefore  considered  it
   appropriate to  proceed  to  determine  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of
   instructed counsel in light of Mr Walker's helpful concession.

11. It seems to me that, given the positive findings made by  the  judge  in
   relation to the appellant's and sponsor's circumstances, the evidence  of
   the appellant's income from his aviation company, the  inability  of  the
   sponsor and children to relocate to South Sudan to join the appellant and
   the best interests of the children, no proper reasons were given  by  the
   judge as to why  the  proportionality  balance  was  tipped  against  the
   appellant. Indeed, I have to agree with the  grounds  at  [13]  that  the
   judge's findings within the immigration rules, in relation to GEN.3.1  of
   Appendix FM involved an unduly restrictive  interpretation  of  the  word
   "reliable" in relation to the source of income or funds available to  the
   appellant for the purposes of paragraph 21A(2)  of  Appendix  FM-SE,  and
   that no proper reasons were therefore given as to why the requirements of
   the immigration rules were not met on that basis. For those  reasons  the
   judge's conclusions and decision has to be set aside.

12. For the same reasons it seems to me that, on the basis of  the  evidence
   available,  the  appellant  has  demonstrated  an  ability  to  meet  the
   requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  under  GEN.3.1  and  that  the
   requirements  of  GEN.3.2  have  also  been  shown  to  be  met  in   the
   alternative. As such, there is no public interest in refusing  him  entry
   clearance to join his spouse and children in the UK.  Given  Mr  Walker's
   helpful concession I see no need to  make  any  more  detailed  findings.
   Accordingly I allow the appellant's appeal  on  Article  8  human  rights
   grounds.

DECISION

13. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error  of  law  and  the
   decision  was  set  aside.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing   the
   appellant's appeal.




Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  26 August
2021
