
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00006/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MICHAEL COLARELLI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. J. Plowright, counsel (Direct Access)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Respondent, who was born on 6 August 1958,  is  a  citizen  of  the
    United States of America. He was granted  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom for the purpose of  settlement  with  his  mother,  who  was  a
    British citizen, on 22 April 1963. He has lived here ever since and has
    only visited America on one occasion since his arrival.

 2. He initially lived and attended school in Liverpool and then  moved  to
    Bournemouth in 1977 and has lived there ever since. He has  four  adult
    children and six grandchildren, who are all British citizens.

 3. On 11 February  2012  the  Respondent  was  arrested  and  subsequently
    charged with one count of producing a Class B  drug,  namely  cannabis,
    and one count of abstracting electricity. He entered a guilty  plea  at
    his Plea and Case Management Hearing in 2013 and 10th June 2014 he  was
    sentenced to 18 months imprisonment.  In  his  sentencing  remarks  Mr.
    Recorder Lowe said that in his view the Respondent's  co-defendant  had
    been the prime mover in their criminal enterprise.

 4. On 9 December 2014 the Respondent was served with a  deportation  order
    and the Appellant certified his claim on the basis that  he  would  not
    face serious irreversible harm if he  were  to  be  deported  from  the
    United Kingdom before his appeal hearing took place. He challenged this
    certificate in a pre-action protocol letter, dated 19 January 2015, and
    on 24 February 2015 the Appellant granted him an  in-country  right  of
    appeal.

 5. The Respondent appealed on 9 March 2015 and his appeal was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood on 6  July  2015.  The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision on 30 July 2015 and on 28  October  2015
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes granted her permission to appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

 6. Paragraph 398(b) of the Immigration Rules applied to the Respondent  as
    he had been convicted of an offence for which he had been sentenced  to
    less than four years but at least 12 months. Therefore, in  his  appeal
    he had relied on the exception in paragraph 399A which states that:

         "This paragraph applies ... if

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of
         his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported".

 7. There was no dispute between the parties that  he  had  had  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom since 1963, when he arrived as  a
    four year old and that this was more than fifty years  ago.  Therefore,
    it was agreed that he meet the requirements of sub-paragraph (a). First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood also  found  at  paragraph  33  of  his
    decision that the Respondent had "fully established that  he  has  been
    part of UK society since the age of  4,  starting  from  his  education
    here". He did so after considering  a  544  page  bundle  submitted  on
    behalf of the Respondent. This included  witness  statements  from  his
    children, ex-partners, siblings, other relatives and  friends;  all  of
    which indicated that  he  was  significantly  socially  and  culturally
    integrated into their lives and the life of his community.

 8. Between paragraphs 28 and  33  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Youngerwood
    carefully considered this evidence. In her first ground of  appeal  the
    Appellant argues that the  Respondent's  offence  clearly  demonstrates
    that the Respondent is not fully integrated socially and culturally  in
    the UK. However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  specifically  addressed
    this issue in detail in paragraphs 29 to 30  of  his  decision,  taking
    into account the Appellant's own guidance on this issue. The conclusion
    he reached was in accordance with this guidance and I agree with First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Heynes, who stated when granting  permission,  that
    this ground amounted to a mere disagreement with the Judge's findings.

 9. In paragraphs 34 to 39 First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood also  gave
    comprehensive and careful consideration  to  whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to the Respondent being able  to  integrate  into
    the United States of America after an absence of more than fifty years.
    His conclusion that there were was one that was clearly open to him  on
    the evidence before him and I  agree  with  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Heynes that the Appellant's second ground of appeal was no more than  a
    disagreement with the Judge's findings.

10. The Appellant's third ground of appeal  was  that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Youngerwood had failed to consider three powerful public interest
    considerations, which were relevant in a deportation appeal. The  first
    of  these  considerations  was  whether  there  was  a  risk  that  the
    Respondent would re-offend.  However, the Judge did remind  himself  in
    paragraph 17 of his decision that the pre-sentence report  prepared  on
    the Respondent considered that the likelihood of  his  reoffending  was
    low and in paragraph 33 he noted that his offending was  restricted  to
    one time period and there was no known history of any other  offending.
    Therefore, I find that the Judge had taken this factor into account. It
    was also clearly open to the Judge on the evidence  to  find  that  the
    risk of  the  Respondent  re-offending  was  low  and  the  Appellant's
    assertion that he may re-offend in the future  if  he  faced  financial
    difficulties amounted to mere speculation.

11. The Appellant also submitted that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    considered the role  of  deportation  as  an  expression  of  society's
    revulsion at serious crimes and in building public  confidence  in  the
    treatment of foreign citizens who have committed serious crime and  the
    need for deterrence. However, in paragraph 29 of his decision the Judge
    did look at the various factors capable of adding weight to the  public
    interest in deportation and noted that none of these  were  present  in
    the Respondent's case. In  paragraph  32  he  also  correctly  directed
    himself that cases are fact-sensitive and  then  proceeded  to  balance
    aspects of the Respondent's  history  against  the  fact  that  he  had
    committed a serious crime.

12. Furthermore, paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules is an exception to
    the presumption in paragraph 398(b) that deportation  is  conducive  to
    the public good where a person has been sentenced to at least 12 months
    and less than four years imprisonment. In MF (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 the Court of  Appeal
    held that the Immigration Rules now include a complete code for dealing
    with deportation cases involving Article 8 of the ECHR and that  it  is
    only where an applicant or appellant does not  fall  within  that  code
    that it is necessary to consider  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances to consider his or her case outside the Rules.

13. At the error of law hearing the Appellant relied on KMO (section 117  -
    unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT  00543  (IAC),  in  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal agreed that  "the  Immigration  Rules,  when  applied  in  the
    context of the deportation of a foreign criminal, are a complete  code"
    but also found in relation to paragraph 399 that it is  also  necessary
    to have regard to the matters to which the Tribunal must have regard as
    a consequence of the provisions of section  117C  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. .

14. Section 117C(1) states that the deportation of foreign criminals is  in
    the public interest and section 117B(2) states that  the  more  serious
    the offence committed by a foreign criminal, the greater is the  public
    interest in the deportation of the criminal". First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Youngerwood explicitly referred  to  section  117C  in  the  concluding
    paragraph of his decision, where  he  noted  that  sub-section  117C(4)
    replicates paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules and also acts as  an
    exception to the general presumption in favour of deportation where  an
    individual has been sentenced to at least 12 months and less than  four
    years imprisonment.

15. In my view, paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules and section 117C(4)
    do not incorporate an additional public interest test. But even if they
    did I am satisfied that when considering the relevant factors in  these
    provisions, First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood did direct himself to
    the seriousness of the crime committed by the Respondent and the public
    interest and balanced it against other relevant factors.  Therefore,  I
    find that the Judge did not err in his approach to the public  interest
    and that his findings were open to him on the evidence before him.

16. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal on all grounds and uphold the decision
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood, promulgated on 16 July  2015,
    to allow the Respondent's appeal against deportation.


Date: 15 January 2016

    Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

