
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/00556/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 June 2021                    |On 13 July 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                 AMRIK SINGH
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan of Counsel, instructed by Adam Bernard
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes  before  me  following  the  decision  of  Upper
          Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  on  9  October  2020  to  set  aside  the
          determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro dated 27  March
          2020. Judge O'Garro had allowed the appellant's article  8  appeal
          having found that he had resided in  the  UK  since  1996  without
          absences. Upper Tribunal Judge  Reeds  allowed  the  Secretary  of
          State's appeal against that decision on the basis that  the  judge
          had failed to adequately reason how she concluded, in the  absence
          of any documentary evidence, that the appellant had  resided  here
          between 1996 and 2002. It was accepted that there was evidence  as
          to his presence here from 2002 until the  present  date  and  that
          finding has been preserved.

       2. The appellant is an Indian national from the  Punjab  born  on  21
          June 1971. He claims to have entered illegally with the help of an
          agent in  April  1996.  On  16  March  2015  he  was  served  with
          enforcement  papers  when  he  came  to  the  attention   of   the
          authorities, but he did not seek to regularise his stay  until  11
          May 2017. His application for leave on long residence grounds  was
          refused because the respondent did not accept he had resided  here
          since 1996 as he claimed and because she was  not  satisfied  that
          there would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration  on
          return to India. The respondent also considered that there were no
          exceptional circumstances  which  warranted  the  grant  of  leave
          outside the rules.

      The Hearing

       3. The appellant attended the hearing before me on 29 June 2021 along
          with two witnesses. I heard oral evidence from  them  in  turn  in
          Punjabi through the court interpreter whom they all confirmed they
          understood. No interpretation issues arose during  the  course  of
          the hearing.

       4. The appellant gave evidence first.   He  confirmed  his  name  and
          address as 369 Thorold Road in Ilford and gave his date  of  birth
          as 21 June 1971. He stated that he had never used any other  names
          or dates of birth. He confirmed the contents of  the  two  witness
          statements in the bundle as true and adopted them as his  evidence
          in chief. He was then tendered for cross examination.

       5. In response to Mr Tufan's questions, the appellant stated that his
          correct year of birth was 1971;  the  reference  to  1972  in  his
          witness statement was an error. The NHS letter in the bundle which
          referred to one Amrik Singh but with a different date of birth did
          not relate to him. Mr Khan confirmed that this had  been  included
          in the bundle by the representatives in error. He  explained  that
          it had also been included in  the  bundle  before  the  First-tier
          Tribunal. Given the  personal  contents  of  that  letter,  it  is
          extremely concerning that the appellant's  solicitors  would  have
          included evidence relating to another of their clients and  breach
          his confidentiality in such a serious way on  two  occasions,  and
          despite being alerted to the error on the last occasion.  Mr  Khan
          assured  me  that   he   would   convey   my   concerns   to   the
          representatives.

       6. The appellant produced his driving licence  to  confirm  his  1971
          date of birth. He stated that he had obtained it in 2003.

       7. The appellant confirmed that he had met his friend, Mr  Lal,  when
          working in construction. He said he had been taken to the site  by
          a builder and he had been paid in cash. He had no evidence that he
          had worked there. He  said  he  had  been  taken  there  from  the
          gurdwara in 1997. Mr Lal undertook carpentry and  other  labouring
          jobs.

       8. The appellant explained that his friend,  Ranjit  Singh,  who  had
          provided a supporting statement, had not been able to  leave  work
          and attend the hearing.

       9. With regard to his friend, Shervinder Singh, the appellant  stated
          that he used to see him at  the  Ford  Social  Club.  He  said  he
          himself was not a member of the club; he just passed by. They  had
          open grounds so anyone could walk in. He said he  met  Mr  Lal  in
          1997 and Shervinder Singh in 1998. He was very close friends  with
          both of them. Mr Tufan  asked  him  if  he  had  any  photographic
          evidence of his time with his friends in the 1990s. He said he did
          not; at that time, he was not  fond  of  photographs.  When  asked
          about the club's activities he stated that they  had  a  bar,  and
          hockey and football  could  be  played  there.  He,  himself,  was
          interested in hockey. Mr Lal was not a member of the club.

      10. That completed cross examination. There was no re-examination.

      11. In response to questions I put for  clarification,  the  appellant
          said that he had travelled by air from India to Dubai and then  to
          Russia and from there it had taken almost a year to reach  the  UK
          by car via Calais. The agent had taken  him  to  the  gurdwara  in
          Barking and they had then put him up in various accommodation, but
          he could not recall any details. He said he had come here to  work
          because there was no future in  India.  He  had  left  behind  his
          parents, one brother, one sister, a wife and a  son  who  was  now
          aged 24. He thought his son had been born in 1993.

      12. The appellant said he had opened a bank account in  2003.  He  had
          been unable to do so before because he had not had any ID but once
          he obtained a driving licence, he used that as ID. When asked  how
          he had obtained a licence without ID, he stated that he had  shown
          them his passport. When asked why he had not used his passport  as
          ID for a bank account, he stated that he had no  leave  to  remain
          shown on it. When it was pointed out that his licence did not show
          his status, he said the bank only checked the licence for his date
          of birth.

      13. I asked the appellant whether his friends were aware of  his  lack
          of status. He confirmed they were. When asked what view  they  had
          taken about that,  he  replied  that  they  had  not  had  such  a
          discussion. His friends were aware but had said nothing.

      14. I asked the appellant why he had waited  until  2017  to  seek  to
          regularise his stay. He said that  he  spoke  to  a  solicitor  in
          2016/2017 who had told him to  wait  but  this  solicitor  was  no
          longer working. He had waited a long time because he had not known
          what to do.

      15. I asked the appellant about his  private  life.  He  said  he  had
          friends and there was "good  culture".  He  had  nothing  else  he
          wanted to tell me.

      16. He confirmed he had kept in contact with his  family  although  he
          rowed with his wife "all the time". He sent money to  his  family.
          His brother had passed away 9 months ago.

      17. Neither party had any questions arising  and  that  completed  the
          appellant's oral evidence.

      18. I then heard evidence from  Shervinder  Singh.  He  confirmed  his
          address on Donald Drive and his date of birth. He also adopted his
          witness statement which he confirmed was true and correct. He  was
          asked how he was certain that he had met the appellant in 1998. He
          stated he had met him at the social club. The  appellant  used  to
          come there with his friend. The  question  was  repeated  and  the
          witness stated that they got together on Fridays. He did not  have
          his passport with him.

      19. In cross-examination, the witness stated that he had been a member
          of the social club but it had since closed. He confirmed  that  he
          used to have a membership card but not any  longer.  He  clarified
          that he had paid a fee and had a card in 1998. When asked when the
          club had closed, he then said it had not. The  club  stayed  open,
          but the hockey stopped. The witness stated that  he  had  obtained
          British nationality in 2010 or 2011.

      20. The witness stated that he did not think that the appellant was  a
          member of the club. He used to come with his friends. He could not
          remember them because it was a long time ago.  When asked  whether
          he had any other contact with the appellant apart from seeing  him
          at the club, he said they saw each other weekends. He said that he
          had met the appellant's parents  in  India  six  years  ago.  That
          completed cross examination. There was no re-examination.

      21. In response to my questions, the witness stated that he  had  come
          to the UK in 1991 as a visitor. Thereafter,  he  got  married  and
          stayed. He said he did not  know  about  the  appellant's  illegal
          status. When asked what he thought he had come to  court  for,  he
          then said the appellant had  told  him  about  his  position  just
          before he prepared his witness statement  last  year.  When  asked
          whether he only saw the appellant at the  club,  he  replied  that
          they went to other matches together. He did  not  know  where  the
          appellant had lived. He only knew he lived in Ilford.  Those  were
          my questions. Neither party had any questions arising from mine.

      22. The next and last witness was Mohan Lal who confirmed his personal
          details. He was asked by Mr Khan about the claim in his  statement
          that the appellant had lived with him until 2020. He  agreed  that
          was correct. The question was repeated twice  and  both  times  he
          confirmed that was correct.  He then confirmed the contents of his
          two statements were true and  adopted  both  as  his  evidence  in
          chief.

      23. In cross examination the witness stated that the appellant was  no
          longer living with him. When asked when the  appellant  had  moved
          out, the witness replied it was a long time ago. He stated he  had
          moved to his current address a year ago.  Prior  to  that  he  had
          lived at Thorold Road but he did not know where the appellant  had
          been living at that time.

      24. The witness confirmed that he had met the appellant  when  working
          in construction. He said he himself had been working lawfully.  He
          did not know about the appellant; he had not asked him.  They  had
          worked together for one year but it was a long time ago and he was
          not sure. The witness said that he had an Indian passport. He  had
          indefinite leave to remain. He did not have  a  British  passport.
          When asked whether he had ever been in prison in the UK he said he
          had. He confirmed that he had been convicted  for  driving  whilst
          disqualified and for failing to provide a specimen.

      25. Mr Khan re-examined. The witness confirmed that the appellant  had
          lived with him at Hamilton Road. He  said  the  appellant  was  no
          longer there, but he had no idea when he had moved out; it  was  a
          long time ago.

      26. I then asked the witness how it was that he was able  to  remember
          when he met the appellant if he could not recall  anything  else.,
          even more recent events such as the appellant's move and where  he
          lived thereafter.  He said that he remembered when he came to  the
          UK from India. When asked when that was, he said  1978.  A  moment
          later he said it could be 1988. He had come as a visitor and  then
          claimed asylum. In 1999 he obtained indefinite leave to remain. No
          evidence of his status has been adduced.

      27. Mr Khan questioned the witness again about his ability  to  recall
          that he met the appellant  in  1997.  He  then  said  he  did  not
          remember the year and he had no proof or evidence.  The  appellant
          had been worried about finding a place to live  and  had  come  to
          him.

      28. That completed the oral evidence. I then heard submissions.  These
          are set out in full in my record of proceedings but, to summarise,
          Mr Tufan submitted that there was no reliable  evidence  to  cover
          the period  of  residence  claimed  between  1996  and  2002.  The
          witnesses had been confused and contradictory. The high test under
          paragraph 276ADE(vi) had not been met. The appellant had spent his
          formative years in India, he had family there and  had  no  health
          issues. With respect to article 8 outside the rules, whilst he had
          established a private life, his stay had always  been  precarious,
          he did not speak English and was not financially independent.  The
          appeal should be dismissed.

      29. Mr Khan asked that I allow  the  appeal.  The  appellant  and  his
          witnesses had been credible, and the appellant had been frank  and
          open in his evidence. The witnesses may have sounded confused, but
          they were being asked about events dating back a number of  years.
          They were,  however,  consistent  about  when  they  had  met  the
          appellant. The appellant had lived here for a number of years  and
          had formed friendships. He was now 50. He would  not  be  able  to
          enjoy the same quality of friendships in India. He  had  a  strong
          support network here and an absence of ties to India.

      30. That completed the evidence and submissions. At the conclusion  of
          the hearing, I reserved my decision which I now give with reasons.



          Discussion and Conclusions

      31.  The  appellant  has  relied  on  paragraph  276ADE(vi)   of   the
          Immigration Rules or, alternatively, on article 8 in terms of  his
          private life. In his skeleton argument  and  in  submissions,,  Mr
          Khan argued that the appellant had been here for over 20 years but
          failing that, he had shown that he  would  face  very  significant
          obstacles on his return to India because  he  had  no  connections
          there. He also submitted that  the  appellant  had  established  a
          private life in the UK which was strong enough to  render  removal
          disproportionate.

      32. No case law was relied on, but I have considered the guidance in R
          (Razgar) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department (SSHD)
          [2004] UKHL 27 and the five stages recommended by Lord Bingham  as
          the  correct  approach  to  Article  8  decision  making.  It  was
          considered that the questions for the court  were  likely  to  be:
          "(1) will the proposed removal be an  interference  by  a  public
          authority with the exercise of the applicant's  right  to respect
          for his private or (as the case may be) family life?; (2)  If  so,
          will such  interference have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
          potentially to engage the operation of article 8?; (3) If so,  is
          such interference in accord with the law?;  (4)  If  so,  is  such
          interference necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
          national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the
          country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for  the
          protection of health and morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
          rights and freedoms of others?; (5) if so,  is  such interference
          proportionate to the legitimate public end to  be  achieved?...The
          answering of question (5), where that question is  reached,  must
          always involve the striking of a fair balance between the  rights
          of the  individual  and  the  interests  of  the  community  which
          is inherent in the whole of the Convention." (paras 17 and 20). I
          also bear in mind that the correct standard in article 8 cases  is
          the civil standard of the balance of probabilities.

      33. The relevant parts of paragraph 276ADE(vi) state that an applicant
          must either have lived : (iii) ....continuously in the UK  for  at
          least 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or...(vi)
          .... continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
          any period of imprisonment) but there would  be  very  significant
          obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
          he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

      34. In terms of the consideration of article 8, I must have regard  to
          public interest considerations and s. 117B provides:

          (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
          public interest.

          (2) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that
          persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
          to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

          (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

          (b) are better able to integrate into society.

          (3) It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
          interests of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that
          persons who seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
          financially independent, because such persons-

          (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

          (b) are better able to integrate into society.

          (4) Little weight should be given to-

          (a) a private life, or

          (b) a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
          established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
          Kingdom unlawfully.

          (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
          a person at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
          precarious.

          (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
          public interest does not require the person's removal where-

          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
          with a qualifying child, and

          (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
          United Kingdom.

      35. Having considered all the oral and documentary  evidence  and  the
          submissions made, and bearing in mind that  I  must  consider  the
          evidence as at the date of the  hearing,  I  reach  the  following
          conclusions.

      36. The appellant relies on his long residence in  the  UK,  allegedly
          since 1996, and the friendships he has  formed  here  during  that
          time as  the  basis  of  his  article  8  claim.  In  his  witness
          statements, he emphasises the loss of all connections  with  India
          and his integration into the British way of life. I consider first
          whether the appellant has made out his claim of long residence and
          the nature of his life here before applying the facts to paragraph
          276ADE (vi) and then to a consideration of article 8  outside  the
          rules. This approach  accords  with  the  issues  as  set  out  in
          Counsel's skeleton argument (at paragraphs 6-8).

      37. I do not find that the appellant  has  shown  on  the  balance  of
          probabilities that he has lived in the UK for over 20  years.  Nor
          do I find that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
          reintegration on return.

      38. I was not impressed with the oral  and  written  evidence  of  the
          appellant or his two witnesses. Contrary to  Counsel's  submission
          that they had been credible and that the appellant had been  frank
          and open, I find that the appellant sought to mislead and that the
          oral evidence contradicted much of the  written  evidence  to  the
          extent that none of it is reliable.  This  is  for  the  following
          reasons which are set out in no order of priority.

      39. The appellant has been able to provide a  variety  of  documentary
          evidence to cover the period from 2003. No  good  explanation  has
          been given for why  he  did  not  have  any  documentary  evidence
          whatsoever from the earlier period of 1996-2002. He stated that he
          had a passport which he used  to  travel  to  Dubai  and  then  to
          Russia; that has not been provided. It may have shown the dates of
          his journeys. He provided bank documents; but no clear reason  has
          been given for why he could not have opened a bank  account  prior
          to 2003. His explanation that he had no form of ID  is  undermined
          by his claim that he had a passport which he used  as  a  form  of
          identity to obtain a driving licence. He has provided no  evidence
          of employment during those years and has been  very  vague  as  to
          where he worked and where  he  lived  both  in  oral  and  written
          evidence. There is no  explanation  for  why  he  could  not  have
          provided utility bills, as he subsequently has, polling  cards  or
          any form of correspondence. Nor is there any clear explanation for
          how he was suddenly, from 2003,  able  to  produce  a  variety  of
          documentary evidence regarding his residence yet have been  unable
          to provide a shred of independent documentary  evidence  prior  to
          that if he had indeed been living here for all those years  as  he
          claims.

      40. The oral evidence is wholly  inadequate  and  unsatisfactory.  The
          appellant stated vaguely in his witness statement  of  14  October
          2020 that he  had  "stayed  at  different  places  with  different
          people" (AB:1). When asked for further information, he was  unable
          to provide any. He claimed to have lived with Mr Lal  at  Hamilton
          Road until 2002 but Mr Lal's witness statement claimed that he had
          lived there with him until 2020 (AB:4). Despite three attempts  by
          Mr Khan, presumably to get the witness to change his  account,  he
          stood by it but made a further mess of his evidence when he  later
          claimed to have been living elsewhere and to not  know  where  the
          appellant had been living in 2020 or indeed  prior  to  that.  The
          appellant was very specific in his witness statement that  he  had
          met both witnesses in 1997 (AB:5 and 6) but in  oral  evidence  he
          claimed to have met one in 1997 and the other in 1998.  Shervinder
          Singh gave 1998 as the year of meeting in  his  statement  (AB:9).
          The evidence is also inconsistent as to whether  Shervinder  Singh
          would socialise at the club having come there with  a  friend  (as
          stated in his own evidence and  the  witness'  oral  evidence)  or
          whether the witness brought him to the club (AB:9).  Although  the
          appellant and witnesses were vague on many other  aspects  of  the
          evidence claiming that it was all a long time ago,  they  did  not
          resile  from  their  claim  of  when  they  met  (other  than  the
          appellant's discrepant evidence as set out above). It is  entirely
          unclear to me, and they could not explain, how they  were  all  so
          certain about the year they met when they  could  not  recall  any
          other events, including more recent occurrences, with any  clarity
          at all. They could give no reason for why  they  were  so  certain
          about that date when their memories were so poor on other matters.



      41. Mr Lal stated in oral evidence  that  he  and  the  appellant  had
          worked together for one year, but his witness  statement  suggests
          that that they had worked together on and off for a lengthy period
          (AB:4). He describes the appellant as a man of good character  and
          trustworthy despite the fact that the  appellant  entered  the  UK
          illegally, remained without authority until making an  application
          to regularise his stay in  2017  and  worked  without  permission,
          presumably paying no taxes or  national  insurance  contributions.
          Moreover, Mr Lal has  a  criminal  conviction  or  driving  whilst
          disqualified.  His  regard  for  the  law  is  therefore  somewhat
          dubious.

      42. The oral evidence of the appellant and his witnesses also  changed
          as it went along. Mr  Lal  was  adamant  that  the  claim  in  his
          statement about the appellant living with him until 2020 was  true
          and correct but he later retracted that claim and appeared not  to
          recall when or for how long they lived together. Shervinder  Singh
          maintained he did not know about the  appellant's  illegal  status
          but then when the oddity of him attending the hearing was  put  to
          him he retracted his evidence and maintained he had known but only
          found out a year ago. He also  gave  conflicting  evidence  as  to
          whether he only used to meet the appellant at the club or  whether
          they went together to other venues.  The  evidence  was  that  the
          appellant and  the  witnesses  were  very  close  and  had  strong
          relationships but neither knew where the appellant lived. Mr Lal's
          oral evidence on how long he and the appellant had worked together
          contradicted his written evidence. The appellant maintained at his
          last hearing and in his witness statements that he  had  lost  all
          connections and ties to India but it emerged in his answers to  my
          questions that he had in fact been in touch  all  along  with  his
          family, that he was in contact with his  wife,  son,  parents  and
          siblings and was even sending money to them and that  his  friend,
          Shervinder Singh, had gone to visit his parents on  his  visit  to
          India a few years ago. That does not accord with a claim  that  he
          has no ties to India and would have no support network there or  a
          home to return to.  Plainly he has close family with whom  he  has
          stayed in touch and no reasons were given as why he would  not  be
          able to return home and resume his life with his them. He may find
          it difficult after all his time away but  that  does  not,  in  my
          view, amount to a very significant obstacle. He has  retained  his
          Punjabi, indeed had to make use of an interpreter for the hearing,
          he is involved with the Sikh gurdwara and his best friends are all
          from the  Sikh/Indian  community.  he  plainly  retains  language,
          cultural, religious and familial ties to his country of origin. Mr
          Khan argued that the appellant would not have the same quality  of
          friendships in India but  gave  no  reason  for  that  submission.
          Friendships are all different, but I cannot see  anything  in  the
          evidence I have seen and heard as to  why  these  friendships  are
          said to be particularly strong. They appear to consist of  meeting
          at a club on weekends.

      43. I place little weight on the statements from other friends as they
          did not attend the hearing and their evidence could not be tested.
          Some of the letters of support are written in identical format and
          that further detracts from their reliability.

      44. The appellant's own written evidence also undermines his claim  to
          have been in the UK since 1996 because he states that he had  left
          his country almost  18  years  ago.  Although  the  copy  of  that
          statement in the latest bundle is unsigned and undated,  a  signed
          copy is contained in the bundle for the hearing in March 2020  and
          is dated 26 February 2020. If at that time the appellant professed
          to have been in the UK almost 18 years, he could not possibly have
          entered in 1996 as he  now  claims.  I  note  that  the  appellant
          confirmed the contents of that statement and that it  was  adopted
          as true and correct with no amendments.  No explanation  for  this
          has been provided.

      45. For these reasons I find  that  the  appellant  has  not  met  the
          requirements of either sub section  (iii)  or  (vi)  of  paragraph
          276ADE.

      46. I now turn to the appellant's private life claim.  Accepting  that
          the appellant has a private life in the UK by way of his residence
          here since 2003, and answering in the positive to questions  2,  3
          and 4  of  the  Razgar  stages,  I  come  to  the  proportionality
          assessment. I am required to consider the public interest  factors
          set out in s.117.

      47. The appellant speaks a little English but as  he  had  to  use  an
          interpreter to give his  oral  evidence,  I  must  find  that  his
          knowledge of English is not fluent. I  have  seen  no  independent
          evidence of any work the appellant has undertaken during his  time
          in the UK, no evidence of  any  tax  paid  or  national  insurance
          contributions paid. The  letter  from  December  2009  (AB:N5)  is
          unsupported by any evidence of income. In his application form  he
          claimed that he was supported by friends but no reliable  evidence
          of that has been produced and the witnesses did not give  evidence
          in that respect. Additionally, no reason is given as to why anyone
          would take on the responsibility for  supporting  someone  over  a
          number of years. I do  not  find  that  the  appellant  has  shown
          himself to be financially independent. He has never had  leave  to
          enter or remain and has always known that eh was here  unlawfully.
          Little weight can be given to his private life when his status has
          always been unlawful and precarious. Despite  knowing  he  has  no
          permission to be here, he remained and took no steps to regularise
          his stay until 2017. He has shown no regard for the laws  of  this
          country.

      48. His friendships such as they are show no interdependency and there
          is no reason why they  should  take  precedence  over  the  public
          interest of removing an illegal immigrant who has  not  integrated
          into  British  society  and  who  has  not  contributed   to   it,
          particularly when he has a home and close family to return  to  in
          India.  I  conclude  that  in  his  circumstances,  removal  is  a
          proportionate interference in his  private  life.  No  exceptional
          circumstances have been identified that would warrant a  grant  of
          discretionary leave.




      Decision

      49. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.




      Signed


      Dr R Keki?


      Upper Tribunal Judge
      5 July 2021
