
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00168/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2021                     |On 30 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  YING YANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Lisa's Law
Solicitors


This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. However, I will refer  to
      the parties as they were designated in the First-tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of China, born in 1970, who has been in the
      UK since 2006.

   3. The respondent is appealing against a decision of Judge of the  First-
      tier Tribunal White  ("the  judge")  promulgated  on  9  January  2020
      allowing the appellant's human rights appeal.




   Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   4. The judge found that the appellant's removal from the UK would  breach
      article 8 ECHR because there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
      continuation of  her  family  life  with  her  partner  in  China  and
      therefore she satisfied the conditions of paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix
      FM of the Immigration Rules.

   5. The sole reason the judge found there to be  insurmountable  obstacles
      was that the appellant has been unable to obtain a Chinese passport or
      travel document and therefore is unable to return to China.

   6. The judge noted that the appellant  had  on  four  occasions  attended
      interviews with the respondent to facilitate  obtaining  an  emergency
      travel document from the Chinese embassy  but  on  each  occasion  the
      embassy had rejected the  application  because  they  were  unable  to
      verify her identity. The judge summarised the respondent's argument as
      being   that   the   appellant    could    provide    the    necessary
      information/evidence to obtain  a  travel  document  but  deliberately
      failed to do so  to  thwart  the  process.  The  judge  rejected  this
      contention. At paragraph  20  the  judge  stated  that  there  was  no
      suggestion  that  the  answers  provided  by  the  appellant  to   the
      respondent at the four interviews were "ambiguous, clearly  incomplete
      or inconsistent" and at paragraph 21 the judge stated:

           "On the face of it the appellant has repeatedly engaged, at  the
           respondent's  request,  in  the  redocumentation   process.   No
           specific criticism has been made of what she  said  or  did,  no
           error or difficulty has been identified, and no explanation  has
           been obtained from the Chinese authorities about where there are
           difficulty lies. It  is  wholly  unclear  what  more  she  could
           do...."

   7. The judge stated that the appellant's evidence was that she had  tried
      on two occasions to obtain a passport herself from the embassy but was
      refused. The judge noted that she did not obtain anything  in  writing
      from the embassy.

   8.  The  judge  rejected  the  respondent's  argument  that  because  the
      appellant had sold a property in China and transferred the proceeds of
      sale to the UK, she must (or is likely to) have documents  capable  of
      satisfying the Chinese authorities that she is a Chinese citizen.  The
      judge found that there was no evidence before him about the  practical
      requirements for selling a property in  China  or  transferring  money
      abroad and it could not be inferred from  the  appellant  having  done
      this that she has documents which would satisfy the  authorities  that
      she is Chinese.

   9. The judge concluded at paragraph 22:

        "If the appellant cannot obtain a travel document or  passport  she
        cannot return to China. Mr Eaton submitted that she had  not  tried
        to return, but it is not clear how  she  is  supposed  to  do  that
        without the documents necessary to pass through immigration control
        here, let alone on arrival in China. It seems to me on balance that
        the appellant has shown that she is unable to obtain the  necessary
        documents. If so, I am  satisfied  that  there  are  insurmountable
        obstacles to the continuation of family  life  outside  the  United
        Kingdom, because she cannot go to live in China..."



Grounds of Appeal

  10. The grounds of appeal make the following submissions:

        a. The judge erred because the appeal should have  been  considered
           under Gen 3.2 of Appendix FM rather than section EX.1.

        b. The judge erred because "the mechanics of removal  are  not  for
           the Tribunal to be concerned with".

  11. Permission was granted on both of these grounds.



Respondent's submissions dated 18 August 2020 ("the written submissions")

  12. The written submissions state that the respondent is not pursuing  the
      arguments in the grounds of appeal but is contending  that  the  judge
      erred in his assessment of  the  appellant's  assertion  that  she  is
      unable to obtain travel documents via bone fide evidence.

  13. It is argued that the judge failed to consider the reliability of  the
      appellant's claim to have visited the Chinese embassy on two occasions
      when the appellant did not provide any corroboratory evidence  of  her
      visit and the onus was on her to prove that she had  given  bona  fide
      evidence to the Chinese authorities and to the respondent  during  the
      various attempts to obtain removal documentation.

  14. It is also argued that the judge failed to appreciate  that  the  onus
      was on the appellant to establish that she did not have to  prove  her
      identity to transfer the property (and proceeds of sale) in China.

  15. A further argument made in the written submissions is that  the  judge
      erroneously placed the burden on  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
      appellant had failed to provide clear and complete information at  the
      four interviews when it was not for the respondent to prove anything.





Respondent's submissions at the hearing

  16. Mr Whitwell relied on the written submissions. He also argued that the
      judge's conclusion that the appellant could not return  to  China  was
      not open to him based on the evidence because (a) the applications for
      a travel document had not been made on the appellant's  own  volition;
      (b) she had been found to give false information previously;  (c)  the
      judge found that her evidence should be treated  with  circumspection;
      and (d) the information given to the Chinese embassy  was  not  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.



Appellant's submissions at the hearing

  17. Mr Kannangara argued that the arguments advanced by the respondent  in
      the written submissions and by Mr Whitwell orally were not within  the
      grounds of appeal and that it was too  late  for  the  grounds  to  be
      amended.

  18. With regard  to  the  substance  of  the  respondent's  arguments,  Mr
      Kannangara submitted that the judge's findings were open to him  based
      on  the  evidence,   which  included  documentation  showing  how  the
      appellant responded to questions posed by the respondent in  order  to
      obtain an emergency travel document.



Analysis

  19. The arguments advanced in the written submissions and by  Mr  Whitwell
      at the hearing are not in the grounds of appeal.  Mr  Whitwell  argued
      that the arguments stem from the ground contending that the  mechanics
      of removal are not  a  concern  for  the  Tribunal.  I  disagree.  The
      argument in the grounds - which, in sum, is that it is  irrelevant  to
      the question of  whether  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  under
      paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM that as a practical matter the appellant
      is unable to obtain a travel document - is entirely different  to  the
      argument advanced in the written submissions and at the hearing, which
      in sum is that the evidence did not support the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant is unable to obtain travel documents.

  20. In my view, it would not be fair to the appellant for  the  respondent
      to be able to advance arguments  that  were  not  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal. I keep in mind what was said by Lord Justice Singh in Talpada
      v The Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ
      841 at [69] about taking a robust approach in these circumstances:

           "Courts should be prepared to  take  robust  decisions  and  not
           permit grounds to be advanced if they  have  not  been  properly
           pleaded or where permission has not been granted to raise  them.
           Otherwise there is a risk that there  will  be  unfairness,  not
           only to the other party to the  case,  but  potentially  to  the
           wider public interest, which is an important facet of public law
           litigation."

  21. The respondent  therefore  cannot  succeed  because  (a)  she  is  not
      pursuing any of the arguments in the grounds of appeal; and (b)  I  am
      not prepared to decide the appeal on the basis of arguments  that  are
      not in the grounds of appeal.

  22. In any event, I do not accept  that  the  judge  fell  into  error  as
      contended in the written submissions and in oral submissions.

  23. Firstly, it is clear that the judge recognised that the burden was  on
      the appellant to establish that she could not obtain travel  documents
      to return to China, as at paragraph 16 the judge stated:  "I  bear  in
      mind also that the burden of proving that she cannot  be  admitted  to
      China is on her".

  24. Secondly, it is plain that  the  judge  took  into  consideration  the
      negative credibility findings about the appellant. At paragraph 14 the
      judge stated: "I  also  bear  in  mind  that  her  asylum  appeal  was
      dismissed on the express basis that her claim was a fabrication".

  25. Thirdly, it is misconceived to argue  that  the  judge  erred  by  not
      requiring corroboration of  the  appellant's  visits  to  the  Chinese
      embassy when the central reason the  judge  accepted  the  appellant's
      claim to not be able to obtain an emergency travel document  was  that
      the respondent had not been able to obtain one on her  behalf  despite
      four  attempts  and  the  appellant  providing  information   to   the
      respondent that was not ambiguous, incomplete or inconsistent.  It  is
      not a valid criticism of the decision to assert that the judge did not
      know what information was provided to the  Chinese  embassy  (via  the
      respondent) and therefore the judge was not in a position  to  comment
      on  its  consistency  and  completeness  when  it  is  apparent   from
      paragraphs 7 and 20 of the decision that the judge was provided  with,
      and considered, documentation from the respondent's interviews.

  26. Fourthly, given the evidence showing that four attempts have been made
      by the respondent to obtain an  emergency  travel  document  from  the
      Chinese embassy and the absence of any evidence indicating what  error
      or difficulty had been identified with the information provided by the
      appellant, it was open to the judge to conclude that the appellant  is
      unable to obtain an emergency travel document. Many judges  might  not
      have reached this conclusion, but it was not irrational to do so.



Notice of decision

  27. The grounds of appeal do not identify an error of law and the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal stands.
|                                    |                                    |
|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|D. Sheridan                         |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |Dated: 22 March 2021                |

