
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/00785/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 November 2019                |On 13 January 2020                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                            HIS HONOUR JUDGE BIRD
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     DA
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Ogunbusola, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the appellant

Introduction

    1. We have anonymised the appellant because this decision refers to  the
       circumstances of his minor children.

    2. The appellant appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       ("FTT") Judge M A Khan sent out  on  22  July  2019,  dismissing  his
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to deport him  as  a
       foreign criminal.

    3. The appellant applied to the FTT for permission to appeal on 2 August
       2019, permission was refused by FTT Judge Lever on 14 August 2019. On
       2 September 2019 the appellant applied to the Upper Tribunal  ("UT").
       Permission was granted on the papers on 2 September 2019.

Preliminary Point

    4. At the outset we invited the appellant's counsel to clarify what  his
       grounds of appeal were (see paragraph 17 below).  In  doing  so,  the
       appellant put forward a new ground, namely that at  paragraph  64  of
       the decision, the FTT Judge had  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the
       appellant had only limited leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  at
       the relevant time. In fact (as the FTT Judge recorded at  para.43  of
       the decision) the appellant had indefinite leave to  remain.  It  was
       said that this was a material error as it caused  the  FTT  Judge  to
       wrongly afford the appellant's private life little weight. No written
       proposed amendment was produced and no explanation was offered as  to
       why the amendment had not formulated or considered earlier.

    5. The Secretary of State resisted the application on 2 grounds:  first,
       even if the FTT Judge had  made  an  error  in  law,  the  error  was
       immaterial. On the findings of  fact  made  by  the  FTT  Judge  (see
       paragraph 9 below) the quality of the appellant's private life rights
       was minimal and so if they  had  been  given  the  maximum  allowable
       weight the outcome would have been exactly the same. Secondly,  on  a
       reading of the judgment as a whole the FTT judge correctly identified
       that the appellant had indefinite leave to  remain  at  the  relevant
       time (see para.43).

    6. In considering the application, in addition to the points  raised  by
       the Secretary of State, we bore in mind:

        a. the overriding objective set  out  at  r.2(1)  of  the  Tribunal
           Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the Rules") and

        b. r.21(4)(e) of the Rules which requires grounds of appeal  to  be
           set out in the application for permission to appeal to the UT

        c. the rules-based requirement to have provided grounds  of  appeal
           to the UT by 2 September 2019 (the date of  the  application  to
           the UT for permission)

        d. our general powers of  case  management  set  out  at  r.5(3)(a)
           giving us a power to extend time

        e. We have also considered the fact that the appellant had given no
           notice of the amendment to the Secretary of State or the UT and

        f. that he had had plenty of time to consider the need to amend his
           grounds (because both the FTT Judge see paragraph 8 below and UT
           Judge see paragraph 12 below had noted  the  inadequacy  of  the
           grounds of appeal)

        g. The grounds were provided to the UT 2 months and  24  days  (the
           delay being from 2 September 2019 to 26 November 2019)

    7. Having considered the application we  delivered  a  judgment  at  the
       hearing giving brief reasons for our conclusion  that  the  amendment
       should not be allowed. We said that the reasons would be supplemented
       in writing. These are those reasons.

    8. It is generally unsatisfactory for an application to amend to be made
       for the first time during the opening of an appeal without any notice
       having been provided. Whilst there are circumstances in which such an
       application might be allowed we are of the view that there should  be
       some explanation for the (in this case lengthy) delay in  making  the
       application and that the proposed amended  ground  should  have  some
       prospect of success. Neither appears in this case. We  bear  in  mind
       that there is a time limit for the submission of  appeals  (supported
       by grounds) and that the admission of a late ground might be seen  to
       undermine that limit. We accept the Secretary of State's  point  that
       even if the proposed new ground was made out and an error of law  was
       found, that error cannot, given the FTT Judge's findings of fact,  be
       material. In all the circumstances this is not a  case  in  which  we
       feel able to exercise our power to extend time.

Background

    9. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1995.  He  entered  the
       United Kingdom in March 2011 accompanied by  his  mother  with  entry
       clearance to remain until May 2013. On 19 June 2013  he  was  granted
       indefinite leave to remain. On 4 July 2017 he  was  convicted  of  an
       assault occasioning actual bodily harm and  of  possessing  a  bladed
       article in a public place. On 17 November 2017 he was sentenced to  a
       term of imprisonment totalling 15 months. The sentencing remarks  are
       set out at paragraph 16 of the FTT decision. On 4  December  2017  he
       was served with a notice of decision  to  make  a  deportation  order
       against him. On 22 December 2017 and 22 October 2018,  the  appellant
       made submissions to the Secretary of State setting out why he  should
       not be deported. Those submissions  were  rejected  and  the  reasons
       served on the appellant on 31 December 2018.

   10. The appellant has 2 children of his own. His partner has  a  daughter
       from a previous relationship born in  April  2013.  His  partner  has
       mental health issues. She is mother of the appellant's  son  who  was
       born in January 2019. The appellant has a son born in June 2017  from
       a previous relationship whom he did not see at the  time  of  hearing
       before the FTT. His relationship with his present  partner  has  been
       ongoing but not continuous since 2013. There was a break in 2016. His
       partner has no plans to move with her children to live in Jamaica.

FTT

   11. Grounds of appeal in respect of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
       were submitted to the FTT on or about 3 January 2019.  The  appellant
       sought to argue that the Secretary of State's decision  was  unlawful
       because removal would breach his ECHR rights.

   12. The grounds of appeal are described by the FTT Judge in his  decision
       as being "expressed in general  terms  only".  It  appears  from  the
       judgment that he considered the thrust of the appeal to be  that  the
       Respondent  had  wrongly  determined  that  the  deportation  of  the
       Appellant would not breach any  relevant  Convention  Rights,  namely
       Art.8 rights.

The FTT decision

   13. The FTT Judge recorded the following findings of fact in  respect  of
       the appellant:

        a. He has no role in the life of his eldest son (para.48) and

        b. has no plans to live  with  his  partner  in  the  future  (once
           conditions of bail which  require  him  to  live  with  her  are
           lifted) (para.49)

        c.  He  occasionally  takes   his   partner's   daughter   to   her
           grandmother's house so she can take her to school (para.50) and

        d. is making no financial contribution to his  partner's  household
           (para.51).

        e. He has "very minimum involvement in the lives of  his  children"
           (para.52).

        f. Further his relationship with his partner is "not  significantly
           strong" (para.50).

        g. He has a brother and sister living in Jamaica who would be  able
           to support him there until he "is able to stand on his  own  two
           feet" (para.53) and he has

        h. "quite memorable links" with Jamaica (para.60).

   14. The FTT Judge found "on the balance of probabilities" that  paragraph
       399 of the Immigration Rules had not been engaged.  An  out  of  date
       version of paragraph 399 is set out in his judgment at  para.8.  That
       version was current before 28 July 2014. It  makes  no  reference  to
       undue harshness.

   15. The FTT considered section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA") including Exception  2  at  section  117C(5)
       (para.61) and sections 117A and 117B of the same Act (para.62).

The Appeal before the UT

   16. In giving permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Stephen  Smith
       noted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were
       "difficult to follow and poorly particularised".

   17. At the start of the hearing we invited the appellant to clarify  what
       the grounds of appeal were. We have dealt above with  an  application
       to  supplement  the  grounds  of  appeal  by  way  of  amendment.  Mr
       Ogunbusola confirmed that there was  no  appeal  in  respect  of  the
       findings of fact asset out at paragraph 12  above.   The  grounds  of
       appeal advanced were as follows.:

        a. The FTT Judge had failed to have  regard  to  the  Secretary  of
           State's duty  to  discharge  his  immigration  functions  having
           regard to the need to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
           children who are in  the  United  Kingdom  (section  55  of  the
           Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 "BCIA 2009")

        b. The FTT Judge erred in dealing with his assessment under section
           117C(5) as to whether the effect of  his  deportation  would  be
           unduly harsh on a relevant partner or a relevant child

        c. The FTT Judge failed properly to consider if  the  circumstances
           of  the  case,  taken  in  the  round  raised  "very  compelling
           circumstances"  sufficient  to   render   the   deportation   an
           infringement of Convention rights.

The Legal Framework

   18. The legal framework has recently been set out by the Court of  Appeal
       in Secretary of State for the Home Department v KF  (Nigeria)  [2019]
       EWCA Civ 2051 (paragraphs 8  to  15).  We  respectfully  adopt  those
       paragraphs.

   19. The appellant is a foreign criminal as defined in section 117D(2)  of
       NIAA. He was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment and so falls  within
       section 117C(3). The public interest requires his deportation  unless
       Exception 1  (section  117C(4))  or  Exception  2  (section  117C(5))
       applies. The grounds of appeal raise no issue in respect of ground 1.
        Exception 2 is mirrored by IR 399.

   20. It seems to us to be clear that  IR  399  and  section  117C(5)  each
       require 3 broad questions to be answered:

        a. is the person who is at risk of deportation ("D") in  a  genuine
           and subsisting relationship with a third party ("TP")? If so,

        b. is the TP either a "qualifying partner" or a "qualifying child"?



        c. If so, will the effect of D's deportation on the TP  be  "unduly
           harsh"

   21. It is accepted and common ground that the appellant's  partner  falls
       within  the  definition  of  "qualifying  partner"   and   that   the
       appellant's 2 children and his partner's  daughter  (the  "qualifying
       children") fall within the definition of "qualifying child".

   22. The correct approach to the meaning of "unduly harsh" in Exception  2
       in respect of children has most recently been set out by the Court of
       Appeal in KF (Nigeria) and SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ  1213.
       For the purposes of this  judgment  it  is  sufficient  to  note  the
       helpful reminder at paragraph 14 of the Court of Appeal's judgment in
       KF (Nigeria) of the guidance provided at paragraph 23 of KO (Nigeria)
       [2018] UKSC 53:

           "one is looking for a degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what
           would necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
           deportation of a parent."

Error of law discussion

   23. We have come to the conclusion that the FTT judge took  a  number  of
       wrong turns in the decision. Some were raised during  the  course  of
       argument and described as errors of law, some were  not.  Nonetheless
       we feel it would be helpful to refer to some of them:

        a. At para. 8 of the decision the FTT Judge sets  out  IR  399.  He
           refers to the rule as it was before 28 July  2014.  The  version
           cited by the FTT Judge makes no reference to  the  need  for  an
           "unduly harsh" effect on  a  qualifying  partner  or  qualifying
           child.

        b. Although he refers to section 117C  at  para.61  the  FTT  judge
           failed to explain  its  relevance  and  fails  to  set  it  out.
           Although he recites at para.40 and 41 the  submissions  made  by
           the parties which refer to the "unduly harsh" test he  makes  no
           reference of the statutory or regulatory context from which  the
           test is derived.

        c. At para.54 the FTT Judge concludes that IR 399  is  not  engaged
           but has cited the wrong version of that rule.

        d. The FTT Judge concludes (para.56) that the case before him  (the
           appellant having been sentenced to 15  months  imprisonment)  is
           not an automatic deportation  case.  He  appears  to  base  this
           conclusion on Bah (EO Turkey) - liability to deport [2012[  UKUT
           196 (IAC) (see para.46 of the decision).  In  fact  the  present
           case is (subject to section 33 of  the  same  Act)  governed  by
           section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.

   24. In addition to these, we accept as the grounds of appeal submit that:

        a. The FTT Judge made no specific reference  to  the  Secretary  of
           State's duty under section 55 of the BCIA  2009.   However,  the
           FTT  Judge  considered  the  exact  extent  of  the  appellant's
           involvement with the children and his relationship with each  of
           them. He made clear findings of fact in respect of this matters.
           In our judgment this treatment of  the  appellant's  involvement
           with the children is a clear indication that the Judge  had  the
           section 55 duty in mind. We therefore conclude that this  ground
           is not made out.

        b. The judgment fails to set out how the test for  undue  harshness
           arises in a statutory or regulatory context. However, at para.50
           of the judgment  the  FTT  Judge  finds  that  the  relationship
           between the appellant and  his  partner  is  "not  significantly
           strong [enough] to have unduly harsh effect on the  family  upon
           his removal from the UK". On balance we have  reached  the  view
           that the FTT Judge  did  consider  the  effect  the  appellant's
           deportation would have on his  partner  and  "the  family".  The
           conclusion might helpfully have expressed in a clearer way  but,
           on balance we find that this ground is not made out.

        c.  The  FTT  Judge  makes  no  reference   to   "very   compelling
           circumstances" in his judgment. This is an error of law  but  it
           is not material for the reasons we set out below.

Materiality

   25. We now deal with the question of materiality of the  errors  we  have
       identified above.

   26. By section 12 of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcements Act  2007  the
       UT may set aside a decision if it finds an error of law  but  is  not
       obliged to do so. If the error is not material, so that the UT can be
       sure that the decision would have been the same if the error  of  law
       had not been made, the decision should not be overturned.

   27. We remind ourselves, as set out at paragraph 135 of the  judgment  of
       the Court of Appeal in R (Balajigari) v Home Secretary [2019]  1  WLR
       4647 that it is well established that the court "should observe great
       caution in refusing relief on the basis of immateriality, and that is
       reflected  by  expressing  the  relevant  threshold   in   terms   of
       inevitability".

   28. Adopting this approach, we are satisfied that any errors of  law  are
       not material and that if those errors had not been made, and  if  the
       FTT Judge had properly directed himself on the  law,  the  conclusion
       expressed in the decision would have been the same.

   29. It is significant that the findings of fact made the  FTT  Judge  are
       not challenged. Those findings allow us to reach a  clear  conclusion
       on materiality. Dealing with each ground of appeal (but  not  in  the
       order advanced):

        a. As we point out at paragraph 21 above, section 117C(5)  requires
           3 questions to be answered. The presence  or  absence  of  undue
           harshness only arises  when  there  is  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship with a qualifying child or such a relationship with
           a qualifying partner. In our view the FTT  Judge's  findings  of
           fact suggest strongly that the appellant is not in a genuine and
           subsisting relationship with his partner or with any  of  the  3
           qualifying children. Indeed the finding at para.52 is  that  the
           appellant "has very minimum involvement  in  the  lives  of  his
           children". If there was  no  sufficient  relationship  then  the
           consideration of undue harshness is not reached.  In  any  event
           the high hurdle of undue  harshness  for  the  children  or  the
           appellant's partner cannot on any legitimate view  be  overcome,
           given the findings of fact regarding the nature and  quality  of
           those relationships.

        b. Given the findings of fact  made  by  the  FTT  Judge,  we  have
           reached the  clear  view  that  any  application  of  the  "very
           compelling  circumstances"  test  would  have  resulted  in  the
           conclusion that there are none. One  of  the  features  of  this
           appeal is that the appellant falls far short of every hurdle  he
           would need to surmount if his appeal was to succeed.

        c. If we are wrong and the FTT Judge did not have  the  section  55
           duty at the forefront of his mind we have no doubt that he would
           have reached the same  conclusion.  The  FTT  Judge  found  that
           appellant had "very little involvement with  the  lives  of  his
           children". On a strict reading, this finding relates only to his
           2 sons. However, paragraph 52 goes on to refer to the  partner's
           wish to take "their children" to visit him in  Jamaica.  As  the
           appellant and his partner have  only  one  child  together,  any
           sensible reading of this paragraph strongly  suggests  that  the
           finding relates to the  appellant's  partner's  children  (their
           son,  and  her  daughter).  The  appellant's  evidence  of   his
           relationship with  his  partner's  daughter  (that  he  plays  a
           fatherly role in her life) was found by  the  FTT  Judge  to  be
           exaggerated. Taking these findings together, it seems to us that
           his approach to the question of undue harshness would have  been
           the same.

   30. This is a decision that  falls  short  in  numerous  ways.   We  have
       identified those above.  However, the FTT's findings of fact have not
       been challenged and they were open to it.  Those findings of fact are
       such that on any application of the applicable high tests in  section
       117C, the dismissal of the appeal on Article 8 grounds is inevitable.
        It follows that, even if we were to be wrong about  the  grounds  of
       appeal, any relevant errors of law are immaterial.

   31. For all of the reasons we have set out  we  are  satisfied  that  the
       appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of decision

The FTT's decision does not contain a material error of law and  we  do  not
set it aside.


Signed:     Date: 7 January 2020

HHJ Bird

