
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/00100/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2021                     |On 10 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             KORIE David LENNARD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Counsel


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


    Introduction

      1. The SSHD has appealed against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal
         ('FTT') promulgated on  4  December  2020,  allowing  Mr  Lennard's
         appeal on Article 8 grounds, against the SSHD's decision  dated  17
         December 2019 refusing his human rights claim following a  decision
         to deport him.



    Background

      2. Mr Lennard is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago,  born  in  December
         1997.  He first entered the UK with his  mother  in  2011  and  re-
         entered in 2012 when he was granted a settlement visa to  join  his
         mother.  He spent a six-month period in Trinidad in 2013,  when  he
         lived with his paternal grandfather.  After this time, he has lived
         continuously in the UK and was granted indefinite leave  to  remain
         on 4 July 2016.

      3. Mr Lennard and his mother were thrown out of her ex-husband's  home
         in 2014 and it has not been disputed that life was  very  difficult
         for them at around this time.  Mr Lennard was described as spending
         most of his time in his bedroom between 2014 and 2018, whilst using
         cannabis, at a time when his  mother  was  working  at  three  jobs
         whilst studying to  become  a  social  worker.   He  obtained  very
         limited school  qualifications.   After  an  altercation  with  his
         mother concerning, Mr Lennard left the family home in February 2018
         and his life quickly unravelled.  He  became  involved  in  a  gang
         whilst sofa surfing and  sleeping  in  a  park  and  his  drug  use
         progressed to wide ranging class A substances.  He fell  into  debt
         and began selling drugs.  As the FTT found at  [49]  his  drug  use
         increased and his mental health deteriorated after he left home and
         lost his support network.

      4. Between 2018 and 2019 Mr Lennard was convicted of various  offences
         including drugs offences (3  years  sentence)  and  an  offence  of
         violent disorder (18 months sentence),  all  of  which  took  place
         within the period April to September 2018.

      5. On 19 November 2018 the SSHD made a deportation  order  against  Mr
         Lennard.  In response he made  a  human  rights  claim,  which  was
         refused in the decision under appeal.  Mr Lennard, his  mother  and
         his stepfather gave  evidence  before  the  FTT.   Mr  Lennard  was
         released from prison in June 2020.

      6. Although the  FTT  had  concerns  regarding  some  aspects  of  the
         evidence provided by Mr Lennard and his  mother,  in  allowing  the
         appeal it accepted much of the evidence  adduced  on  Mr  Lennard's
         behalf, including a 37-page carefully drafted report from Dr Sen, a
         Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist.  The FTT recorded at [11] that Dr
         Sen's conclusions  were  not  challenged  by  the  SSHD.    Dr  Sen
         diagnosed Mr Lennard as suffering from  a  mental  and  behavioural
         disorder due to his use of cannabis,  but  that  he  was  currently
         stable.  He also found him to have significant  vulnerabilities  in
         his personality due to  adverse  childhood  experiences  (including
         significant  deprivation),  which  has  an  effect  on  his   adult
         behaviour  in  the  form  of  difficulties  in   managing   stress,
         difficulties  in  emotional  regulation,   poor   self-esteem   and
         vulnerability to ideas of hopelessness.  Dr Sen found that when, in
         2018, he was without  the  protective  factors  of  his  supportive
         family network, particularly his mother and stable accommodation he
         fell into multiple drug use and a life of crime.  He concluded that
         without these protective factors, the risk of deterioration in  his
         mental disorder of addiction escalating to polydrug dependence  and
         a life of crime was very high.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      7. The SSHD's grounds of appeal  contain  12  paragraphs  but  Mr  Tan
         clarified that the SSHD relied  upon  two  overarching  grounds  of
         appeal:

 i) The FTT's reasoning did not disclose  "very  compelling  circumstances"
    for the purposes of s.  117C(6)  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act');

ii) The FTT was not entitled to accept Dr Sen's conclusion, when  that  was
    based upon a different factual matrix (Mr Lennard  has  no  family  and
    accommodation to turn to in Trinidad) to the findings of fact  made  by
    the FTT  (Mr  Lennard  has  some  family  and  temporary  accommodation
    available in Trinidad).

      8. UTJ Martin granted permission to  appeal  in  a  decision  dated  4
         January 2021.  She observed that the FTT's  conclusion  that  there
         were very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public  interest
         in deporting  Mr  Lennard  was  not  arguably  sustainable  on  the
         evidence, particularly when he continued to use cannabis and  would
         have family support and access to employment in Trinidad, where any
         mental health issues might be dealt with.

      9. At the beginning of the hearing before me Mr Nath sought  to  place
         reliance upon an email indicating  that  Mr  Lennard  had  recently
         sought assistance from Turning Point in accordance  with  Dr  Sen's
         recommendations.  I indicated that post-decision evidence would not
         assist me in determining whether the FTT erred in law and  declined
         to admit the evidence.

     10. Mr Tan relied upon the grounds of appeal  in  support  of  the  two
         grounds of appeal.  Mr Nath took me  to  the  detail  of  Dr  Sen's
         report.  This was not available on the Tribunal's file but  a  copy
         was emailed to me and I have considered it in full.  Mr Tan's reply
         was very brief. He repeated his submission that  Dr  Sen  was  only
         partially informed of the likely position in Trinidad, and the  FTT
         erred  in  failing  to  find  that  this  undermined  his   overall
         conclusions.

     11. After hearing from both parties I reserved my decision, which I now
         provide with reasons.

Legal framework

     12.  There was no dispute between the  parties  as  to  the  applicable
         legal framework.  The SSHD's appeal turns upon the  application  of
         the factual matrix to the governing legal test in s.117C(6) in  the
         2002 Act, as informed by the remainder of Part 5A and the  criteria
         to be  considered  as  part  of  the  relevant  balancing  exercise
         contained in the  Strasbourg  authorities  on  Article  8.   It  is
         nevertheless helpful to set out s.117C in full:

             "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years of more,
             the public interest requires Cs deportation unless Exception 1
             or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  a.   C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom
                  for most of C 's life,

                  b.   C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  c.   There would be very signi?cant obstacles to Cs
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to be
                  deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
             relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and
             the effects of Cs deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
             and 2."

     13. In NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA 662, [2017] 1 WLR  207  it  was
         established that s.117C(6) still applied to  a  person  who  was  a
         'medium  offender'  and  not  a  'serious  offender',   like   this
         appellant.  Moreover, positive evidence of rehabilitation, and thus
         of a reduced risk of re-offending, could in principle  be  included
         in the overall proportionality exercise.  The correct approach  was
         described by Jackson LJ in this way:

             "32. ... The decision-maker, be it the Secretary of State or a
             tribunal,  must  look  at  all   the   matters   relied   upon
             collectively,  in  order  to  determine   whether   they   are
             sufficiently compelling to outweigh the high  public  interest
             in deportation.

             33.  Although there is  no  "exceptionality"  requirement,  it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in  deportation  will  be  rare.  The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient."

     14. Therefore, in considering whether "very  compelling  circumstances"
         for the purposes of s.117C(6) exist, the tribunal  should  consider
         the proportionality test required by the  Strasbourg  Court  -  see
         [27] and [38] of HA (Iraq) and [81] of Unuane.  For  the  avoidance
         of doubt, when I refer to "very  compelling  circumstances"  during
         the course of this decision, I am merely using  this  as  shorthand
         for  the  full  expression  contained  in  s.117C(6)   i.e.   "very
         compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
         Exceptions 1 and 2...".

     15. The  flexible  and  movable  nature  of  the  public  interest,  as
         described in Akinyemi v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2098, [2020]  1  WLR
         1843, does not mean that the s. 117C(6) test is anything less  than
         "extremely demanding".  As Underhill  LJ  put  it  at  [38]  of  HA
         (Iraq):

             "The effect is clear:  circumstances  will  have  to  be  very
             compelling in order to be sufficiently compelling to  outweigh
             the strong public interest in deportation."

     16. In the recent decision of the European Court  of  Human  Rights  in
         Unuane  v  The  United  Kingdom  (Application  no.  80343/17),  the
         applicant's case was that courts and tribunals  were  precluded  by
         domestic immigration rules  from  carrying  out  an  assessment  of
         deportation in compliance with the case-law of the Court  but  that
         argument was rejected at  [83].   However,  on  the  facts  of  the
         individual case, it was found that  the  UT  had  not  conducted  a
         separate balancing exercise under Article 8, and the Court made its
         own assessment, which led it to conclude that  the  seriousness  of
         the applicant's offences was not of a nature or degree  capable  of
         outweighing the best interests of the children so as to justify his
         expulsion.

     17. Unuane did not materially change the complexion of the recent Court
         of Appeal guidance in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2021] WLR 1327, [2020] EWCA
         Civ 1176.  At [29(A)] Underhill LJ made it clear  that  in  a  case
         such as this wherein it is accepted that the appellant is a 'medium
         offender' who cannot meet the requirements of the Exceptions:

             "... a full proportionality assessment is  required,  weighing
             the interference with the article 8 rights  of  the  potential
             deportee and his family against the  public  interest  in  his
             deportation. In conducting that assessment the  decision-maker
             is required by section  117C(6)  (and  paragraph  398  of  the
             Rules) to proceed on  the  basis  that  "the  public  interest
             requires  deportation  unless  there   are   very   compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and 2"."

     18. The  wide-ranging  evaluative  exercise  required  under  s.117C(6)
         clearly includes an application of the principles in the Strasbourg
         authorities to ensure compatibility with the UK's obligations under
         Article 8 and must be accommodated within the  statutory  scheme  -
         see NA (Pakistan) at [29] and [38]; HA (Iraq) at [28] and Unuane at
         [72-75] and [81-83].

     19. This is a case in which the FTT found that  one  of  the  necessary
         ingredients of Exception 1 could not be met.   Nevertheless,  facts
         and matters relevant to the  assessment  of  whether  an  Exception
         applies remain relevant to the overall  assessment,  and  could  be
         sufficient to outweigh the public interest in  deportation  either,
         if especially strong, by themselves or in  combination  with  other
         factors.  As the Court put it in NA (Pakistan) at [29] (as endorsed
         in HA (Iraq) at [33]):

             "... [A] foreign  criminal  is  entitled  to  rely  upon  such
             matters, but he would need to be able to point to features  of
             his case of a kind mentioned in Exceptions 1  and  2  (and  in
             paras. 399 or  399A  of  [the  Rules]),  or  features  falling
             outside the circumstances described in  those  Exceptions  and
             those paragraphs, which made his  claim  based  on  Article  8
             especially strong." (my emphasis)

    Error of law discussion

     20. It is clear from several passages in its decision but in particular
         [38], that the FTT correctly understood  that  the  test  posed  by
         s.117C(6) of the 2002 Act is a very demanding one.  I  accept  that
         the harder a test is to meet, the more important it is  to  marshal
         the relevant factors on each side so that they  can  be  given  the
         weight which  the  tribunal  considers  appropriate,  and  balanced
         against  one  another.   Although  the  FTT's  decision  might   be
         described as generous, there has been no suggestion  on  behalf  of
         the SSHD that the FTT misapplied the law.  Mr Tan  was  correct  to
         take this  approach.   When  assessing  proportionality  from  [83]
         onwards, the FTT properly adopted the balance  sheet  approach,  by
         marshalling all the relevant factors against the appellant followed
         by all the relevant factors in  his  favour.    This  included  the
         strong public interest in deportation in the light of the  severity
         of the offending and the risk of re-offending and  the  explanation
         that this was outweighed by the likely significant deterioration in
         Mr Lennard's mental health in Trinidad, such that there were  "very
         compelling circumstances".

     21. The grounds of appeal criticise the FTT's failure to pay particular
         regard to four matters, which  count  against  Mr  Lennard  in  the
         requisite balancing exercise.  Mr Tan limited  his  submissions  to
         the first two of these. I deal with each in turn together  with  Mr
         Tan's two overarching grounds of appeal.

     22. First, it was submitted that Mr Lennard continued  to  be  a  daily
         cannabis user and the FTT minimised the importance  of  this.   The
         FTT was well  aware  of  the  nature,  extent  and  history  of  Mr
         Lennard's cannabis use.  This was set out in  detail  in  Dr  Sen's
         report.  At [51] the FTT found that Mr Lennard continued to  be  an
         ongoing user of cannabis and placed weight on Dr Sen's diagnosis of
         cannabis  dependency  syndrome.   Indeed,  the   FTT   specifically
         factored this in as a factor against Mr Lennard when compiling  the
         balance sheet at [87].

     23. The SSHD's linked submission that Mr Lennard had no real desire  to
         reform or rehabilitate himself away from drug addiction was clearly
         rejected by the FTT.  The FTT accepted the  overall  evidence  from
         all three witnesses and Dr Sen that notwithstanding  his  continued
         cannabis use, Mr Lennard had drastically changed  his  life  around
         (in terms of stable employment, stable mental health  and  positive
         family relationships) since his release from prison and  return  to
         the family home - see [59] to [72] of the FTT's decision.  The  FTT
         was careful to note at [89] and [90] that  cannabis  use  continued
         but at a reduced level and there were other significant  protective
         factors which reduced the risk of re-offending in contrast  to  the
         relevant short period of instability and accompanying offending  in
         2018.

     24. Second, Mr Tan submitted that the FTT was wrong to attach weight to
         Dr Sen's opinion that Mr Lennard would suffer  a  deterioration  in
         his mental health and a return to hard drug use in Trinidad.   This
         constituted his second ground of appeal.  Mr Tan pointed  out  that
         this was predicated upon the evidence available to Dr Sen  from  Mr
         Lennard and his mother to the effect that there would be no  family
         support available in Trinidad.  The FTT rejected this aspect of the
         evidence and Mr Tan argued that in those circumstances, it was  not
         entitled to accept Dr Sen's conclusion,  which  was  based  upon  a
         different factual matrix.  This submission does not fit comfortably
         with the position adopted by the SSHD before the FTT: as set out at
         [11] the SSHD did not challenge Dr Sen's expertise, qualifications,
         experience or conclusions.

     25. The FTT clearly found that there would be some  family  support  in
         Trinidad, having made that express finding at [58], which  is  then
         repeated later on during the course of the balance  sheet  exercise
         at [88]. The FTT went on to carefully explain that it accepted  the
         evidence  from  Dr  Sen  that  Mr  Lennard  remained   particularly
         dependent upon his mother (see [70]) and the  level  of  dependency
         went beyond normal emotional ties (see [72]).  When the decision is
         read  as  a  whole,  the  FTT  was  entitled  to  accept  Dr  Sen's
         conclusions (see [72]) notwithstanding  its  own  findings  on  the
         availability of some family in Trinidad.  The FTT accepted that the
         loss of the close support  Mr  Lennard  accrued  from  his  mother,
         stepfather and  stepsister  and  the  absence  of  that  particular
         support in Trinidad would result in a deterioration of  his  mental
         health and addiction, leading to a return to a life  of  crime  and
         hard drugs addiction.  In reaching this finding,  the  FTT  clearly
         had  in  mind  its  earlier  finding  there  would  be   "temporary
         accommodation and some family support" in Trinidad, but  considered
         this would not be sufficient or  stable  enough  to  replicate  the
         family support in  the  UK,  so  as  to  avoid  the  high  risk  of
         deterioration in Trinidad.   Although Dr Sen's analysis  was  based
         upon a slightly different factual matrix  to  that  which  the  FTT
         applied, it is significant that Dr Sen focussed his attention  upon
         the loss of Mr Lennard's "current support  systems"  (my  emphasis)
         given his past  mental  and  behavioural  past  disorders  and  his
         significant personality vulnerabilities - see 1.3.1, 5.3 and 5.4 of
         Dr Sen's report.  In addition, when the report is read as  a  whole
         Dr Sen clearly identified "a supportive family network around  him,
         particularly his mother" (my emphasis) as the protective factor and
         not mere presence of family members - see 5.2 of Dr  Sen's  report.
         I am satisfied that whilst there was a  different  factual  matrix,
         that difference was not as stark as submitted by Mr Tan,  and  this
         probably  explains  why  the  SSHD  did  not  challenge  Dr   Sen's
         conclusions before the FTT.  On the FTT's  findings  the  requisite
         particular family support Mr Lennard was dependent upon in the  UK,
         could on no legitimate view be replicated in Trinidad.

     26. That analysis of the FTT's reasoning is consistent  with  [78]  and
         [79] when it addressed Exception 1.  At [78] the FTT  repeated  the
         family support and accommodation Mr Lennard would have in  Trinidad
         before saying this regarding s.117C(4)(c), at [79]:

             "However, we balance these  factors  against  the  high  risk,
             identified  by  Dr  Sen,  of  the  appellant's  mental  health
             significantly deteriorating if he is removed from his  current
             stable environment, with a resultant return to addiction and a
             life of crime.  On balance, we find that the very high risk of
             such deterioration would cause very significant  obstacles  to
             the appellant's integration to Trinidad."

     27. This finding has not been challenged by the  SSHD  and  it  clearly
         contributed  to  the  overall  assessment   of   "very   compelling
         circumstances".

     28. Third, the grounds suggest that Mr  Lennard  could  be  financially
         supported by his mother in Trinidad.  Mr Tan  was  correct  not  to
         highlight this during his submissions. The FTT was clearly aware of
         this and expressly found that there would be some accommodation for
         Mr Lennard in  Trinidad  and  he  could  maintain  a  long-distance
         relationship with his mother and stepfather.

     29. Fourth, the grounds submit that no consideration was  given  as  to
         what medical support would be available if Mr Lennard  returned  to
         drugs or his mental health deteriorated in Trinidad.  This is not a
         case in which  it  was  argued  that  medical  treatment  would  be
         unavailable in  Trinidad.   That  is  because  notwithstanding  its
         availability or otherwise,  the  FTT  accepted  that  Mr  Lennard's
         particular circumstances  including  the  personal  vulnerabilities
         described by Dr Sen are such that he faced a high risk of a  return
         to polydrug addiction, without the family support he  derived  from
         his UK-based family.

     30. I now return to Mr Tan's first ground of appeal.  As  I  have  said
         the FTT's conclusion that the  high  s.117C(6)  threshold  was  met
         might be considered generous, given the severity  of  Mr  Lennard's
         relatively recent offending and his continued cannabis use.  Whilst
         the conclusion that the strong public interest  was  outweighed  by
         other  matters  capable  of  giving  rise   to   "very   compelling
         circumstances" was relatively briefly expressed, the reasons for it
         are tolerably clear, when the decision is read as a whole.   It  is
         important to note that the FTT accepted that the high  risk  of  Mr
         Lennard's deterioration would cause very significant  obstacles  to
         his integration in Trinidad.  As noted above, NA (Pakistan) and  HA
         (Iraq) endorse the principle that the fact  that  (b)  and  (c)  of
         Exception 1 are met, remains relevant to  the  overall  assessment,
         and  could  be  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
         deportation either, if  especially  strong,  by  themselves  or  in
         combination with other  factors.   The  FTT  clearly  regarded  the
         highly likely deterioration in  Mr  Lennard,  in  combination  with
         other factors, as especially strong for the reasons  summarised  at
         [88] to [92].  This reasoning could have been more detailed  but  I
         am satisfied that the reasoning  for  the  ultimate  conclusion  is
         tolerably clear and was open to the FTT on the evidence.

    Conclusion

     31. I do not consider that the FTT made any material errors of law.  On
         the contrary, the FTT carried out a careful and balanced evaluation
         of all the important factors and  reached  a  rational  conclusion.
         This included keeping the severity of  the  offending,  the  strong
         public  interest  and  the  need  to  identify   "very   compelling
         circumstances" fully in mind. This was a decision arrived at  after
         a specific assessment of the evidence  and  not  by  a  process  of
         generalisation.  As such it accords with the approach that has been
         laid down in HA (Iraq) and described in Unuane.




    Decision

    The decision of the FTT does not contain a material error of law and is
    not set aside.


Signed:  Date:
Ms Melanie Plimmer
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer    30 April 2021
