
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
HU/00840/2015

                                                     HU/00839/2015
     HU/00841/2015
     HU/00842/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 5 February 2018                    |           On 12 February 2018        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                            RP (first appellant)
                            AP (second appellant)
                            RCP (third appellant)
                            PP (fourtH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Khan, instructed by Wisestep
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of the Philippines who were born  in  1977,
    1980, 2008 and 2010 respectively.  The first and second appellants  are
    married to each other and the third and  fourth  appellants  are  their
    children.  The appellants made human rights applications to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom but, by a  decision  dated  2  January  2015,  their
    applications were refused by the Secretary of State.  They appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Dineen) which, in a decision promulgated
    on 23 January 2017, dismissed the appeals.  The appellants now  appeal,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The issue in the appeal is whether the judge applied the relevant  law,
    including Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended) and the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705.   The  third
    appellant was 7 years old and had lived  throughout  his  life  in  the
    United  Kingdom  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
    However, as the judge noted [30] the third appellant had not  completed
    seven years of residence in the United Kingdom as at the  date  of  the
    application to the Secretary of State  (see  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)).
    The judge concluded that none of the  appellants  qualified  for  leave
    under the Immigration Rules and  in  his  analysis  of  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds, he concluded that it would  be  reasonable  for
    the third and fourth appellants to leave the  United  Kingdom  together
    with their parents [31] and for the  first  and  second  appellants  to
    return to the Philippines with the family.  The judge also  found  that
    the first and second appellants enjoyed family life with  relatives  in
    the United Kingdom which "goes beyond emotional ties because  they  are
    materially supported by them" [36].  Mr Tufan,  for  the  Secretary  of
    State before the Upper Tribunal, challenged that finding which he  said
    was wrong in any event.  Mr  Khan,  who  appeared  for  the  appellants
    before the Upper Tribunal, submitted that the judge had  not  addressed
    adequately or at all the provisions of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

 3. In the light of MA, it was necessary for  the  respondent  to  consider
    that there were "strong reasons", for removing a  child  who  had  been
    living in the United Kingdom for more than seven years  (a  "qualifying
    child" for the purposes of Section 117).  Mr Tufan submitted  that,  in
    the light of the Court of Appeal judgment in AM (Pakistan) [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 180, there were public interest considerations which would need  to
    be weighed against the seven year residence of the third appellant  and
    that this was a case in which  the  first  and  second  appellants  had
    demonstrated a blatant disregard for immigration law giving rise  to  a
    substantial public  interest  in  their  removal.   Mr  Tufan  provided
    helpful submissions but I do not agree that the inadequate analysis  of
    Judge Dineen in this instance can be saved.  I am well aware that it is
    of little consequence if a judge fails to refer in terms  to  statutory
    provision or jurisprudence provided he  or  she  properly  applies  the
    relevant principles of law and statute to the facts  as  found  in  the
    given case.  Having read the decision carefully,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that Judge Dineen has had the provisions of Section 117B(6) in his mind
    when he dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  At [30], the  judge
    notes that the third appellant had not resided in  the  United  Kingdom
    for at least seven years at  the  date  of  the  application  and  then
    stated:

         In any event, I am satisfied it would be reasonable  for  both  the
         third and fourth appellants to leave the  UK  together  with  their
         parents, if there were no reasonable grounds for the parents not to
         return.

 4. The judge went on to say at [32]:

         The children are young enough to adapt to  living  in  a  different
         country as  do  many  children  whose  parents  choose  to  migrant
         internationally.  In the present case, the parents  were  extremely
         familiar with the Philippines having  spent  most  of  their  lives
         there.

 5. At [40], Judge Dineen wrote:

         I take into account under Section 117B of the  2002  Act  that  the
         maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
         interest and that little weight should be  given  to  private  life
         established by an  adult  at  a  time  when  they  are  in  the  UK
         unlawfully, or when their immigration status is precarious.

 6. Judge Dineen did not err by noting that  paragraph  276ADE  requires  a
    period of seven years' residence in the United  Kingdom  to  have  been
    completed by the date of application.  However, it is not at all  clear
    whether the judge took any account of the seven year residence  of  the
    third appellant (which would have been achieved  by  the  date  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing) in determining the  appeal  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.   Indeed,  he  makes  no  mention  of  the  child's  long
    residence in the context of that Article 8 appeal.  Instead,  the  only
    lesson which he appears  to  draw  from  Section  117  is  that  public
    interest  considerations  are  relevant  in  the  analysis  as  is  the
    precarious nature of the immigration status of  the  first  and  second
    appellants.  Section 117B (6) provides that "the public  interest  does
    not  require"  the  removal  of  the  third  appellant's   parents   in
    circumstances where it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  The judge was correct to record
    that public interest considerations arise,  but  the  reason  he  gives
    (briefly) at [31] for finding that it would be reasonable is that there
    were no "reasonable grounds for the parents not to return".  Again,  at
    [32], although he legitimately observes that the  children  are  "young
    enough to adapt to living in a different country", the focus  is  again
    on  the  parents  who  had  "spent  most  of  their   lives   [in   the
    Philippines]".  Significantly, the judge does not refer to other public
    interest considerations such as those raised by  Mr  Tufan  before  the
    Upper Tribunal, namely the "blatant disregard" by the first and  second
    appellants of immigration law.  Likewise, although the judge finds that
    the two adult appellants enjoy a family life with  adult  relatives  in
    the United Kingdom, he leaves that point  unresolved  as  he  does  any
    detailed consideration of the private lives of any of  the  appellants.
    Further, as Judge Bruce noted when granting  permission,  there  is  no
    assessment of whether there exists "strong reasons" for the removal  of
    the third appellant or how such reasons might be  analysed  within  the
    context of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 or Section 117 of the 2002 Act.  I note that, although the hearing
    before Judge Dineen took place on 10 March 2016, his decision  was  not
    promulgated until 23 January 2017; it is possible that the  paucity  of
    the analysis is a consequence of the judge's completion of the decision
    after a very lengthy delay.

 7. For the reasons I have given above, I am not satisfied that  the  judge
    has delivered a cogent decision in  this  instance.  I  set  aside  the
    decision.  There will need to be further  fact-finding  to  update  the
    family circumstances and that is an exercise better  conducted  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Whilst it is unfortunate in  light  of  the  long
    delays in this case, the appeal will have to be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal which will remake the decision.



Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  23
    January 2017 is set aside.  The appeals are returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Dineen) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 8 February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


