
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01561/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 29th September 2020               |  On 05th October 2020               |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FA
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The SSHD's decision dated 9 January 2020.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Farrelly, promulgated on 6 March 2020.

     iv) The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT, stated in  the  application
         for permission to appeal dated 10 March 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 27 April 2020.

     vi) The UT's directions, issued  on  28  July  2020,  with  a  view  to
         deciding without a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in law and (b)
         if so, whether its decision should be set aside.

    vii) The SSHD's response, dated 31 July 2020.

   viii) The appellant's response, dated 12 August 2020.

 3. In light of all the above, the UT may now fairly and justly,  in  terms
    of rules 2 and 34,  decide  questions  (a)  and  (b)  above  without  a
    hearing.

 4. The crux of the SSHD's decision (at pages 3-5 of 7)  was  that,  having
    regard to the best interest of his daughter, her relocation with him to
    Nigeria would involve no  exceptional  circumstances  or  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences, and so could reasonably be expected.

 5. The FtT held to the contrary.

 6. The SSHD's grounds say at [1]  that  the  judge  failed  to  adequately
    consider the evidence; it is unclear on what basis he found it  in  the
    child's best interests to remain here; he would need to be sure of  all
    the facts; and it "cannot be said that simply because she has  been  in
    the UK since birth, her best interests lie in remaining here".

 7. The judge had to decide on such evidence as he had before him.  He  did
    not have to attain certainty.

 8. The judge does say why he thinks it better for the child to stay  here.
    See the summary at [4  (ii)]  of  the  appellant's  response,  and  the
    decision: [43], has started primary school here, has only known life in
    Glasgow; [44], removal to Nigeria would make contact  with  her  mother
    very difficult (she being a national of  the  Czech  Republic  who  had
    returned there and was in custody); [45], possibility  of  being  taken
    into care were he to leave without her; [46], possible visits from  her
    mother if she remains in the  UK;  [47],  unlikelihood  of  her  mother
    attempting to live in Nigeria; [48], better prospects of employment  of
    the appellant in the UK;  [49],  insufficient  for  respondent  to  say
    educational facilities exist in Nigeria; a country where she has  never
    been; English used, but no familiarity with other languages; no support
    from mother or extended family; [50], distinctive  mixed  race  origins
    would make transition  difficult;  [51],  not  a  UK  national,  but  a
    European; educational, heath  service  and  other  benefits;  [52],  no
    evidence of state supervision of child welfare in Nigeria; [53], unduly
    harsh to expect her to live in Nigeria.

 9. Ground 1 does not fairly reflect the decision.  Some factors listed are
    obviously stronger than others, and some might be  debatable;  but  the
    decision is not based only on the child being here since birth.

10. Ground 2 says that the judge speculated, but his views  are  reasonable
    estimates of future possibilities; and  the  ground  goes  on  to  mere
    alternative guesses about mother and child coming together  in  Nigeria
    or in the Czech Republic.

11. Ground 3 says that the judge failed to consider that the child did  not
    qualify to remain under the EEA Regulations, but he declined at [37] to
    deal with any such point.  This ground leads nowhere.

12. Ground 4 complains vaguely that the judge did not go through the  steps
    required by the rules and by statute, but that does not fairly  reflect
    his  overall  approach,  which  is  reached  in  terms  akin   to   the
    respondent's decision, although coming down on  the  other  side.   The
    appellant's response on this ground, at [7], is well taken.

13. There was a case to be made for the respondent that on  the  assumption
    of the appellant leaving the UK  for  Nigeria,  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect his daughter, for whom he was currently the sole  carer,  to  go
    with him.  As conceded  for  the  appellant  at  [4  (ii)],  the  FtT's
    decision might be  viewed  as  generous.   The  grounds  of  challenge,
    however, are only insistence and  disagreement,  and  do  not  identify
    error in the decision on a point of law.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which is preserved.

      [pic]

      29 September 2020
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

