

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
HU/01518/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   | Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2018                   | On 1 October 2018                    |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                            mrs minoti rani saha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp instructed by Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, whose  date  of  birth  is  2nd
    January 1946, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 12th December 2016 to  refuse  her
    application for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative  of  her
    son  in  the  United  Kingdom.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Swaniker
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 9th April 2018.   The
    Appellant now appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted by Judge
    Hollingworth on 1st August 2018.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant applied  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent  relative.   It  is  claimed  that  her
    husband died in 2012 and that two of her children live  in  Canada  and
    the other two in the UK.  It is  claimed  that  she  has  a  number  of
    medical conditions which indicate that she requires long term  personal
    care and that she is a Hindu  and  requires  personal  care  only  from
    within the Hindu community and that this is not  available  to  her  in
    Bangladesh.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  Sponsor.
    The  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR 2.4 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  that
    as a result of age, illness  or  disability  she  requires  long  -term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks.  However  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant had demonstrated that she  met  paragraph  E-
    ECDR 2.5 on the basis that she had not provided the specified  evidence
    set out in paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge accordingly considered that the Appellant had  not  submitted
    any of the documents specified to demonstrate that  she  is  unable  to
    obtain the required level of care in Bangladesh.  The judge went on  to
    consider Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules and  found  on  the
    evidence that the Appellant's relationship with the Sponsor is not such
    as constitutes family life within Article 8.   However,  in  the  event
    that he was wrong in that conclusion, the judge  went  on  to  consider
    proportionality and concluded that the Appellant  had  not  established
    that there were exceptional circumstances warranting the issue of entry
    clearance on Article 8 grounds  outside  of  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

The grounds of appeal and submissions

 4. The Grounds of Appeal set out five grounds challenging the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The first ground contends that the judge does
    not state in terms that she found paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 of  Appendix  FM
    to be unmet instead focusing on the evidential requirements set out  in
    paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE.  It is contended that it  appears  from
    paragraphs 24 to 26 of the decision that paragraph E-ECDR 2.5  was  not
    met even though the judge found at paragraph 24 that, as a devout Hindu
    the Appellant required care to be provided by a  member  of  the  Hindu
    community.  It is contended that the judge  was  preoccupied  with  the
    evidential requirement at paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE and that  this
    dominated her resolution of the substantive question  at  paragraph  E-
    ECDR 2.5.  The grounds of appeal highlight that the judge accepted that
    the Sponsor was a credible  witness  whose  evidence  was  truthful  at
    paragraph 15 and that the Appellant's family had approached the  temple
    in Bangladesh who had been unable to find a  carer  for  her  from  the
    Hindu community.

 5. It is contended that there was evidence that the judge  had  failed  to
    consider which showed that  family  members  had  gone  to  substantial
    lengths to provide care for the Appellant  in  Bangladesh.   There  was
    evidence that the Appellant's nephew had provided care for her in  2016
    until he was unable no longer able to do so.  The  Appellant's  son  in
    Canada had to go in December 2017 to support her.  It is contended that
    the judge appeared  to  consider  that  the  evidence  only  showed  an
    approach to the Hindu temple whereas the oral evidence from the Sponsor
    showed prolonged attempts to obtain care  in  Bangladesh  extending  to
    enlisting assistance from relatives.  It is contended  that  the  judge
    failed to take  account  of  the  Sponsor's  evidence  in  his  witness
    statement that he could not place an advert for a carer  because  there
    were constant attacks on the Hindu community and, as a  lonely  elderly
    person, his mother was vulnerable and would have been an  easy  target.
    It is argued that the judge failed to address  the  evidence  from  the
    Temple as regards to the breadth of their efforts  to  seek  assistance
    for the Appellant through worshippers and through their own staff.

 6. It is argued in the grounds that it is difficult to see how  the  judge
    could justify a conclusion that the  measures  taken  seeking  a  local
    carer were insufficient or unreasonable given that the Temple which had
    been approached is the leading Hindu institution in Bangladesh.  It  is
    contended that the judge also failed to  take  into  account  that  the
    Sponsor's evidence about his reluctance to advertise more widely  which
    was supported by evidence about violence against members of  the  Hindu
    community in Bangladesh.  It is argued that the failure to address  all
    of the evidence undermines the judge's conclusion that the Sponsor  had
    not done enough to locate a local carer.   It  is  contended  therefore
    that insofar as the judge did address paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 of  Appendix
    FM her reasoning and conclusion was unsustainable.

 7. The second Ground of Appeal  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    approach to Appendix FM-SE paragraph 35.  The  grounds  highlight  that
    there was evidence satisfying this requirement  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge including evidence from Dr Alam and Dr Begum.

 8. In his submissions Mr Fripp highlighted that the judge  had  found  the
    Sponsor to be credible at paragraph 15.  He pointed out that the  judge
    found that the Appellant requires long term personal care and that  she
    met the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR 2.4.  He highlighted that  the
    judge accepted the medical  evidence.   He  contended  that  the  judge
    considered paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 at paragraph  21  but  failed  to  take
    account of the finding made later at paragraph 24 where she  found;  "I
    also find no reason to disbelieve the evidence that  as  a  devout  and
    strict Hindu she requires such care to be provided by a member  of  the
    Hindu community.  I find that this is the only limit put on the type of
    care required by the Appellant."

 9. Mr Fripp contended that the judge's findings and the evidence which the
    judge failed to address did in  fact  show  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE were met.  In his submission  the  judge
    was preoccupied with the evidential requirement  over  the  substantive
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR 2.5.  He accepted that both provisions
    have to be met  but  contended  that  the  judge  materially  erred  in
    allowing  the  evidential  requirements  to  obscure  the   substantive
    requirements.  In his contention there was  abundant  evidence  all  of
    which had been accepted by the judge that went to show the satisfaction
    of the substantive aspect of paragraph E-ECDR 2.5.

10. Mr Fripp referred to two letters from the Temple at pages 25 and 27  of
    the Appellant's bundle.  He pointed out that at  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision the judge had noted that the evidence from  the  Sponsor  that
    the Temple from which the evidence  had  been  obtained  was  the  main
    temple in the whole of Bangladesh.   He  highlighted  in  addition  the
    letter from the Appellant's nephew at paragraph 24 saying that he  used
    to assist her in 2016 but was unable to do so any more.   The  evidence
    also showed that relatives have travelled from abroad to look after the
    Appellant.   Mr  Fripp  pointed  to  the  letter  at  page  20  of  the
    Appellant's bundle from the Appellant's second son which  he  submitted
    was consistent with the Sponsor's  evidence.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge had dealt with the issue of paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 very shortly  at
    paragraph 21  given  that  she  had  already  accepted  evidence  which
    incorporated or endorsed  the  evidence  of  the  son  in  Canada,  the
    Appellant's nephew and the Temple committee.  He submitted that  it  is
    clear that the substantive test was met.

11. Mr Fripp  submitted  that  an  adequate  examination  of  the  evidence
    demonstrated that the requirements of paragraph 35  of  Appendix  FM-SE
    were met.  He referred to the letter at  page  31  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle from Dr Alam and the psychiatric evidence at pages 34 and 35  of
    the Appellant's bundle which indicates that it  is  essential  for  the
    Appellant to live with family members.  In his submission the  evidence
    from the family doctor and from the psychiatrist were endorsed  by  the
    judge.

12. In response Mr Tufan submitted that paragraph 35 was  not  met  on  the
    basis of the evidence before the judge.  He submitted that the evidence
    before the judge from the Sponsor recorded at paragraph 10 that  Hindus
    make up only 1% of  the  population  in  Bangladesh  whereas  objective
    evidence shows that it is actually 10%.  In any event he submitted that
    the evidence submitted does not come within paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-
    SE.  In his submission on the basis of the evidence  submitted  to  the
    judge the Appellant did not make out her case under the Rules  and  the
    conclusions were open to the judge.

Error of Law

13. I deal with grounds 1 and 2 together.  The relevant provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules are as follows:-

         Appendix FM

         "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or disability require long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.


         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where
         they are living, because-

             (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country
             who can reasonably provide it; or
             (b) it is not affordable."



         Appendix FM-SE

         "Adult dependent relatives
         ...
         35. Independent evidence that the applicant is unable, even with
         the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to
         obtain the required level of care in the country where they are
         living should be from:
              (a) a central or local health authority;
              (b) a local authority; or
              (c) a doctor or other health professional.
         ..."

14. The  judge  accepted  at  paragraph  20  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR 2.4 and found that,  as  a  result  of
    age, illness or disability the Appellant required  long  term  personal
    care to perform everyday tasks.  That finding has not been  challenged.



15. The judge went on to consider the provisions of E-ECDR 2.5 at paragraph
    21 of the decision.  As set out above,  in  this  case  that  paragraph
    required the Appellant to show  that  she  is  unable,  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the Sponsor,  to  obtain  the  required
    level of care in Bangladesh because it is not available and there is no
    person in that country who can reasonably provide it.

16. Mr Fripp asserted that the judge failed to engage with that part of the
    assessment.  Instead he submitted the judge allowed  the  consideration
    of the provisions of  the  specified  documents  under  Appendix  FM-SE
    paragraph  35  to  obscure  consideration  of  the  substantive  issue.
    However, I note that Mr Fripp properly accepted  that  both  provisions
    had to be met.

17. In considering the substantive provisions I accept that,  at  paragraph
    21, the judge did focus on the requirements of paragraph 35 of Appendix
    FM-SE.  However it is clear from the consideration elsewhere  that  the
    judge had in mind the factors relevant to the  substantive  issues.  At
    paragraph 24 the judge accepted the evidence  that,  as  a  devout  and
    strict Hindu, the Appellant required that her care  be  provided  by  a
    member of the Hindu community.

18. At paragraph 25 the judge considered the efforts to obtain  such  care.
    The judge accepted that the family had  approached  the  Hindu  Temple.
    That the  judge  found  "I  do  not  consider  that  this  evidence  is
    sufficient to demonstrate that a local Hindu carer could not/cannot  be
    found for the Appellant".  The judge found  that  little  if  any  real
    evidence pointed to efforts made directly by the Sponsor and/or  family
    members to try to find a suitable carer themselves for  the  Appellant.
    The judge considered it reasonable  to  expect  that  the  Sponsor  and
    family would look to secure such help themselves outside of looking  to
    the Temple to help find them a carer.  In the judge's view the  Sponsor
    is familiar with life in Bangladesh and she considered it reasonable to
    expect him to carry out his own enquiries and make efforts  himself  to
    seek the appropriate care for his mother in Bangladesh.  She considered
    it likely that the Sponsor would have his own network  of  friends  and
    indeed relations in Bangladesh who he could reasonably be  expected  to
    consult to help him seek out and obtain a carer from within  the  Hindu
    community.  The judge  did  not  find  any  evidence  or  any  credible
    evidence to demonstrate any such efforts being made by the  Sponsor  to
    find a suitable carer for his mother. Although the judge considered  it
    commendable that the Sponsor sought the assistance of the Hindu Temple,
    she found that this effort fell far short of  supporting  the  argument
    that suitable care cannot be found for the Appellant.

19. The judge went on at  paragraph  26  to  consider  this  issue  further
    reiterating that there was no reliable evidence to demonstrate that the
    Sponsor and/or other family members had themselves actively looked into
    identifying  and  arranging  suitable  care  for  the   Appellant   and
    considered it reasonable to expect greater efforts to be made and shown
    in this regard.

20. The judge considered the Sponsor's evidence about the fact that all  of
    the poor people were working in the  ready-made  garment  industry  and
    that Hindus only made up 1% of the  population  in  Bangladesh  was  "a
    sweeping and unsupported generalisation"[26].  The judge accepted  that
    the Hindu community is in a minority in Bangladesh and had  faced  some
    discrimination and attacks  but  did  not  find  credible  evidence  to
    substantiate or indicate that this  had  a  meaningful  impact  on  the
    prospects of sourcing a carer from within the community.  The judge did
    not accept that the fact that the Temple Committee was unable to find a
    Hindu  carer  sufficient  to  support  a  conclusion  that  there   are
    exceptional circumstances to the extent that the Appellant is unable to
    obtain the required level of care in Bangladesh.

21. Accordingly, whilst at paragraph 21 the judge focused on the  specified
    documents required by paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE, it is clear  from
    paragraphs 25 and 26  that  the  judge  did  consider  the  substantive
    elements of E-ECDR 2.5 and was not satisfied with the  evidence  before
    her as to the efforts made to find a suitable carer in Bangladesh.

22. In the grounds and in his submissions Mr  Fripp  referred  to  evidence
    from the Temple but it is clear from paragraphs  25  and  26  that  the
    judge did not consider that this evidence was sufficient to demonstrate
    that the Appellant was unable to obtain the required level of  care  in
    Bangladesh.

23. Mr Fripp referred to the letter from the  nephew  at  page  24  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  While the letter talks about how he had previously
    sometimes assisted his  aunt  the  nephew  stated  that  he  no  longer
    travelled to Dhaka to assist her any more.  Although he refers  to  the
    fact that his cousins travelled from abroad to look after the Appellant
    he makes no reference to efforts to obtain the required level  of  care
    in  Bangladesh.   Mr  Fripp  also  referred  to  the  letter  from  the
    Appellant's son who lives in Canada  at  page  20  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  That letter asserts that it is  impossible  to  find  suitable
    Hindu nursing support in Bangladesh and indicates that "we  have  tried
    every possible way to arrange nursing support for her  in  Bangladesh".
    However no details are given as to what efforts have been made  by  the
    family apart from the enquiries with the Temple  and  no  evidence  was
    provided to substantiate the assertion that the family had tried 'every
    possible way' to obtain appropriate care.

24. Accordingly, I find that, in considering E-ECDR 2.5, it is  clear  that
    the judge took into account the factors and the  evidence  set  out  at
    paragraphs  25  and  26  and  the  conclusion  that   the   substantive
    requirements have not been met were open to the judge on the  basis  of
    this evidence.

25. The judge considered at paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE which  sets  out
    the specified documents in considering whether the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of  E-ECDR  2.5.   Paragraph  35  sets  out  the  evidence
    required in relation to obtaining the level of care in  Bangladesh  and
    states that independent evidence that the  Appellant  is  unable,  even
    with the practical and financial help of the  Sponsor,  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in Bangladesh should be from a central or  local
    health authority, a local health authority, or a doctor or other health
    professional.  The judge referred to the  letter  from  the  Temple  at
    paragraph 21 and considered that this did not fall within the specified
    documents at paragraph 35.

26. Mr Fripp referred to other evidence before the judge and submitted that
    there was evidence which met the  requirements  of  paragraph  35.   He
    referred to  the  letter  dated  20th  August  2016  from  Dr  Alam,  a
    diabetologist, at page 31  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.   That  letter
    states that the Appellant is no longer able to  undertake  her  regular
    day-to-day  activities  and  requires  assistance  for   her   everyday
    household tasks and states "as a family physician, I  understand  that,
    unfortunately there is no-one to assist her, which is  very  alarming".
    Mr Fripp suggested that this sentence is reflective of an inability  to
    obtain a carer.  He also referred to pages 34 and 35 of the Appellant's
    bundle which contains evidence  from  a  psychologist  Dr  Begum  which
    states that for the Appellant "to  be  mentally  healthy,  it  has  now
    become essential for her to live with family members.  So, we  strongly
    recommend her family members to arrange this without  further  delays".
    Whilst this emphasises that support is required from family members, in
    my view this does not strictly meet the requirements of paragraph 35 in
    relation to the inability of family  members  to  obtain  the  required
    level of care in Bangladesh.  I do not  accept  Mr  Fripp's  submission
    that this evidence is conclusive of the specified evidence requirements
    set out in paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE.  I accept that the judge did
    accept the medical evidence as set out at paragraphs 17 to  19  of  the
    decision.  However this evidence is not conclusive of paragraph 35  and
    in my view it was open to the judge to find that the Appellant had  not
    submitted the specified documents under paragraph 35.

27. I now turn to the third, fourth and fifth grounds.  These relate to the
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

28. The third ground contends that in finding that there  was  no  relevant
    family life between the Appellant and her family members in the UK  the
    judge raised a new point  which  had  not  been  raised  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer or the Entry Clearance Manager.  Reliance  is  placed
    on RM (Kwok-on-Tong: HC 395 para 320) India [2006]  UKAIT  00039  which
    stated that if new elements of the Immigration Rules come into play  at
    the time of a hearing the  parties  must  be  allowed  any  appropriate
    adjournment in order to avoid the injustice of being taken by surprise.
     It is contended that if the Appellant had been aware that the issue of
    family life was in issue it would have been addressed in  evidence  and
    submissions and that the judge could not fairly take a new point in the
    absence of any representative of the ECO at  the  hearing  and  without
    notice.

29. I do not accept that this ground has been made out.  The only Ground of
    Appeal open to the Appellant in relation to the decision  under  appeal
    is a human rights ground.  The Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal relies on Article 8 and the steps set out in R v SSHD ex parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The skeleton argument submitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal sets out the relevant Immigration Rules and sets out  the
    Razgar steps.  It is very clear that, as this was an  appeal  based  on
    Article 8, the judge was required to undertake a proper  assessment  of
    Article 8 which includes the first  assessment  as  undertaken  by  the
    judge at  paragraph  22  as  to  whether  the  family  life  exists  in
    accordance with Article 8.

30. In any event the judge went on to  consider  at  paragraphs  23  to  27
    proportionality and  therefore  if  there  was  any  error  as  to  the
    assessment of family life it is not material.

31. In any event Mr Tufan highlighted the decision in Britcits v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ  368.   That  decision
    considered the provisions of Appendix FM in relation to adult dependent
    relatives.  In looking at Article 8 Sir Terence Etherton,  MR  said  at
    paragraph 61:

         "Nor do I accept the submission that there is  always  family  life
         which engages Article 8 of the Convention  whenever  a  UK  citizen
         with an elderly parent resident outside the UK wishes to bring  the
         parent to the UK to look after the parent.  Whether or not there is
         family life at the moment of the application will depend on all the
         facts as to the relationship between parent and adult child and its
         history ...".

32. This is reiterated at paragraph 74  where  reference  is  made  to  the
    decision  in   Kugathas   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
    Department [2003] EWCA Civ 170 where the court found that, with regard
    to an adult, neither blood ties nor  the  concern  and  affection  that
    ordinarily go with them are,  by  themselves  or  together,  enough  to
    constitute family life and that there is no presumption that  a  person
    has a family life even with the members of a person's immediate family.
     The court has to scrutinise all the relevant factors and there must be
    something more than normal emotional ties and  at  paragraph  86  where
    Lord Justice Sales said:-

         "In my view there is likely to be a  significant  number  of  cases
         even within a paradigm type of situation involving elderly  parents
         abroad ... in which Article 8 rights will not be engaged and  where
         for that reason the application of the ADR Immigration Rules  would
         not contravene Article 8."

33. The judge considered family life under Article 8 at paragraph 22  where
    she  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the  Sponsor  is  living  an
    independent life with his own nuclear family  in  the  UK.   The  judge
    accepted that the Sponsor has a good relationship with his  mother  and
    is clearly concerned about her health and welfare.  The judge  accepted
    that the Appellant benefits from the presence of her family members  in
    terms of the positive effects their visits to her  in  Bangladesh  have
    had on  her  mental  health  but  did  not  accept  that  the  evidence
    demonstrates that the Appellant's relationship with  the  Sponsor  goes
    beyond the normal emotional ties between a parent and adult  child  and
    what she considered to be a child's natural affection for  and  concern
    about the parent's welfare, wellbeing and  support.   The  judge  found
    nothing in the evidence to point to the Sponsor playing a role  in  the
    Appellant's life so as to elevate  his  relationship  with  his  mother
    beyond that naturally to be found between a parent and adult child  and
    the judge noted that he has his own family in  the  UK  and  has  lived
    apart from the Appellant for some years now.  The judge  considered  it
    perfectly natural for a parent to be bouyed by the presence of a  child
    or grandchildren and considered that the evidence supports the  natural
    consequences of such interaction between a parent and child.  The judge
    also found no credible reason why the Appellant and  Sponsor  could  or
    should not be able to continue and maintain and sustain  this  positive
    effect by continuing with visits to each other so as  to  properly  and
    effectively address any related mental health issues the Appellant  may
    suffer.  For these reasons the judge did not consider that in this case
    the relationship amounted to family life within Article 8.  In my  view
    these findings were open to the judge and the judge has given  adequate
    reasons for these findings.

34. In the Grounds of Appeal in developing the fourth ground it is asserted
    that reliance is placed on the case of Pawandeep Singh v ECO New  Delhi
    [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1075  where  the  Court  of   Appeal   applied   the
    jurisprudence of the European Court  of  Human  Rights  said  that  the
    existence or non-existence of family life for the purposes of Article 8
    is essentially a question of fact depending on the  real  existence  in
    practice of close personal ties.  In my view the judge  undertook  such
    analysis of this case on its facts and reached a conclusion open to her
    on the evidence.

35. The fifth Ground of  Appeal  contends  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    alternative finding that the decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  is
    proportionate.  It is contended that the judge erred in  requiring  the
    Appellant to show exceptional circumstances.  However as is clear  from
    my assessment in my view the findings in relation  to  the  Rules  were
    open to the judge.  In these circumstances it was open to the judge  to
    treat the failure  to  meet  the  Rules  as  a  significant  factor  in
    assessing proportionality.  In my view this is exactly what  the  judge
    did at paragraphs 25 and 26 of the decision.  In these circumstances in
    my view the judge's proportionality assessment was open to her  on  the
    evidence before her.  This ground has not been made out.

36. I find that the judge reached conclusions open to her on  the  evidence
    in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8.   In  these
    circumstances the Grounds of Appeal have not been made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 26th September 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date: 26th September 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
