
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01850/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 November 2018                          |On 6 December 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 GLORIA [P]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Heaver, Solicitor instructed by Hennessey &
                    Hammudi, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the  appeal  of  Mrs  [P]  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 11 December 2017 refusing her application on  human  rights
    grounds for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   There was an earlier hearing before me in July where I found  an  error
    of law in the decision of the judge below. It is not a  matter  of  any
    criticism of him, he simply was not provided with any documentation and
    it looks as there may have been  a  confusion  in  that  the  appellant
    thought that the Secretary of State would provide the documentation and
    so she did not need to.  We have those documents now but  matters  have
    moved on somewhat.

3.   It is accepted on her behalf that  the  previous  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain had lapsed and when she was granted  a  visit  visa  on
    return to the United Kingdom that was the end of  that  leave  and  the
    only basis upon which she can succeed therefore now is on the basis  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

4.   The family circumstances have changed somewhat as well.  The  children,
    twins, are in school in the United  Kingdom,  they  are  jointly  UK/US
    citizens, they are in the process of  studying  for  their  GCSEs.   Mr
    Scott has had to go back to California because his company was sold  to
    Wave Computers and he is an employee of Wave Computers and he is having
    for now to work for them in California.

5.   In the very helpful written submissions I have  from  Mr  Melvin  while
    not conceding the appeal he takes a realistic view of the facts of  the
    case and says at paragraph 18 the court may decide  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to require Mrs [P] to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules under the five  year  route  by  returning,  with  or
    without the family, to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  or
    settlement and allow this appeal under the ten  year  route  which  may
    involve more expense in the long run.  I think that is  realistic.   It
    seems to me in the family circumstances as they are that  it  would  be
    wholly disproportionate to require either Mr Scott to give up  his  job
    in California, come to the United Kingdom, get a job here and  seek  to
    meet the requirements or the Rules or for Mrs [P] to go  to  California
    and apply from there.  Mrs [P] is here as the sole guardian of her sons
    in the United Kingdom.  If she were to have to  leave  California  with
    them to  make  an  application  then  as  Mr  Heaver  says  that  would
    ultimately be considered in Sheffield, it would take several months and
    they are at a crucial stage in their education.

6.   So, bringing all these  matters  together  it  seems  to  me  that  the
    argument for disproportionality of refusal is clearly made out in  this
    case and accordingly the appeal is  allowed  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date     21 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
