
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01336/2016


HU/01342/2016


HU/01344/2016


HU/01348/2016


HU/01351/2016
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 January 2018                           |On 26 January 2018            |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RIZWAN [G]
                                SHUMALIA [R]
                                    [W R]
                                   [Yl F]
                                   [Yn F]
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                    Mr. O. Sobowale of counsel,
instructed by Marks &                      Marks Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS






BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The 1st Respondent was born on 6 November 1976 and the  2nd  Respondent
    was born on 23 June 1982. Their three children were born on [ ] 2007, [
    ] 2010 and [ ] 2014. They are all nationals of Pakistan.

2.   The 1st Respondent entered the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant on 12 September 2010. The 2nd, 3rd and 4th  Respondents
    entered the United Kingdom as his dependents on 12 August 2012, when he
    had been granted further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-study)
    Migrant. The 5th Respondent was born here.

3.   The Respondents made a human rights application on 24 August  2015  but
    their application was refused on 7  January  2016.  They  appealed  and
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips allowed their appeals in a decision,
    promulgated on 24  April  2017.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  her
    decision on 5 May 2017 and First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Osborne  granted
    the Appellant permission to appeal on 16 November 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

4.    Both  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  and  counsel   for   the
    Respondents made oral submissions and I have referred to the content of
    these submissions, where relevant, in my decision below.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   At paragraph 26 of her  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phillips
    found  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not  provided   sufficient
    information in  her  refusal  letter  to  support  the  assertion  that
    suitable medical treatment was available  for  the  5th  Respondent  in
    Pakistan. When granting permission to appeal First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne found that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phillips  had  arguably
    erred in law. In particular, he found that "in an otherwise careful and
    focused decision it was nonetheless arguable that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Phillips had reversed the burden of proof  in  paragraph  26.  He
    also went on to find that it was for the Respondents to establish  that
    appropriate care is unavailable in Pakistan and/or  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the 5th Respondent to rely upon  the  healthcare
    that is available in Pakistan".

7.    As  submitted  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Phillips had ended her decision by  merely  saying  that
    she allowed the  appeal  because  the  Appellant's  decision  had  been
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. However, it  was
    clear from her decision that the breach concerned the medical treatment
    required by the 5th Respondent.

8.   The medical evidence provided by the Royal London Hospital  and  Newham
    University Hospital confirmed that the 5th  Respondent  had  been  born
    prematurely and had suffered from  chronic  lung  disease,  necrotising
    enterocolitis, gastro oesophageal reflux, group B meningitis  and  that
    she was now suffering from a hole  in  her  heart,  which  may  require
    surgery.

9.    In  his  letter,  dated  9  February  2017,  Dr.  Ali,  a   consultant
    paediatrician at Newham University Hospital, stated that her "need  can
    be categorised as complex need which can  only  be  provided  in  well-
    established Multidisciplinary team effort, which cannot be provided  in
    Pakistan". This evidence was not challenged by the Appellant.

10.  In the refusal letter the Appellant had  noted  that  "according  to  a
    Country  of  Origin  Information  Report,  treatment   and   specialist
    paediatric care is available in Pakistan. Consideration has been  given
    to the difference in the standard of  medical  facilities  in  Pakistan
    compared with that available here". She then  went  on  to  state  that
    "although it is accepted that the health care  systems  in  the  United
    Kingdom and in Pakistan are unlikely to be equivalent,  this  does  not
    mean that [the 5th Defendant's] case is exceptional and"  entitles  her
    to remain here.

11.  In paragraph 25 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Phillips  implicitly  found
    that this was not sufficient and relied upon the decision by the  Grand
    Chamber of the European Court of  Human  Rights  Paposhvili  v  Belgium
    (Application No. 41738/10) where it held that:

         "... the definition of "very exceptional needs to be clarified. The
         Court determines that Article 3 is triggered in these  cases  where
         "the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving  country  or
         the lack of access to such treatment, exposes the individual  to  a
         serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  or  her  state  of
         health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction
         in life expectancy".

12.  In paragraph 28 First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips also noted that  the
    Grand Chamber "highlighted that appropriate procedures need to  be  put
    in place which allow the individual to adduce evidence of the potential
    risk upon return to the country of origin and for the State for examine
    the foreseeable consequences of return with regard to both the  general
    situation and the individual's circumstances".

13.  In paragraph 30 she also found that there was "sufficient  evidence  to
    make it necessary  for  the  [Appellant]  to  examine  the  foreseeable
    consequences of return".

14.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips did not make an explicit finding  in
    relation to Article 3 but implicitly found that the [Appellant] had not
    followed the judgment in Paposhvili. This amounted to an error  of  law
    because, although she was obliged to take into account decisions of the
    Grand Chamber, she had to follow the precedent established by the House
    of Lords in N v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2005]
    UKHL31, which imposes a much higher test for a breach of Article  3  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights in medical cases and  does  not
    suggest that the Secretary of State for the Home Department  bears  the
    burden of proof.  It was not simply a case of he who  asserted  bearing
    the burden of proof.

15.  She also erred in law in so far as she relied on  Paposhvili  when  she
    went on to find that, if the 5th Respondent had to go to Pakistan, this
    would amount to a disproportionate breach of Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights. She also failed to take  into  account  the
    Upper Tribunal's decision in Akhalu  (health  claim:  ECHR  Article  8)
    [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC) or give adequate reasons for finding  a  breach
    of Article 8.

16.  As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Phillips  did
    err in law in her decision.
DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The appeal is remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Phillips.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 18 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


