
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/01853/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 25 July 2019                            |on 2 August 2019                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             SANDEEP SINGH MANN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Murray,
    promulgated on 15 April 2019.   His  5  grounds  are  set  out  in  his
    application dated 30 April 2019.  Permission was granted principally on
    ground 4, based on Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL  40.   Mr  Caskie  based  his
    submissions on that issue, and  on  the  overlapping  question  of  the
    weight given to the public interest, it being "clear that the appellant
    would be granted entry clearance" if he were to apply from India.

 2. It is convenient to deal firstly with minor  points  arising  from  the
    other grounds.

 3. Ground 1 says that the judge  erred  by  not  giving  reasons  for  the
    adverse credibility finding based on section 8 of the  2004  Act.   The
    ground is not well framed.  As Mr Caskie correctly  pointed  out,  this
    was not a credibility case.

 4. The judge's comment was not unreasoned; the matter  spoke  for  itself.
    It may have been irrelevant, but it is no worse than  that.   Ground  1
    leads nowhere.

 5. Ground 2 complains about the judge saying that the sponsor's refusal to
    accompany the appellant went against a finding  that  they  were  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, as her comment is unexplained  and
    there is no indication of the weight given to it.

 6. The comment was justified, as far as it  went,  but  she  proceeded  to
    decide the case on the basis that the appellant and sponsor do  have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship, so ground 2 also leads nowhere.

 7. Ground 3 was not  advanced  by  Mr  Caskie,  no  doubt  because  it  is
    misconceived.  The case on which it relies  has  no  relevance  to  the
    present circumstances.

 8. Ground 5 is a vague disagreement with the  proportionality  assessment.
    It adds nothing to the main argument for the appellant.

 9. I return to ground 4 and to the principal submissions.

10. Mr Caskie submitted that although paragraph 320(11) of the  immigration
    rules was not mentioned by either the respondent or the judge,  she  in
    effect found against the appellant on a general ground of refusal,  due
    to his adverse immigration history, although there were no  aggravating
    circumstances such as might justify refusal under that  paragraph.   He
    accepted that representatives in the FtT had not referred the judge  to
    Chikwamba.  However, he said that this was a  "Robinson  obvious"  case
    for the principles of Chikwamba to apply, so it was an error of law not
    to consider the  matter,  even  in  absence  of  submissions,  and  the
    decision should be reversed.

11. Mr Govan said that the case was  one  where  the  Chikwamba  principles
    might  have  been  considered,  but  that  the  appellant   would   not
    automatically benefit from them.  Each case turned on  its  own  facts,
    and  the  judge  made  various  observations  about   the   appellant's
    immigration  history  which,  even  if  incorrectly  referred   to   as
    "credibility" matters,  amounted  to  an  assessment  of  all  elements
    relevant in terms of Chikwamba. He submitted that the  decision  should
    not be set aside, or that alternatively, if a fresh decision was  made,
    the appellant did not qualify for the benefit  of  Chikwamba,  and  the
    appeal should again be dismissed.

12. Mr Caskie in reply said that some element  of  an  adverse  immigration
    history was inevitable in any case where Chikwamba could  be  involved,
    and the appellant's conduct did not rise above that minimum level.   He
    had been in the UK from 2006 until he met the sponsor in 2013, and even
    if it might be surmised  that  he  had  worked  illegally  during  that
    initial period, that was historic, and he had not done so since, as she
    supported him.  A case like this  disclosed  a  lacuna  in  the  rules,
    because the sponsor was prevented from going to India with him while he
    applied by the fact that she would then not have the earnings  required
    for his application to succeed.

13. I was not taken to the case law.  The following passages appear  to  me
    to be in point.

14. In Robinson [1997] Imm AR 568 the Court of Appeal held at [39]:

         "Because the rules place an onus on the asylum-seeker to state  his
         grounds of appeal, we consider that it would be wrong to  say  that
         mere arguability should be the criterion  to  be  applied  for  the
         grant of leave in  [pic]such  circumstances.  A  higher  hurdle  is
         required.  The  appellate  authorities  should  of   course   focus
         primarily on the arguments adduced before them, whether  these  are
         to be found in the oral argument before the special adjudicator or,
         so far as the tribunal is concerned,  in  the  written  grounds  of
         appeal on which leave to appeal is sought. They are not required to
         engage in a search for new points. If there is readily  discernible
         an obvious point of Convention  law  which  favours  the  applicant
         although he has not taken it, then the special  adjudicator  should
         apply it in his favour, but he should feel under no  obligation  to
         prolong the hearing by asking the parties for submissions on points
         which they have not taken but which could be  properly  categorised
         as merely "arguable" as opposed to "obvious."  Similarly,  if  when
         the tribunal reads the special adjudicator's decision there  is  an
         obvious point of Convention law  favourable  to  the  asylum-seeker
         which does not appear in the decision, it  should  grant  leave  to
         appeal. If it does not do so, there will  be  a  danger  that  this
         country will be in breach of its obligations under the  Convention.
         When we refer to an obvious point we  mean  a  point  which  has  a
         strong prospect of success if it is argued. Nothing less  will  do.
         It follows that leave to apply for judicial review of a refusal  by
         the tribunal to grant leave to appeal  should  be  granted  if  the
         judge is of the opinion that it is properly arguable that  a  point
         not raised in the grounds of appeal to the tribunal  had  a  strong
         prospect of success if leave to appeal were to be granted."


15. The opinion of Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood in Chikwamba  includes
    the following:

         "[41]    Is not the real  rationale  for  the  policy  perhaps  the
         rather different one  of  deterring  people  from  coming  to  this
         country in the first place without having obtained entry  clearance
         and to  do  so  by  subjecting  those  who  do  come  to  the  very
         substantial disruption of their lives involved  in  returning  them
         abroad?


         [42]     Now I would certainly not say that such an objective is in
         itself necessarily objectionable. Sometimes, I accept, it  will  be
         reasonable    and    proportionate    to    take    that    course.
         Indeed, Ekinci still seems to me just such a case. The appellant's
         immigration history was appalling and  he  was  being  required  to
         travel no further than to Germany and to wait for no longer than  a
         month for a decision on his application. Other  obviously  relevant
         considerations will be whether,  for  example,  the  applicant  has
         arrived in this country illegally (say, concealed in the back of  a
         lorry) for good reason or ill. To advance a  genuine  asylum  claim
         would, of course, be a good reason. To enrol  as  a  student  would
         not. Also relevant would be for how long the Secretary of State has
         delayed in dealing with the case-see in this regard EB (Kosovo)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41.  In  an
         article 8 family case the prospective length and degree  of  family
         disruption  involved  in  going  abroad  for  an  entry   clearance
         certificate will always be highly relevant. And there may  be  good
         reason to apply the policy if the ECO abroad is better placed  than
         the immigration authorities here to investigate the claim,  perhaps
         as to the genuineness of  a  marriage  or  a  relationship  claimed
         between  family  members,  less  good  reason  if  the  policy  may
         ultimately result in a second  section  65  appeal  here  with  the
         appellant abroad and unable therefore to give live evidence. ...


         [46]     Let me now return to the facts of the present  case.  This
         appellant came to the UK to seek asylum, met  an  old  friend  from
         Zimbabwe, married him and had a child. He is now settled here as  a
         refugee and cannot return. No one apparently doubts  that,  in  the
         longer term, this family will have to be allowed to  live  together
         here. Is it really to be said that  effective  immigration  control
         requires that the appellant and her child must  first  travel  back
         (perhaps at the taxpayer's expense) to Zimbabwe, a country to which
         the enforced return of failed asylum-seekers remained suspended for
         more than two  years  after  the  appellant's  marriage  and  where
         conditions are "harsh and unpalatable", and remain there  for  some
         months obtaining entry clearance, before finally she can return (at
         her own expense) to the UK to resume her family life which meantime
         will have been gravely disrupted? Surely one has only  to  ask  the
         question to recognise the right answer."


16. In her brief concurrence, Lady Hale said:

         "Even if it would not be disproportionate to expect  a  husband  to
         endure  a  few  months'  separation  from  his  wife,  it  must  be
         disproportionate to expect a four year old girl, who was  born  and
         has lived all her life here, either to be separated from her mother
         for some months or to travel with her mother to endure  the  "harsh
         and unpalatable" conditions in Zimbabwe simply in order to  enforce
         the entry clearance procedures."


17. I accept that the Robinson principles apply also to obvious  points  of
    human rights law, and to the extent to which FtT judges are obliged  to
    take points not pleaded.  I also accept that  although  decided  before
    the immigration rules were amended to more closely reflect human rights
    obligations, the Chikwamba principles remain available,  and  they  are
    not restricted to cases involving children.

18. Cases turn on their own facts, but some comparison here is instructive.

19. The appellant does not have such a bad immigration history  as  Ekinci,
    but he has entered and remained unlawfully for many  years.   His  case
    does not involve a child having to travel, or separation of parent  and
    child.  He does not face harsh and unpalatable conditions.   Lady  Hale
    did not think it necessarily disproportionate for husband and  wife  to
    face a few months' separation.

20. Placing the appellant on the spectrum illustrated by Chikwamba, he  did
    not have a point as  strong  as  envisaged  by  Robinson.   He  had  an
    arguable case, rather than an obvious one.  A judge  might  have  cited
    Chikwamba and decided against him.

21. There is also force in the argument by Mr Govan that although the judge
    did not expressly consider Chikwamba, she applied it in effect,  noting
    the extent to which his history was adverse, and observing at [35] that
    she did not understand why he had not  already  returned  to  make  his
    application.

22. I find no error by reference to paragraph 320(11) of the  rules.   That
    argument did not arise from the grounds, and it read into the  decision
    something which is not there.

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

24. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      25 July 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
