
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01307/2020
                                                               HU/01310/2020
                                                               HU/01312/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 July 2021                            |On 26 July 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              SHAHNA VARIKODAN
                        ABDUL RAFEEQ VELUTHAKUNNATHUS
                        LIYA FATHIMSA VELUTHAKUNNATHU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bond instructed by Krishmorgan Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellants appeal with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Burns promulgated on 24 February 2021 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appeals of this family unit,  all  citizens  of
        India, on human rights grounds.
     2. The appellant assert the Judge erred in law on four grounds.
     3. Ground 1 asserts the Judge was wrong to find that matters  outlined
        at [8] of the decision were new matters which  is  said  to  be  an
        irrational conclusion.
     4. Ground 2 assets the decision of  the  Judge  not  to  consider  the
        factors  outlined  at  [8]  in  terms  of   significant   obstacles
        constituted an error of law.
     5. Ground 3 assert the Judges decision and questioning a  headmaster's
        letter at [21 - 22] is irrational.
     6. Ground 4 asserts when assessing the best  interests  of  the  third
        appellant, a child, the Judge did not ask the basic question as  to
        what the best interests of the child were as a  freestanding  issue
        with nowhere in the determination it appearing  the  Judge  made  a
        freestanding finding as to what the best  interests  of  the  third
        appellant child were.
     7. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal. The operative part of the grant being  in  the  following
        terms:


           "2.    The first ground, argues the FtTJ  erred  by  failing  to
           consider within his assessment of paragraph  276  ADE  (1)  (vi)
           certain matters which the Appellants had  raised  regarding  the
           risks to them on the return to India and  which  would  normally
           form the basis of a protection claim.
           3. I found this ground is arguable. In [11] the FtTJ wrote  that
           most of the material appeared to be new matters, which begs  the
           question why he did not consider those parts which were not  new
           matters. Whilst the FtTJ might well have  viewed  such  evidence
           with a healthy degree of scepticism  given  the  timing  of  the
           disclosures and the fact the appellants had not claimed  asylum,
           he could not simply ignore it when concluding  that  there  were
           not very significant obstacles to integration. The evidence  was
           highly relevant to the issue in hand. The  FtTJ's  consideration
           was arguably incomplete and therefore erroneous.
           4. I cannot say that  any  error  would  be  immaterial  to  the
           outcome."


     8. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 response dated 8 April  2021,
        writes:


           "3.    The appellants arrived in UK on 9/9/2015. Ms Varikon  had
           a student Visa and the other two appellants were her dependents.
           They have made a number of applications  to  remain  in  the  UK
           since arrival all of which were refused.
           4. The application, the refusal of which,  dated  6/1/2020,  was
           the subject of the present appeal  was  made  under  family  and
           private life on 2/10/19. No asylum  application  has  ever  been
           made.
           5. The appellant  raises  a  number  of  issues  which  a  close
           scrutiny clearly indicates are applicable to an  application  in
           relation to a protection claim.
           6. The Immigration Rules are clear in that an asylum application
           should be made at  a  designated  place  of  asylum  claim.  The
           relevant rules as per following:


           (para 327 IR set out)


           7. It is clear that protection issues  were  not  raised  in  as
           protection application as per the requirements of the rules  and
           the matters relied upon by  the  appellants,  in  spite  of  the
           assertion that some of them were contained  in  the  appellant's
           bundle, were indeed new matters. The judge  was  not  seized  of
           considering this evidence,  particularly  when  no  consent  was
           given by the Presenting Officer.
           8. It is of note that the judge considered relevant matters  out
           with  protection  issues  as  he  outlined  at  paragraph  [11].
           Furthermore, the judge, albeit in otiose remarked at  [16]  that
           there was no obligation for the appellants to live in their home
           area on return to India.  His  findings  are  not  tainted  with
           errors of law.
           9. The remaining grounds do not have  any  merit.  There  is  no
           qualifying child. The judge considered  the  best  interests  of
           children, considered both the so-called expert  report  and  the
           "headmaster's letter". The judge's findings were open to him  on
           the evidence and it is submitted that there are no errors of any
           materiality.


     9. The Judge at [8] and [11], both appearing in  the  section  of  the
        decision  in  which  the  Judge  considered  the  issues   and   an
        adjournment application, wrote:

           "8.    Indeed, in her witness  statement  for  the  appeal,  the
              First Appellant set out considerable material, claiming  risk
              and dangers in India awaiting the Appellants,  including  (i)
              the problems caused by one of her brothers in law having  had
              a relationship with  a  lower  caste  Hindu  girl  (ii).  Her
              brother having borrowed but not repaid  money,  resulting  in
              quarrels and tensions (iii) threats from  creditors  wrecking
              havoc in the Appellants home (iii)  religious  problems  from
              extremist Hindus (iv) religious problems from  Islamists  (v)
              extremist groups and "goons" attacking the Second Appellant's
              family and (vi) generalised anti-Muslim sentiment in India as
              demonstrated by communal riots and targeting  of  Muslims  in
              Delhi and (vii) the  refusal  of  India  to  acknowledge  the
              Indian identity of Muslims.


           ...


           11.I  told  the  parties  that  while  I  would  consider  under
              paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi) the usual issues  such  as  cultural
              assimilation, financial means, employment  opportunities  and
              access to healthcare and education, etc, I would not consider
              the  material  summarised  in  paragraph  8  above.  Of  this
              material, most of it appeared to be new  matters,  which  the
              Respondent had not had a chance to deal with,  and  which  it
              had not consented to the tribunal dealing  with  it.  To  the
              extent that it had been identified in  the  application,  the
              Respondent had, quite properly, in my view, declined to  deal
              with it because a formal  asylum  application  had  not  been
              made."


Error of law

    10. There has been a recent decision of Upper Tribunal reported  as  JA
        (human rights claim: serious harm) Nigeria [2021] UKUT  0097  (IAC)
        header of which reads:

           1) Where a human rights claim is made,  in  circumstances  where
              the Secretary of State considers the nature of what is  being
              alleged is such  that  the  claim  could  also  constitute  a
              protection claim, it is appropriate for her to draw  this  to
              the attention of the person concerned, pointing out they  may
              wish to make a  protection  claim.   Indeed,  so  much  would
              appear to be required, in  the  light  of  the  Secretary  of
              State's  international  obligations  regarding  refugees  and
              those in need of humanitarian protection.


            (2)   There is no obligation  on  such  a  person  to  make  a
              protection claim.  The person concerned may decide  to  raise
              an alleged risk of serious harm, potentially  falling  within
              Article 3 of the ECHR, solely for the purpose  of  making  an
              application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom that is
              centred on the private life aspects of Article 8, whether  by
              reference  to  paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)   or   outside   the
              immigration rules.  If so, the "serious harm" element of  the
              claim falls to be considered in that context.


           (3)    This is not to say, however, that the failure of a person
              to make a protection claim, when the possibility of doing  so
              is drawn to their attention by the Secretary of  State,  will
              never be relevant to the assessment by her and, on appeal, by
              the First-tier Tribunal of the "serious harm"  element  of  a
              purely human rights appeal. Depending on  the  circumstances,
              the assessment may well be informed by a person's refusal  to
              subject themselves to the procedures that are inherent in the
              consideration  of  a  claim  to   refugee   or   humanitarian
              protection status. Such a person may have to accept that  the
              Secretary of State and the Tribunal are entitled to  approach
              this element of the claim with some scepticism,  particularly
              if it is advanced only late in the day. That is  so,  whether
              or not  the  element  constitutes  a  "new  matter"  for  the
              purposes of section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and
              Asylum Act 2002.


           (4)    On appeal against the refusal of a human rights claim,  a
              person who has not made a protection claim will not  be  able
              to rely on the grounds set out in section 84(1) of  the  2002
              Act, but only on the ground specified in section 84(2).

    11. The Judge  noted  in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  that  the
        appellant had raised the possibility of communal violence in  their
        home area and had relied on a letter recommending the family remain
        safe and stay away, indicating that this was raised as an issue  of
        exceptional circumstances within the human rights claim and not  as
        a protection claim.
    12. It was accepted by Mr Tan that in light of this judgement he was in
        some difficulty in continuing to oppose the  application.  That  is
        correct.
    13. The Judge should have considered the issues identified  at  [8]  of
        the determination, which were  clearly  not  new  matters,  in  the
        context of the human rights appeal  but  not  on  the  basis  of  a
        protection appeal as no protection claim has been made. The Judge's
        failure to do so amounts to a legal error which, as  it  cannot  be
        said the decision will be the same at this  stage,  I  find  to  be
        material.
    14. The appellants have therefore not had proper judicial consideration
        of all the evidence they rely upon in  support  of  their  appeals.
        They are entitled to a fair hearing. It was agreed it was therefore
        appropriate to set the determination  aside  with  there  being  no
        preserved findings and  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal sitting at Taylor House to be  heard  afresh  by  a  judge
        other than Judge Burns in light of the above.

Decision

    15. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Taylor House to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Burns.

   Anonymity.

    16. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 8 July 2021
