
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01149/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th June 2019                    |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                               mr jasim uddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N K Mustafa, instructed by Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the  Secretary  of  State  on  30th
    December 2015 to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the  UK
    on human rights grounds as the  spouse  of  Farzana  Amin.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Callow dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on
    29th January 2019 and the Appellant appeals against that decision  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grimmett  on  2nd  May
    2019.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the UK on 7
    October 2009 with leave as a Tier 4 Student. He was last granted  leave
    as a Tier 4 Student until 16  August  2015.  On  7  September  2015  he
    applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  private  and  family
    life. The Secretary of State refused the application on the basis  that
    the Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements of paragraph S-
    LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. This was  because  the
    Secretary of State considered that  his  presence  in  the  UK  is  not
    conducive to the public good as he had fraudulently  obtained  a  TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS)  by  the  use  of  a
    proxy test taker.  The application was further  refused  under  Ex1  of
    Appendix FM  as  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant's relationship with his spouse was  genuine  and  subsisting.
    As a result of the decision  under  the  suitability  requirements  the
    Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  met   the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Secretary of State decided that there would  not  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration in Bangladesh and refused  the
    application under paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) of the Rules. The  Secretary
    of State did not accept that there were any  exceptional  circumstances
    such as to justify a grant of leave to remain under Article  8  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was initially determined by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zahed in a decision promulgated on 24th July 2017 dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal.  That decision was appealed to the Upper  Tribunal.
    In a decision promulgated on 3rd May 2018, Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Saini preserved the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding in relation  to
    paragraph S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM that the  Appellant  had  taken  the
    TOEIC test himself and that he did not arrange a proxy to take his test
    and that he did not act dishonestly.  However  Judge  Saini  set  aside
    Judge Zahed's decision that the Appellant's removal  would  not  breach
    his right to private and family life on the  basis  that  the  findings
    were inadequate and unreasoned. This issue was remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be made afresh.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow heard the appeal and  found  that  the
    Appellant had not established that the relationship between him and his
    wife was genuine and subsisting and found that Ex1 of Appendix  FM  did
    not apply. He dismissed the appeal.

Discussion and conclusions

 5. The Grounds of Appeal take issue with a number of aspects of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Callow's decision.

 6. The first ground contends that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred
    because the previous determination of Judge Zahed  had  been  preserved
    from paragraphs 1 to  17  and  that  Judge  Callow  was  bound  by  the
    unchallenged findings in paragraphs 16 and 17 of the decision.   It  is
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was bound to take these as
    a starting point but had failed to do so.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed said the following at paragraphs 16 and
    17 of his decision:

         "16. The Appellant appeals that it would be a  breach  under  human
             rights for the Appellant to be refused further leave to remain
             because he is married to his wife who is settled in the United
             Kingdom.

         17.  The Appellant's spouse Mrs Farzana Amin stated that she  first
             met the Appellant in  Bangladesh,  as  he  was  her  brother's
             friend and that he would come around to their house.  She  had
             lived 18 years in Bangladesh before coming to the UK in  2006.
             She met the Appellant in the UK at a wedding in September 2014
             and started a relationship.  Her civil marriage was registered
             on 11 June 2015.  Her parents, brother  and  sister  lived  in
             Bangladesh."

 8. In his decision Upper Tribunal Judge Saini concluded that, as no  party
    had challenged paragraphs 1 to 17, of the decision those  would  remain
    intact [7].  However he set aside paragraphs 18 to 20 of  the  decision
    as they were infected by legal error.  At paragraph 8 Judge Saini said:

         "The consequence of my findings is that the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision regarding  suitability,  concerning  paragraph  S-LTR.1.6,
         remain intact, but the remainder of the decision in respect of  the
         issues concerning the genuineness of the Appellant and his spouse's
         relationship,    insurmountable    obstacles    and     exceptional
         circumstances (the jurisprudential vernacular for a proportionality
         assessment in light of Agyarko) are  hereby  set  aside  and  these
         issues will require re-making by the First-tier  Tribunal  de  novo
         upon remittal."

 9. At paragraph 4 Judge Callow set out  paragraphs  16  and  17  of  Judge
    Zahed's decision.  It is clear therefore  that  he  was  aware  of  the
    observations there.  In our view paragraph 16 of Judge Zahed's decision
    simply sets out the assertion of the basis of the  Appellant's  appeal.
    Paragraph 17 sets out the claimed  factual  basis  of  the  Appellant's
    wife's background.  In our view it is clear that Judge  Zahed  made  no
    findings in those paragraphs.  Further, the decision was remitted  from
    the Upper Tribunal to be remade on a number of issues de novo including
    the genuineness of the Appellant's relationship with his  wife.   There
    is nothing in paragraphs 16 and 17 which go to that issue.  Accordingly
    the judge was not bound by paragraphs 16 and 17  or  required  to  take
    those as a starting point as there was nothing of  substance  in  those
    paragraphs.  In our view ground 1 has not been made out.

10. It is contended in ground 2 that Judge Callow was required as a  matter
    of law to take the positive credibility findings made by Judge Zahed at
    paragraph 15 as a  starting  point  when  determining  the  Appellant's
    credibility.  Reliance is placed on Devaseelan (second appeals - ECHR -
    extraterritorial effect) Sri Lanka [2002] UKIAT 00702.  At the  hearing
    Mr Mustafa highlighted the final sentence  of  paragraph  15  of  Judge
    Zahed's decision and said that the positive credibility  finding  there
    should have been a starting point in assessing the credibility  of  the
    Appellant and his wife.  At  paragraph  15  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Zahed found that the Appellant took the TOEIC test himself and  he  did
    not arrange a proxy to take the test and went on to say  "I  find  that
    the Appellant did not act  dishonestly  and  has  at  all  times  acted
    lawfully in connection with his immigration matters".  Judge Zahed went
    on to consider the marriage and related matters from paragraph  16  on.
    In  our  view  it  is  clear  that  Judge  Zahed  made  those  positive
    credibility  findings  in  relation  to  the  separate  matter  of  the
    Appellant's English language test.  Those findings were  made  in  June
    2017 and were not part of a wider assessment of the credibility of  the
    Appellant's  claim  in  relation  to  his  marriage.    Judge   Zahed's
    conclusions in the assessment of Article 8  were  set  aside  by  Judge
    Saini  on  the  basis  that  they  were  inadequate   and   unreasoned.
    Accordingly, in our view ground 2 has not been made out.

11. It is contended in the third ground that  Judge  Callow  erred  in  his
    assessment of credibility.  It is contended that the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for  his  finding  of  credibility.  It  is  also
    contended that he failed to have regard to a number of material factors
    such as the attendance of the Appellant's wife  at  the  hearings;  the
    fact that she gave evidence; evidence of cohabitation for a  number  of
    years; the fact that the parties were permitted to marry and no  issues
    were raised by the registrar;  and  the  documentary  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's bundle.  It is contended that Judge Callow wrongly  applied
    principles of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439  which  applies  in  the
    context of documents emanating from abroad in asylum  appeals.   It  is
    further contended that the judge took into account irrelevant  factors,
    for example at paragraph 20 he said that there was no evidence of joint
    financial responsibility or  contribution  and  it  is  contended  this
    ignores the fact that the Appellant  has  no  permission  to  work  and
    therefore cannot contribute and shows the lack of anxious scrutiny.

12. In his submissions at the hearing Mr Mustafa pointed  to  a  number  of
    factors in paragraph 20 of Judge Callow's decision.  He contended  that
    the conclusions in relation to credibility were not open to the  judge.
    He highlighted the evidence of the Appellant recorded at paragraph 8 of
    the decision where he said that he had met his wife at  a  wedding  and
    that in re-examination he clarified that he had met her a long time ago
    as her brother was one  of  his  classmates.   He  compared  this  with
    paragraph 10 where in her evidence the Appellant's wife said  that  she
    had known the Appellant in Bangladesh as a friend of  her  brother  and
    they met up in the UK at  a  wedding.   In  his  submission  there  was
    therefore no inconsistency as to how and where the  Appellant  and  his
    wife first met.  He pointed out that at paragraph  20  the  judge  also
    highlighted  inconsistencies  in  relation  to  the  evidence  of   the
    Appellant and his wife as to  their  qualifications.   However  in  his
    submission there was no significant inconsistency in that at  paragraph
    8 it is recorded that the Appellant said that he thought that  she  had
    not finished a degree course and at paragraph 10 it  is  recorded  that
    the Appellant's wife said that she  had  completed  a  higher  national
    diploma in business in 2016.  In his submission  this  factor  was  not
    sufficient to find that the Appellant and his wife were  not  aware  of
    each other's qualifications.

13. When put to him that there was an inconsistency between the evidence of
    the Appellant and  his  wife  as  to  whether  the  marriage  had  been
    arranged, Mr  Mustafa  accepted  that  there  was  a  conflict  between
    paragraph 8, where it was recorded that the  Appellant  said  that  the
    marriage had been arranged, and paragraph 10, where it is recorded that
    his wife said that it was not an arranged  marriage.  However,  in  his
    submission this was a point upon which clarification was not sought  at
    the  hearing  and  the  Respondent  did  not  rely  on  that  point  in
    submissions.   He  submitted   that   there   were   no   other   major
    inconsistencies  and  the  evidence  is  broadly  consistent.   In  his
    submission the judge gave no adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    Appellant and his wife were not credible, in his  submission  that  the
    reasons given were not rational.  When put to him that it is clear from
    paragraph 8 the judge took into account how the evidence was  given  by
    the Appellant he accepted that the judge could take that  into  account
    but he submitted that the Appellant did put forward his account through
    clarification and re-examination when he corrected the position.

14. In our view  this  ground  has  not  been  made  out.   In  considering
    credibility the judge set out the oral evidence given by the  Appellant
    at paragraph 8 and by his wife at paragraph 10.  The judge  noted  that
    the Appellant's representative at the hearing acknowledged  that  there
    were inconsistencies as highlighted by the Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing.  The judge analysed the evidence at paragraphs 18 to 20.   The
    judge highlighted that they had submitted very  brief  poorly  prepared
    written statements [18].  The judge noted that in his witness statement
    the Appellant did no more than state his position and  failed  to  give
    any evidence as to the genuineness of the relationship [18].  The judge
    took into account the manner  in  which  the  Appellant  gave  evidence
    noting that it was inexplicable that the Appellant was unable to answer
    simple questions about the claimed background of his relationship  with
    his wife, where and when they met and for which he  apologised  without
    an explanation under re-examination [19].  The  judge  considered  that
    the Appellant's wife too was vague in respect of in this  part  of  her
    evidence.

15. In our view the judge was entitled to take  into  account  the  way  in
    which the Appellant gave evidence as noted at paragraph 8 including the
    fact that the judge considered that the Appellant had to have questions
    repeated and that he gave some information  in  re-examination  and  he
    apologised when asked why he had been asked so many  times  to  explain
    when he met his wife.   The judge also took into account  at  paragraph
    19 that the Appellant and his wife relied on a tenancy agreement  valid
    for twelve weeks with effect from 1st June 2015.  The judge  also  took
    into account the further documentary evidence including evidence  of  a
    bank account and bank statements which were  sent  to  the  address  at
    which it was claimed that the couple were  living  together  but  noted
    that there were only four transactions over a period in excess of three
    years.  The judge took into account that there was no explanation as to
    how the parties claimed to live together at a property where the  lease
    expired over three years ago [19].

16. The judge considered the oral evidence of the parties at  paragraph  20
    finding that they were unable  to  provide  accurate  personal  details
    about each other in material aspects and that  they  "did  not  have  a
    shared  understanding  of  the  core  details  of  their  relationship"
    including how, where and when they met prior to marrying and they  were
    unaware of one another's qualifications.

17. Mr Mustafa  pointed  to  what  he  submitted  were  broadly  consistent
    accounts in oral evidence.  That submission fails to  take  account  of
    the manner in which the Appellant gave oral evidence,  a  factor  which
    the judge was entitled to take into account.  It  also  fails  to  take
    into  account  the  fact  that  a  significant  core  detail   of   the
    relationship is whether or not the marriage was arranged and there  was
    a fundamental discrepancy between  the  Appellant  in  regard  to  that
    matter.  This is a matter which is clearly before the judge  and  could
    clearly be encompassed by a finding that they did not  have  a  "shared
    understanding of the core details of the relationship".  We  reject  Mr
    Mustafa's submission that this was not a matter put before the judge.

18. We also reject his submission that the judge  could  not  rely  on  the
    evidence as to the qualifications.  At paragraph 8 the  Appellant  said
    that he did not know what qualifications his wife had but thought  that
    she had not finished her degree  course.   In  her  oral  evidence,  as
    recorded at paragraph 10,  the  Appellant's  wife  said  that  she  was
    unaware of the Appellant's qualifications but that  she  had  completed
    her higher national diploma in business in 2016.  This is the basis for
    the judge's findings that the parties were  unaware  of  one  another's
    qualifications.

19. It is contended in the grounds that it was not open  to  the  judge  to
    find that there was a  lack  of  shared  financial  or  other  domestic
    responsibilities.  However the judge  highlighted  that  there  was  no
    evidence of appropriate  contribution  to  the  responsibilities  of  a
    marriage, for example a lack of  shared  financial  or  other  domestic
    responsibilities, and highlighted that there was  a  lack  of  evidence
    from family or friends testifying to the parties living together  in  a
    genuine relationship.  In  our  view  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    highlight gaps in the evidence  and  evidence  which  could  have  been
    produced to support the Appellant's claim that he and his wife were  in
    a genuine relationship.

20. There is no basis for the submission in  the  grounds  that  the  judge
    should have taken into account the fact that the parties were permitted
    to marry and no issues were raised by the registrar.  This was  not  an
    issue put to the judge.  In any event it cannot be the  case  that  the
    fact that a couple are permitted to marry is in any  way  determinative
    or relevant to the issue of the genuineness of the marriage.

21. It is further contended that the judge wrongly applied  the  principles
    in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.  However  the  judge  referred  to
    that decision in general terms at paragraph 17.  It  is  clear  reading
    paragraphs 18 to 20 that the judge took into account all  of  the  oral
    and documentary evidence giving appropriate weight to that evidence and
    reaching a decision as to the evidence as a whole.   In  our  view  the
    judge's decision at paragraph 20 that he attached little weight to  the
    limited number of documents separately addressed  to  the  parties  was
    open to him in the context of all of the evidence.

22. Mr Mustafa submitted that the judge failed to take account of the  fact
    that the Appellant had no immigration status and  therefore  could  not
    have made a financial contribution.  However  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 20 is broader than that and relates to an absence of evidence
    in relation to contribution to the responsibilities of a  marriage  and
    does not simply highlight a lack of financial documentation in relation
    to the Appellant.

23. It is contended in the fourth ground that the judge made  an  error  in
    his application of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.  Mr Mustafa  accepted
    that this ground only comes into play if we accept that the judge  made
    a material error in relation to the assessment of credibility.  As  set
    out above we do not accept that  the  judge  made  any  errors  in  the
    assessment of credibility.  However we do note that the judge stated at
    paragraphs 14 and 21 that EX.1(b) did not apply in this appeal  as  the
    Appellant's wife is not a British citizen but simply  holds  ILR  [14].
    The judge appeared to understand that EX.1(b)  did  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant as his wife  has  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.
    However the judge did quote from EX.1(b) which applies where there is a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK and
    is a British citizen or settled in the UK.  It appears that  the  judge
    had an erroneous misunderstanding of  EX.1(b).   However  that  is  not
    material in this case as we have found that the judge made no error  in
    the assessment of the genuineness of the relationship.  If there is  no
    genuine relationship  then  the  Appellant  is  not  a  partner  within
    Appendix FM and EX.1(b) does not apply.

24. In any event it was accepted by Mr Mustafa there was no evidence in the
    papers that the Appellant's wife does have indefinite leave to  remain.
    However he submitted that it is implicit in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter  that  the  Respondent  must  have  been  satisfied   that   the
    Appellant's partner was settled as, if it had not  been  accepted,  the
    Respondent would not have gone on to  consider  the  application  under
    Appendix FM.  We do not accept that submission because  the  Respondent
    refused  the  application  because  the  Appellant  had  not,  in   the
    Respondent's view, met the  suitability  requirements  of  Appendix  FM
    because he had fraudulently obtained a TOEIC certificate. Further,  the
    Respondent did not accept that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage.  The Respondent did not therefore consider the  substance  of
    EX.1.

25. In any event, in this case, there was no evidence of  indefinite  leave
    to remain before the Secretary of State  as  it  is  indicated  in  the
    application for leave to remain that the  Appellant's  wife's  passport
    was not available because it had  expired  (B41  Respondent's  bundle).
    There is a copy of what appears to be  extracts  from  the  Appellant's
    wife's passport at C1 to C5, but nowhere there  is  there  evidence  of
    indefinite leave to remain.  In these circumstances the judge  made  no
    material error in the apparent misunderstanding as to Ex1  of  Appendix
    FM.

26. Mr Mustafa did not pursue ground 5 in his oral submissions. There it is
    contended that the  judge  did  not  consider  the  historic  injustice
    resulting from the incorrect ETS allegation raised by  the  Respondent.
    Reliance is placed on the cases of Khan and Others v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1684 and Ahsan v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.   However  in  this
    case no reliance was placed upon any arguments under private life [22].
     It is unclear where, in the context of a  relationship,  any  historic
    injustice would arise from the ETS allegation.   In  any  event  it  is
    unclear what disadvantage the Appellant  would  have  suffered  in  the
    circumstances of this case where it has been found that he was not in a
    genuine relationship with his claimed wife.

27. We conclude that none of the grounds have  been  made  out.   In  these
    circumstances we dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 24th June 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 24th June 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



