
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/01513/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 October 2017                       |  On 24 November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Johari Green
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Hashmi, instructed by Millan, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Johari Green, was born on  14  October  1996
    and is a male citizen of Jamaica.  On 4 October 2016, the appellant was
    sentenced to two years and three months' imprisonment for conspiracy to
    burgle.  He was released from prison on 26 July 2017.  The Secretary of
    State decided to deport the appellant to Jamaica by a decision dated 27
    October 2016.  The appellant appealed  against  that  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Doyle) which, in a decision  promulgated  on
    10 May 2017, allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



 2. The grounds of appeal record that the Secretary of  State  agrees  with
    the judge at [24] and [46] of the decision that the core issue in  this
    appeal is  whether  there  exist  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Jamaica.  The grounds refer to a number of
    agencies offering assistance to those returning to Jamaica,  references
    which were also enclosed in the Secretary of  State's  refusal  letter.
    The grounds complain that the judge failed to make reference  to  these
    agencies who were likely to be able to offer the appellant support upon
    return to Jamaica.  Further, the judge had described the  appellant  as
    "gifted charming and likable".  The Secretary of State queries why such
    qualities would not assist the appellant in integrating  into  Jamaican
    society.   The  judge  refers  to  the  appellant  as  a   "potentially
    vulnerable young man" but failed to  give  reasons  for  that  finding.
    Finally, the Secretary of State asserts that the judge failed  to  give
    proper consideration to the public interest factors concerned with  the
    appellant's removal.

 3. Judge Doyle has produced a long and  detailed  decision.   He  has  not
    referred to the  various  agencies  which  may  offer  support  to  the
    appellant on return to Jamaica.  Details of those agencies are provided
    in the decision letter of the  Secretary  of  State  and  include  both
    government and non-government organisations.  For example,  the  Public
    Assistance Division of the  Ministry  of  Labour  and  Social  Security
    administers "a number of non-contributory social assistance programmes.
     It provides financial assistance to the most vulnerable groups in  the
    society  namely  children,  persons  with  disabilities,  the  elderly,
    pregnant and lactating mothers and the  unemployed".   Other  than  the
    last category, it is difficult to see how the appellant  might  qualify
    for  such  assistance.   The  government  in  Jamaica  also  offers   a
    conditional cash transfer programme (CCT) offering cash grants  to  the
    most needy and vulnerable in society.  I have considered whether  Judge
    Doyle has erred by failing  to  refer  to  these  possible  sources  of
    support for the appellant in his analysis.  I have  concluded  that  he
    has not erred.  The judge has made it clear that he has considered  all
    the evidence; I have no reason to believe that he has not had regard to
    the entire contents of the decision letter.  It is true the judge found
    that the appellant was a man of charm  and  potential.   At  [27],  the
    judge wrote:

         If the appellant is returned to Jamaica he can take his  charm  and
         his UK education with him but  the  real  question  is  what  could
         happen there to a 20 year old recently released  from  custody  and
         without any familial support.  I have  a  copy  of  the  sentencing
         judge's comments.  He noted,  before  sentencing,  the  appellant's
         positive evidence of character and comments on  a  life  which  had
         shown considerable promise.  He  also  accepted  the  appellant  is
         genuinely  remorseful.   The  OasSys  report  tells  me  that   the
         appellant presents a low risk of offending.

 4. It appears to have been uppermost in the judge's  reasoning  that  this
    appellant is not only a young man of previously good  character  before
    his imprisonment but an individual who was brought from Jamaica to  the
    United Kingdom when he was only 9 months old.  He has  never  left  the
    United Kingdom or at least has never been to Jamaica since he  arrived.
    Quite properly, the judge considered that to be an important factor  in
    the analysis.  Although he does not say so in terms, it  is  clear  the
    judge thought that the appellant is thoroughly British,  speaking  with
    an English accent and having the  mores  of  a  person  who  has  spent
    virtually his entire life living in this country.  He  is  not  in  the
    same position as a person who has spent his formative years in  Jamaica
    and who might be able, with the  intent  of  integrating  into  society
    there, to use personal experience of that society to fit  in  with  it.
    Of similar  significance  was  the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  no
    relatives  living  in  Jamaica  who  might  be  able  to  assist   him.
    Furthermore, the agencies which are  referred  to  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal would appear to assist those who are  most  obviously  needy  in
    Jamaican society: the disabled, the sick and those in extreme  poverty.
    Whilst the appellant does not fit into any of those categories he would
    appear to be a capable young  man  and  his  complete  inexperience  of
    Jamaican society and the lack of anyone to assist him might render  him
    vulnerable.    In   any   event,   given   the    circumstances,    the
    characterisation of the appellant as vulnerable by Judge Doyle was  not
    perverse as the grounds appear to suggest.

 5. Of the seven factors contained in the Secretary of State's guidance the
    existence of which might indicate that  significant  obstacles  do  not
    exist, the appellant does not possess any.  It is clear that,  even  by
    the  reference  to  the  respondent's  own  guidance,  describing   the
    appellant as vulnerable and likely to face very  significant  obstacles
    on return to Jamaica was not unreasonable on the facts of this case.

 6.  As  regards  the  public  interest  concerned  with  the   appellant's
    deportation,  I  find  that  the  judge  has  properly  addressed  that
    interest.  The judge refers  to  the  appellant's  "brief  but  focused
    history of offending" but records also the fact that the  appellant  is
    at low risk of reoffending.  The judge also found that "the  weight  of
    reliable evidence tells me that the appellant has disassociated himself
    from the peers  who  led  to  his  offending  behaviour  and  that  the
    appellant has embraced educational opportunities whilst  in  the  young
    offenders' institute".  I find that there is no evidence  here  of  the
    judge having underplayed the public interest in his  analysis.   It  is
    clear that the judge was impressed by the appellant as  a  witness  but
    his analysis has remained objective and it has been  guided  by  proper
    application of statute law (viz. Section  117  of  the  2002  Act)  and
    relevant jurisprudence.  Ultimately, the judge has reached a conclusion
    which was available to him on the evidence.  Nothing in the grounds  of
    appeal lead me to consider interfering  with  the  judge's  conclusion.
    The appeal is dismissed.

 7. Miss Hashmi made an application for costs under Rule  10(3)(d)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Costs were  sought  on
    the basis that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  acted  unreasonably  in
    appealing the decision to the Upper Tribunal.  The claim for  costs  is
    wholly without merit.  The Immigration Rules provide for a losing party
    to apply for permission to appeal which the Secretary of State has done
    in  this  case.   That  application  could  hardly  be   described   as
    unreasonable given that permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  first
    application by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley.  Judge Ransley  quite
    properly  granted  permission  on  the  basis  that  the  grounds  were
    arguable.  Upon more detailed examination in the Upper Tribunal, I have
    dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal but I certainly do  not  find
    that at any stage in the proceedings has the Secretary of  State  acted
    unreasonably; applying for and  being  granted  permission  to  appeal,
    fighting that appeal and losing does not per se amount to  unreasonable
    conduct.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 22 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


