
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01273/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 May 2017                        |On 8 June 2017                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                       Mr Roopenkumar Kiritbhai Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bexson, instructed by Permits2work Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                       (Delivered Orally 26 May 2017)

    Introduction

 1. The appellant beings an appeal before  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Miller promulgated on 13  October
    2016.  The chronology of the appellant's stay in the United Kingdom  is
    set out in detail in the First-tier Tribunal's decision, and I  do  not
    repeat it herein.

 2. The appellant brought an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State (SSHD), dated 8 June 2015,  refusing
    his application for leave  to  remain  made  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence.

    SSHD's decision letter

 3. In her decision  letter  the  SSHD,  inter  alia,  concluded  that  the
    appellant had acted deceptively in one of his earlier  applications  by
    misstating therein the level of his  earnings.   The  SSHD  relied,  in
    coming to such conclusion, on information provided by HMRC  as  to  the
    amount of income the appellant had declared for the years 2009 to 2014.
    Such information was subsequently compared with assertions made by  the
    appellant, in relation to his income, in his previous application -  it
    being observed that there were significant differences.

 4. The SSHD's decision letter refers, on page 3 of  7,  to  the  appellant
    having attended an interview on 30 April 2015 with the Home Office  and
    there are quotations from that interview contained within the  decision
    letter. Ostensibly it was the HMRC information taken together with  the
    contents of the aforementioned interview that the SSHD relied  upon  in
    refusing the appellant's application pursuant to  paragraph  322(2)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

    FtT's Decision

 5. The appellant's appeal before the FtT came before  Judge  Miller  on  8
    September 2016.  At the outset of  the  hearing  Ms  Bexson,  who  also
    appeared below, identified that the SSHD had not produced a copy of the
    record of the aforementioned interview. The Presenting Officer informed
    the FtT that the interview record was not on the SSHD's file.

 6. Neither party sought an adjournment of the  proceedings.  Judge  Miller
    considered for himself whether to adjourn  the  hearing  but  concluded
    that it was not appropriate to do  so  in  circumstances,  inter  alia,
    where neither party had sought an adjournment [10]. I observe  that  no
    mention is made in Judge Miller's decision of consideration being given
    to the issue of fairness.

    Permission to appeal

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 17 March 2017, paragraph 4  thereof
    stating as follows:

         "Given that one of the issues in the case was deception and despite
         the fact that the  judge  has  observed  at  paragraph  29  of  the
         decision that the appellant  accepted  the  discrepancies  claiming
         they came  about  as  the  result  of  miscommunications  with  his
         accountant it is arguable that the judge proceeded with the hearing
         in the absence of the full provision of the available evidence,  in
         circumstances where potential prejudice arose in  relation  to  the
         appellant."

    Discussion and Decision

 8. At the hearing today Mr Tarlow, quite properly  in  my  view,  accepted
    that judge Millar ought to have adjourned the hearing and directed  the
    SSHD to use her best endeavours to produce  a  copy  of  the  interview
    record. The reasons for that are, it seems to me, obvious.  First,  the
    interview record may contain information which is of assistance to  the
    appellant's case.  Second, it may be that when taken in its context the
    evidence from the interview relied upon by the  SSHD  in  her  decision
    letter is not worthy of the weight attached to it by the FtT.

 9. Given Mr Tarlow's concession, which is entirely properly made,  I  need
    say no more than that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside - the appellant not having had a fair hearing.

10. Ms Bexson submitted that the proper course would be to remit the appeal
    back to the FtT for consideration afresh. Mr Tarlow did not  object  to
    this course. In all  the  circumstances,  I  agree  that  this  is  the
    appropriate course.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT is set aside and the appeal is remitted to  the  FtT
for consideration afresh.

                                  Direction

The Secretary of State is directed to use her best endeavours  to  file  and
serve a copy, by no later than 4 weeks from 26 May 2017, of  the  record  of
the interview undertaken with the appellant on 30 April 2015.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Delivered orally 26 May 2017

