
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01547/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2020                  |On 17 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                Zeshan Sarwar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Wells, OISC
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  on  1  June  1987.   He
    appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Ripley
    promulgated on 23 August 2019 dismissing his appeal against a  decision
    of the respondent dated 28 December 2018 to refuse his application  for
    further leave to remain on the basis of his private life.



Factual Background

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application on two bases.

 3. The first was that pursuant to paragraph S-LTR.1.7 of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules, he had failed on  two  occasions  to  attend  an
    interview with the Secretary of State.  The Secretary of State  invited
    the appellant to an interview because she was  concerned  that  he  had
    relied on a possibly fraudulently obtained English language certificate
    in an earlier application for leave to remain, made in  December  2012.
    The English language certificate he had obtained  had  been  marked  as
    "questionable" by the Educational Testing Service  and,  as  such,  the
    respondent was concerned that the appellant may have been  involved  in
    irregularities when taking that test.

 4. The other basis upon which the appellant's application was refused  was
    that he would not face very significant obstacles to his integration in
    Pakistan if he were to return pursuant to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

Grounds of appeal

 5. The appellant appeals with the permission of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Appleyard on the following bases.

 6. Judge Ripley accepted the respondent's account that the  appellant  had
    been invited to an interview on two occasions.  That had been a  matter
    of dispute before the First-tier Tribunal, and the  appellant  contends
    that Judge Ripley failed to give sufficient reasons for  accepting  the
    respondent's version of events.

 7. There is no challenge to Judge Ripley's dismissal of the appeal on  the
    separate limb upon which the appellant's application was refused namely
    that there would be no very significant obstacles to his integration in
    Pakistan.

Submissions

 8. The appellant submits that the respondent had failed to  discharge  the
    evidential burden to  which  she  is  subject  in  order  to  establish
    suitability based concerns for refusing her application  for  leave  to
    remain.  The appellant had given an account before the judge  in  which
    he stated that, although had received many items of correspondence from
    the Home Office over a period of years, he had not received the letters
    inviting him to an interview.

 9. It is for the respondent to establish that  suitability-based  concerns
    are made out, not for an  applicant  under  the  Immigration  Rules  to
    establish that there are no suitability-based concerns.  The respondent
    must satisfy an initial evidential burden to demonstrate that there  is
    a case to answer.  The appellant is then expected to respond  to  those
    allegations, provided the respondent has  met  the  initial  evidential
    burden.

10. Before examining the appellant's account of  the  arrangements  in  his
    shared home for receiving post (something the judge considered  in  her
    decision), it is necessary  to  consider  whether  the  respondent  had
    discharged the initial evidential burden demonstrating that the letters
    had been sent in the first place.

11. Before me, Mr Bramble relies on the fact that the letters were provided
    to the First-tier Tribunal and had  been  available  to  the  judge  to
    consider.  However, there was an additional  document  which  had  been
    produced before the First-tier Tribunal, namely  an  extract  from  the
    respondent's CID system, in which the letters were said  to  have  been
    sent via First Class post inviting the appellant to an interview on  27
    March 2017.

12. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the presenting officer on that occasion
    placed no reliance on this document, and Mr Bramble  did  not  seek  to
    withdraw that concession.

13. The reason the presenting officer placed no reliance on  CID  document,
    as recorded by the judge at [14]  of  her  decision,  was  because  the
    interview dates specified on the document were  dates  in  March  2019.
    The interview date was in March 2017.  The CID  copy,  which  had  been
    provided to the First-tier Tribunal, had been amended by hand  so  that
    the 2019 dates, which had been typed on the  extract  provided  to  the
    Tribunal, now read 2017.

14. In my view, the presenting officer in the First-tier Tribunal was right
    to concede that this is a  document  upon  which  no  reliance  may  be
    placed.  There is no explanation from the individual  who  amended  the
    details on the extract by hand.  There is  no  explanation  as  to  the
    provenance of the need for the amendments to be made.  It is  simply  a
    document which looks as though it has been altered after the event and,
    while I do not suggest that there was any bad faith on the part of  the
    respondent, in view of the nature of the suitability based  allegations
    which were  made  against  the  appellant,  it  is  necessary  for  the
    respondent to establish an evidential case which is able  to  withstand
    scrutiny.  As the presenting  officer  below  and  before  me  on  this
    occasion realistically concede, no  reliance  may  be  placed  on  that
    document.

15. Against that background, therefore, it is  necessary  to  consider  the
    findings of the judge.

16. At [26] the judge examined the appellant's account of the  arrangements
    for the post being delivered to his  shared  home  and  considered  the
    likely  probability  of  these   two   letters   in   isolation   being
    unsuccessfully sent or not sent at all against  a  background  of  many
    successful postal deliveries.

17. The difficulty with the judge's analysis, is that she  jumped  straight
    to  examining  the   appellant's   explanation   for   post   reception
    arrangements at his home and his account of not having  received  them,
    without considering whether there was sufficient  evidence  adduced  by
    the Secretary of State in order to  discharge  the  initial  evidential
    burden.  In my view there was not, and there was no material before the
    judge which reasonably could have permitted that conclusion.

18. I recall the fact that (i) an error  is  only  possible  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on an error of law; and that (ii) the judge had the  advantage
    of considering all the evidence in the  case.   As  the  Supreme  Court
    stated in Henderson v Foxworth Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41; [2014] 1
    WLR 2600 at [62]:

         "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that  the
         appellate court considers that it would have  reached  a  different
         conclusion. What matters is whether the decision  under  appeal  is
         one that no reasonable judge could have reached."

19. For the reasons I have already outlined, the CID extract was a document
    upon which no reliance could properly be placed.  The judge's  view  of
    the inherent probability  of  the  respondent  not  sending  these  two
    letters is difficult to sustain in view of the  fact  that  the  single
    document which purportedly demonstrates that the documents were sent in
    the first place stated on its face that they were sent  in  2019,  some
    two years after the interview was scheduled to take place.

20. I find that the judge did not give sufficient reasons  for  making  the
    findings that she reached.  I also consider that the  finding  in  [26]
    was one which was not reasonably open to the judge on the  facts.   The
    judge fell into error by reaching an irrational decision on this point.



21. The question then arises as to where this leaves the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  There  has  been  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant would not face very  significant  obstacles
    upon his return to Pakistan.

22. There has been no challenge to the judge's conclusion that there  would
    be no exceptional circumstances such that  it  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh for the application to have been refused.

23. However, there is an error of law and I  consider  that  the  error  is
    material because the appellant had  made  against  him  allegations  of
    deception relating to irregularities with an English language test  and
    although that was only on the basis  of  a  "questionable"  certificate
    rather than a "invalid" certificate nevertheless,  the  allegation  has
    been made.

24. I set aside the decision of Judge Ripley and substitute my own findings
    as follows.

25. I preserve the findings of Judge Ripley in relation to very significant
    obstacles and the absence of exceptional reasons outside the Rules  for
    the application to succeed.  I substitute my own findings  in  relation
    to the interview matter as follows.  I find that the appellant was  not
    required to provide any explanation for why  he  contends  he  had  not
    received the letters for the simple reason that the respondent had  not
    discharged the burden that she bore to  demonstrate  that  the  letters
    inviting him to interview had been sent accordingly.

26. Although  this  appeal  still  must  ultimately  be  dismissed,  it  is
    dismissed on the sole basis that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE and that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances meriting a grant of leave outside the Rules.  It was  not
    and is not dismissed on  the  basis  that  there  are  any  suitability
    concerns against the appellant.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Ripley involved the making of an error of law  and  is
set aside.  I substitute my own decision dismissing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 2 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

