
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/01466/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2020                    |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               HASSEN GANNOUNI
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr U Aslam, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but this rest of this decision refers to them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2.  The  SSHD  appeals  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge   Farrelly,
    promulgated on 18 July 2019, on grounds set out in an application dated
    25 July 2019.

 3. The first ground is failure to give adequate  reasons  for  finding  at
    [34] that there are  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor continuing outside the UK.

 4. The second ground is absence of an assessment outside  the  immigration
    rules, so that error in the assessment in terms  of  paragraph  EX1  of
    appendix FM of the rules is material.

 5. FtT Judge  Bristow,  when  granting  permission  on  14  October  2019,
    observed that although  ground  1  says  that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Farrelly is contrary to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11,  that  case  is  "fully
    considered" at [31 - 33].

 6. It is clear from the history of the case and from the decision that the
    focus in the FtT was not on the extent  of  the  obstacles  facing  the
    sponsor, but on whether there is a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor.  The judge gave his reasons  for
    concluding that there is.  The respondent takes no issue.

 7. I understood representatives to accept that this case turns on  whether
    the FtT gave adequate reasons for finding the sponsor's difficulties in
    living in  Algeria  to  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles.   It  is
    inconceivable that a favourable result could be  reached  without  that
    finding.

 8. There is also no dispute  that  the  FtT's  self-directions,  based  on
    Agyarko, are impeccable.

 9. The reasons are at [34].

10. The first is the sponsor's age, 82.  Mr Clark was correct to point  out
    that age alone cannot be decisive.  He did  not  suggest  that  it  was
    irrelevant.  I think it must be generally the case that  advancing  age
    is likely to make relocation of the centre  of  a  person's  life  more
    difficult.  The FtT said this factor was "significant", which does  not
    appear unreasonable.

11. The next point made by the FtT is that staying in Tunisia  for  several
    months at a time is different from living there on a  permanent  basis.
    It is not surprising that the respondent  founded  upon  the  sponsor's
    visits to Tunisia; but the FtT's distinction is valid.

12. The FtT says that the sponsor will not have the benefit of the NHS,  on
    which she is likely to become more reliant.  The observation on absence
    of the NHS is accurate, as far as it goes, but there is some  force  in
    the respondent's point that no case was made based either on  the  need
    for or on the absence of health care in Tunisia.

13. The FtT says that the sponsor speaks very little Arabic.   The  grounds
    say there was no evidence she could  not  learn.   On  my  enquiry,  it
    turned out that neither side asked the sponsor about this when she gave
    oral evidence.  Her uncontested evidence was that she communicates with
    the appellant's family only by gestures.  There  is  no  age  limit  on
    ability to learn  a  language,  but  the  evidence  suggests  that  the
    sponsor, not having yet gained any command of Arabic, is unlikely to do
    so.  The FtT was entitled to take this as a difficulty in  the  way  of
    family life in Tunisia.

14. The FtT observes that there was no evidence that  the  sponsor  follows
    Islam.  That could not reasonably be given much  weight.   It  was  not
    suggested on the appellant's side that there was evidence that her non-
    observance was likely to lead to any hardship.

15. Finally, the FtT refers to the sponsor's life having been  in  Scotland
    where her family are.  Her family here comprises adult  children,  plus
    grandchildren and  great-grandchildren.   The  evidence  was  of  close
    family ties.  The FtT did not explore  this  in  detail.   The  sponsor
    would be free to return to visit her relatives, and  they  could  visit
    her.  There is, however, no error in recognising a degree of difficulty
    and hardship.

16. The SSHD has not asserted that the outcome  was  beyond  the  range  of
    reasonable outcomes.  It was not literally impossible for the appellant
    and sponsor to live in Tunisia, but in my view,  the  cumulative  facts
    were at least on the cusp of very serious difficulties which could  not
    be overcome, or would entail very serious hardship.   While  not  every
    tribunal might have come down on the same side, the SSHD's grounds  and
    submissions disclose disagreement with an assessment of the facts which
    was within the tribunal's rational scope, rather than any  error  on  a
    point of law.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      13 January 2020
      UT Judge Macleman




