
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01166/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 23 January 2017                         |On 6 February 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                           miss jessica akua twum
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Bassiri-Defouli Counsel instructed by BWF
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Bartlett  who  refused  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, dated 22  May  2015,  refusing
    her application dated 16th April  2015,  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    United Kingdom Immigration Rules on the basis  of  paragraph  287(i)(e)
    and (f) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant was notified of her right of appeal under Section  82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Under that provision
    the appellant is able to appeal not against the decision in relation to
    the  Immigration  Rules  but  on  human  rights  grounds.   Nonetheless
    consideration under the relevant Immigration Rules is a  factor  to  be
    taken into account when considering the human rights appeal.

 3. The grounds of appeal assert that the determination was  flawed,  wrong
    in law and so perverse that no other Immigration Judge could have  made
    it.  Paragraph 297 sets out as follows:

         "297.  The requirements to be met by a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:


        (i)      is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join  a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

               a) Both  parents  are  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom; or

               b) both parents are being admitted on the same  occasion  for
                  settlement; or

               c) one parent is present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom
                  and the other is being admitted on the same  occasion  for
                  settlement; or

               d) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
                  being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the
                  other parent is dead; or

               e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
                  being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has
                  had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

               f) one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in  the
                  United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion  for
                  settlement and there are serious and compelling family  or
                  other considerations which make  exclusion  of  the  child
                  undesirable and suitable arrangements have been  made  for
                  the child's care; and


         (ii)     is under the age of 18; and


         (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried  and  is
             not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent  family
             unit; and
         (iv)     can, and will, be accommodated adequately by  the  parent,
             parents or relative the  child  is  seeking  to  join  without
             recourse to public funds in accommodation  which  the  parent,
             parents or relative the child  is  seeking  to  join,  own  or
             occupy exclusively; and
         (v)      can, and will, be maintained  adequately  by  the  parent,
             parents, or relative the child is  seeking  to  join,  without
             recourse to public funds; and
        (vi)     holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in
              this capacity; and
        (vii)    does not fall for refusal under the general grounds for
        refusal."

 4. The grounds for permission to appeal assert that the  judge  considered
    the matter under 297(i)(e) and  found  that  both  of  the  appellant's
    parents who live  in  the  UK  have  parental  responsibility  for  the
    appellant.  The grounds assert that the judge  should  have  considered
    paragraph 297(i)(a) and the Entry Clearance Officer had made a  mistake
    in not considering that both the appellants lived in the UK.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Bassiri submitted that a  letter  had  been
    written to the Entry Clearance Officer by  the  appellant's  solicitors
    pointing out that paragraph  297(i)(c)  should  have  been  considered.
    That was not a matter which was pleaded in  the  grounds  and  I  shall
    return to this.

 6. In the alternative it was argued, in  the  written  grounds,  that  the
    findings of the judge show that the parents  have  sole  responsibility
    and  therefore  the  appellant's  grandmother   did   not   have   sole
    responsibility.  It was  submitted  that  as  the  appellant's  parents
    having been found to have sole responsibility and that they both  lived
    in the UK the judge should have allowed the appeal.  The  judge  failed
    to consider that the Immigration Rules are designed to consider whether
    the appellant's sponsor who lives in the UK had sole responsibility  or
    whether the parent or relative that the appellant  lives  with  in  the
    country of origin had sole responsibility.

 7. In  the  alternative  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that  paragraph
    297(i)(e) and (f) which were either/or clauses.  The appellant did  not
    have to satisfy both of the subparagraphs in order to succeed under the
    paragraph.  The judge had made  positive  findings  in  favour  of  the
    appellant accepting that the appellant was distressed by  remaining  in
    Ghana and separated from her parents.  However she did  not  find  that
    the circumstances amounted to serious and compelling circumstances.

 8. Further the judge was wrong to consider paragraph 297(iv) as  this  was
    not a point raised by the Entry Clearance Officer.

 9. From the Record of Proceedings it is clear that the  discussion  before
    the  judge  was  whether  paragraph  297  or  paragraph   301   was   a
    consideration and it was concluded that Paragraph 297 applied.

10. The evidence given was that the appellant is a national of Ghana,  born
    on 28 March 2001 and an application was made for entry under  paragraph
    297 on 5 May 2015.  The appellant currently lived with her  grandmother
    and had lived with her mother until  her  mother  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom when she was 4 years old on 12 July 2005 to  join  her  father.
    There are three other children born to her parents in  2007,  2010  and
    2013.  The sponsor father visited the appellant between April  and  May
    2015.  The appellant's paternal grandmother, with  whom  the  appellant
    lives, is elderly and with health issues and it was asserted  could  no
    longer care for the appellant.  It was also stated that the appellant's
    sponsor mother did not live with the appellant's  father  because  they
    were not married but the appellant would live with her in the UK.

11. For the purposes of  the  Immigration  Rules  "settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom" is outlined at paragraph 6 under 'Interpretation':

         "Settled in the United Kingdom means that the person concerned:

         (a)      is free from any restriction on the period  for  which  he
             may remain save that a person entitled to an  exemption  under
             Section 8 of the Immigration Act 1971  (otherwise  than  as  a
             member of the home forces) is not to be regarded as settled in
             the United Kingdom except  in  so  far  as  Section  8(5A)  so
             provides; and

         (b)      is either:

             (i) ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom  without  having
                  entered or remained in breach of the immigration laws; or

             (ii)      despite having entered or remained in breach of  the
                  immigration laws, has subsequently entered lawfully or has
                  been granted leave to remain and is ordinarily residence."

12. It is clear that the father  has  limited  leave  to  remain  until  23
    September 2017.  The mother would appear to have a permanent  residence
    card valid until 5 August 2022.  Nonetheless the judge proceeded on the
    basis that the mother had settled status (this was not disputed by  the
    Respondent) but the father did not, and that would  appear  to  be  the
    case made out by the solicitors in their letter of  5  May  2015.   The
    mother arrived in the UK on 12 July 2005 and the father arrived  on  20
    December 2002.

13. It was thus asserted that the judge had erred  in  the  application  of
    paragraph 297(e) and (f) and further had failed to  consider  paragraph
    297(a) or (c) as Ms Bassiri contended at the hearing before me.

14. Going through the various permutations of paragraph 297(i) it is  clear
    that under (a) both parents are not present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom; under (b) both parents are not  being  admitted  on  the  same
    occasion for settlement; under (c) the father is not being admitted  on
    the same occasion for settlement as the mother; (d) it is not the  case
    that one parent is dead and, therefore, in my view the judge  correctly
    applied paragraph (e) considering whether one parent  was  present  and
    settled in the UK and had sole parental responsibility for the  child's
    upbringing.  At paragraph 11 the judge found that  the  parents  shared
    parental responsibility. Evidently it is not the case that  one  parent
    was settled with sole responsibility  as  both  parents  are  here  and
    shared responsibility.

15. With reference to paragraph (f) the judge considered whether one parent
    or a relative was present  and  settled  and  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which made exclusion  of  the
    child undesirable. This is the provision applicable to this  appellant.
    The judge made relevant findings under the Immigration Rules.  At  [13]
    she found that the appellant was 15 at the date of  decision  and  that
    the appellant lived with her grandmother and that the  step-grandfather
    visited the home every evening.  The judge found that  the  appellant's
    father had come to the United Kingdom in 2002 and thus his care of  the
    appellant had lasted for eighteen months and there was  now  a  gap  of
    twelve years.  He had made some financial contribution but  had  failed
    to show that there was any regularity of financial support.

16. Specifically the judge found at [16] that the  appellant's  mother  who
    had left Ghana in 2005 had only revisited Ghana once, in  2015  because
    of financial constraints.  This, the judge found was "indicative of the
    different relationship that she has with the appellant  and  the  three
    children in the United Kingdom".

17. The judge at [15] did not find  the  appellant's  grandmother  suffered
    from serious illness or ill-health and no  medical  evidence  had  been
    provided to that effect and further  the  appellant's  grandmother  was
    able to care for her to an  adequate  standard  in  terms  of  housing,
    education and feeding and assisted by the grandfather.

18. The judge carefully looked at the compelling circumstances in  relation
    to the appellant and also those of the sponsor  and  siblings  and  she
    considered the best interests of the appellant under Section  55.   She
    found as follows:

         "17.     I have given careful consideration to the appellant's best
             interests within section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009, even though it does not  strictly  apply
             to cases where the child is outside  of  the  United  Kingdom.
             The appellant has lived in Ghana all of her life, that  is  14
             years at the date of decision and 15 at the  date  of  appeal.
             She has lived with her grandmother since  2005  when  she  was
             four years old.  She has undergone all  of  her  schooling  in
             Ghana and has deep cultural roots in Ghana  and  its  society,
             particularly in light of the fact Mr Twum and Miss  Addo  have
             only visited her a small number of times.  I accept  that  the
             appellant has met her younger siblings but she  has  only  met
             them once and I find that her life and relationship with  them
             is limited despite the fact that she speaks to them  over  the
             telephone on an almost daily basis.   I  also  find  that  the
             appellant has a family relationship with her uncle  in  Ghana.
             I find that Mr Twum cared for the appellant and lived with her
             from when she was born until  when  Mr  Twum  came  to  United
             Kingdom in 2005.   However  I  find  that  Mr  Twum  has  been
             separated from the appellant since that date and has only seen
             her on one occasion since then.  Therefore  in  all  of  these
             circumstances I find it is in the appellant's best interest to
             remain in Ghana with those with whom she  has  lived  for  the
             past approximately 10 years and in a society in which she  has
             deep roots.

         18.      I have given consideration to  Miss  Addo  and  Mr  Twum's
             three other children and the appellant's siblings who  are  in
             the United Kingdom.  I accept that one of these is  a  British
             citizen and that the others have settlement here.  I find that
             they have a limited relationship with the appellant by  virtue
             of the fact that they have only met her once and the  youngest
             child is only three years at the date of the hearing  and  two
             years old at the date of the decision and the relationship  he
             could form with the appellant is limited by their distance and
             his young years.  The eldest sibling is nine years old at  the
             date of the appeal and eight at the date of the decision.   As
             he has only  visited  the  appellant  once,  and  then  for  a
             reasonably short period of time, and all other  communications
             has been by electronic means, I find that this relationship is
             limited in its  depth.   In  considering  section  55  of  the
             Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, I find that  it
             is in the three siblings who are in the United Kingdom's  best
             interests for the appellant to remain in Ghana.  I  make  this
             finding because they have never lived together as a family and
             the addition of a new sibling under the same roof as them,  if
             she were to live with Miss  Addo,  would  have  a  significant
             effect on the family dynamic and this would be very unsettling
             for the youngest sibling at the very least.  The effect on the
             family dynamic is not clear and I am not  prepared  to  assume
             that it would be positive in all respects.

         19.      I accept that the appellant, Miss Addo and Mr  Twum  would
             all greatly like the appellant to come to the United  Kingdom.
             I accept that the appellant  is  distressed  by  remaining  in
             Ghana and separated from her parents and  from  her  siblings.
             However I do not  find  that  these  circumstances  amount  to
             serious and compelling circumstances."

19. There was discussion of the use of the terms 'serious' and 'compelling'
    in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC) and  which
    underlined that the sensible  construction  of  the  immigration  rules
    should be employed. The Immigration Directorate  Instructions  then  in
    force and which referred to a similar  provision  emphasised  that  the
    objective of this provision was to allow a child to join  a  parent  or
    relative in this country only where that child could not be  adequately
    cared for by his parents or relatives in his own  country.   There  was
    also reference to the internationally accepted principle that  a  child
    should first and foremost be cared for by his natural parent(s), or, if
    this is not possible, by his natural relatives in the country in  which
    he lives. The judge gave various and specific reasons  for  finding  as
    she did and bearing in  mind  the  appellant's  relationship  with  her
    grandparents those findings were open to her.   The  judge  also  found
    that the appellant could make a further application.

20. There was criticism of the judge for taking into account a matter  that
    the Entry Clearance Officer had not considered and that was in relation
    to the accommodation requirements of paragraph 297.  As pointed out  in
    relation to Kwok on Tong (HC 395 para 320) India  [2006]  UKAIT  00039,
    albeit that the financial position was raised  by  the  judge  and  not
    considered by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  the  appellant's  parents'
    financial position differed from that relied on in the  application  as
    the parents had decided  to  separate  again  and  that  was  found  at
    paragraph 5.  Nevertheless the challenge to  the  judge's  approach  is
    overcome by the judge's finding  at  paragraph  21  that  even  if  the
    financial support and accommodation requirements of paragraph 297  were
    satisfied  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules because of her earlier findings.

21. The grounds are premised on the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had misread the Rules in relation  to  paragraph  297(i)(a),  not
    (c), and as pointed out in the Rule 24  response  from  the  Respondent
    both parents must be present and settled in the United Kingdom for  (a)
    and (c)  to  apply.   There  is  no  such  finding  that  both  of  the
    appellant's parents are in the United Kingdom with indefinite leave  to
    remain.  I am not persuaded on a reading of the Immigration Rules  that
    an error of law was made in the application of Paragraph 297.

22. It is clear that the application was made and turned on  whether  there
    are serious and compelling circumstances which make  the  exclusion  of
    the appellant undesirable.  The judge fully explored  the  concept  and
    gave her conclusions and  findings  at  paragraph  13  to  20;  on  the
    evidence those findings were open to her and those cannot  be  arguably
    said to be perverse.

23. The judge then addressed her mind to any compelling circumstances to be
    identified outside the Rules and effectively considered that there  was
    no "gap in this situation" between the rules and a consideration  under
    Article 8.

24. This in effect was an appeal  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  human
    rights, rather than an appeal on the basis of  the  immigration  rules.
    The  rules,  however,  were  clearly  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality  and,  having  considered  all  the  relevant   factors
    including any  compelling  circumstances  under  the  rules  the  judge
    properly continued to apply Section 117 of the Nationality  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002. The judge was clearly aware that the sponsors were
    the biological parents of the appellant but  found,  nonetheless,  that
    the best interests of this child were to remain with  the  grandparents
    and further there was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant  could  speak
    English or that she would be financially  independent.  Those  findings
    were open to the judge under Section 117B.  The  judge  considered  the
    rights of the remainder of the family further  to  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 39 but ultimately gave weight to the primary  consideration
    that being, as the judge found them, having weighed all  the  evidence,
    the best interests of the appellant.

Notice of Decision

25. In the circumstances there is no error of law and the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION



Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 3rd February 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
