
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01087/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre      |                                     |
|On 15 October 2020                   |On 21 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                             MARIAM SAIDU KAMARA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance (at 12 noon); sponsor (at 1.45pm)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone who was born on 10 May 1990.



 2. On 25 September 2018, the  appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance to join her partner, Titus  Boye-Thompson  in  the  UK  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 3. On 6 December 2018, the Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("ECO")  refuse  her
    application.   He  was  not  satisfied  that  she  met  a   number   of
    requirements in Section E-ECP of Appendix FM, including  that  she  was
    coming to the UK to enable her to  marry  the  sponsor,  the  financial
    requirements  of  the  Rules  and  the  English  Language  requirement.
    Further, the  ECO  concluded  that  the  decision  did  not  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences and so was not a breach of  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.  On 21 March 2019, the Entry Clearance Manager maintained the
    ECO's decision to refuse the appellant entry clearance.

 4. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard on 4 October 2019.  There was no appearance by the  sponsor,  who
    was  her  nominated  representative  by  this   time.    Judge   Abdar,
    nevertheless, decided to hear the appeal in his absence.  In a decision
    promulgated on 29 October 2019, Judge Abdar dismissed the appeal.   the
    judge was not satisfied that the appellant met the  'partner'  rule  in
    Appendix FM and, as the  sole  ground  of  appeal,  that  the  decision
    breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on the ground  that  there
    had been a procedural irregularity,  namely  that  the  appellant  (and
    sponsor as her representative) had not received notice of  the  hearing
    and that was why the sponsor had not attended on 4 October 2019.

 6. On 16 March 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bristow)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on the basis that it was  arguable  that
    there had been a procedural irregularity in notifying the appellant and
    sponsor of the hearing.

 7. As a result of the COVID-19 crisis, the  UT  issued  directions  on  13
    August 2020 expressing the provisional view that the error of law issue
    should be decided without a hearing.  The parties were invited to  make
    written submissions in respect of the substantive issue in  the  appeal
    and also whether a hearing was necessary.

 8. In response, on 25 August 2020 the ECO filed a rule 24 reply conceding,
    in the light of submissions made  on  the  appellant's  behalf  by  the
    sponsor on 18 August 2020, the error of law on  the  basis  upon  which
    permission was granted (namely procedural irregularity)  and  accepting
    that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    fresh hearing.  The sponsor also made submissions.

 9. The appeal was listed for a remote hearing by Skype for Business on  15
    October 2020 at 12 noon when I was based in the Cardiff  Civil  Justice
    Centre. Mr Howells, who represented the ECO, took part  via  Skype  for
    Business.

10. The appellant and sponsor did not attend  the  hearing  via  Skype  for
    Business at the listed time of 12 noon.  At that time, I was  satisfied
    that the appellant had been notified of the hearing  by  e-mail  on  23
    September 2020 and the sponsor was aware  there  was  to  be  a  remote
    hearing as he had e-mailed the UT on 25 September 2020 giving his  (and
    the appellant's) details "for the purposes of  the  forthcoming  remote
    appeal".

11. Prior to the hearing, Mr Howells e-mailed the UT on  12  October  2020,
    accepting (as had the rule 24 reply), that the FtT's decision should be
    set aside because of a procedural error and the appeal remitted to  the
    FtT for a fresh hearing.  In those circumstances, I concluded there was
    no prejudice to the appellant in my  hearing  the  appeal  without  the
    sponsor taking part.  I concluded that  it  was  in  the  interests  of
    justice to hear the appeal in the absence of  the  appellant  (and  her
    representative, the sponsor) under rule 38 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).

12. However, shortly after the hearing was concluded, I was informed by  e-
    mail from Field House that the sponsor  had  been  in  touch  with  the
    "Contact Centre" around 12.20pm informing them that he had been  unable
    to log on to the  Skype  hearing  because  of  technical  difficulties.
    Thereafter, I was informed, again by Field House, that the sponsor  had
    now logged onto the Skype hearing which had, by that  time,  concluded.
    As a consequence, I  made  arrangements  through  the  court  staff  to
    contact Mr Howells and to re-convene the  hearing  by  Skype  with  the
    sponsor taking part.  That was achieved at 1.45pm.

13. Mr Howells maintains the respondent's  concession  and  invites  me  to
    remit the appeal to the FtT for a fresh hearing on the basis that there
    was a procedural error such that the appellant (and sponsor)  were  not
    given notice of the FtT hearing and, as a  result,  the  appellant  was
    prejudiced.

14. I explained the respondent's concession to the sponsor and he  informed
    me that, in addition to appellant and he having married, he now  had  a
    job and his wife had obtained her degree through the medium of English.
      He  indicated  that  he  would  send  the  new  evidence   both   the
    reconsideration unit at the Home of Office and  to  the  FtT  when  the
    appeal was listed.

15. I agree with  the  respondent's  concession.   Based  on  the  material
    submitted  with  the  appeal,  the  appellant  has  been   denied   the
    opportunity to take part in the hearing (through her representative the
    sponsor).  That is a material error of  law  even  though  it  was  not
    through any fault of the judge.

Decision

16. The FtT's decision involved the making of  an  error  of  law  and  the
    decision cannot stand.  I set aside the decision.

17. The appellant has been denied a hearing  in  the  FtT  because  of  the
    procedural error.    In those circumstances, having regard to para  7.2
    of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the  proper  disposal  of
    this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Abdar.
                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             15 October 2020
