
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01647/2018
                                                               HU/01649/2018
                                                               HU/01650/2018
                                                               HU/01651/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 November 2019                   |On 11 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                 HHJ STACEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                    Mr MH
                                   MRS TS
                                   MISS AH
                                   MISS AH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reynolds, of Counsel, instructed by Lawmatic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


       1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 9  July  2019  of
          the First-tier Tribunal, before Judge Herlihy, which  refused  the
          Article 8 ECHR appeal brought by the Appellants.

       2. The Appellants  are  a  husband  and  wife  and  their  two  minor
          daughters, dates of birth 2nd September 2010 and 2 July 2016,  all
          of whom are nationals of Bangladesh.

       3. The First Appellant entered the  UK  unlawfully  in  approximately
          2000. He has never had leave to remain. His wife came to the UK in
          2009 with leave as a student but had no  leave  from  23  November
          2014 onwards. The Article 8 ECHR claim was based on  the  fact  of
          their daughter, AH, (the Third Appellant) having lived in  the  UK
          all of her life and for 8 years.  The Appellants sought  to  argue
          that, following the provisions of s.117B(6) of the Nationality and
          Immigration Act 2002 (the Act), it would not be reasonable for  AH
          to leave the UK. The Appellants also  sought  to  argue  that  the
          Second  Appellant  had  not  used  deception  when  relying  on  a
          TOEIC/ETS certificate and that it was disproportionate  to  expect
          the family to return to Bangladesh in all the circumstances.

       4. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Second  Appellant  did  use
          deception when relying on her TOEIC/ETS certificate, that  it  was
          reasonable for AH to leave the UK and that the decision to  refuse
          leave was proportionate.

       5. The Appellants  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the
          decision of Judge Herlihy. In a decision dated 2  September  2019,
          First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  indicated  that  permission  was
          refused but in the body of the decision indicated that the grounds
          had merit, limited to argument on the proper application of  KO  v
          SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

       6. The Appellants renewed their application for permission to  appeal
          on the basis that the decision of Judge Andrew should have  stated
          that permission on limited grounds had been granted. In a decision
          dated 30  September  2019,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  granted
          permission as:

             "it is clear from the decision of Judge Andrew that she  found
             there to be an arguable error in approach as per her paragraph
             2. I am satisfied that the heading 'permission  to  appeal  is
             refused' was an error and that it should have read 'permission
             to appeal is granted'. Permission is therefore granted in  the
             limited terms identified by Judge Andrews."

       7. At the hearing before us, Mr Reynolds sought to expand the grounds
          to include those set out in grounds 1 to  5  which  addressed  the
          adverse findings of Judge Herlihy on the TOEIC/ETS certificate.

       8. We refused to admit grounds 1 to 5. As indicated by Upper Tribunal
          Judge Bruce, Judge Andrew clearly  intended  to  grant  permission
          only on the limited ground concerning the  reasonableness  of  the
          older  child  leaving  the  UK.  The  renewal  of  the  permission
          application to the Upper Tribunal maintained that the decision  of
          Judge Andrew showed that permission  should  be  granted  on  that
          limited basis rather than stating that permission was also  sought
          on the grounds refused  by  Judge  Andrew.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
          Bruce's decision clearly grants  permission  on  a  limited  basis
          only.

       9. Further, the application to expand the grounds was  made  only  on
          the morning of the hearing, without notice having  been  given  to
          either the Tribunal or the respondent. Mr Reynolds was not able to
          provide a good reason to explain  why  the  renewal  grounds  only
          sought recognition that Judge Andrew had granted permission  on  a
          limited basis or why the Appellants had not raised the application
          to admit other grounds in writing at any point after the  decision
          of Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce was issued and only at  the  hearing
          before us. Mr Reynolds conceded that it was difficult for  him  to
          seek to re-open the question  of  the  findings  that  the  Second
          Appellant had cheated in the TOEIC test given those matters.

      10. In all the circumstances, it was our conclusion that it was not in
          the interests of justice or  in  accordance  with  the  overriding
          objective to admit  grounds  on  which  permission  had  not  been
          granted by the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.

      11. We proceeded to hear argument on grounds 6 and 7  which  concerned
          the approach of Judge Herlihy to s.117B(6) and the  reasonableness
          of the older child leaving the UK.

      12. Judge Herlihy properly identified KO as the lead authority on  the
          correct approach the s117B(6) assessment in paragraph  52  of  her
          decision. In paragraph 53 she said this:

             "The immigration history of the parents is not irrelevant  and
             is indirectly material because it is  necessary  in  order  to
             assess whether it would be reasonable for [AH]  to  return  to
             Bangladesh with her parents to ask why she would  be  expected
             to leave the UK and the answer is because her parents have  no
             right to remain and  this  is  a  relevant  consideration.  To
             paraphrase the question another way would be to ask; "would it
             be reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no
             right to remain in the country of origin?".

      13. The grounds maintain that this statement on the principle in KO is
          incorrect.  We did not find that to be so. Paragraphs 17-19 of  KO
          provide:


                "17.   As has been seen, section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
                substance of the rule without material change, but this time
                in the context of the right of the parent to remain. I would
                infer that it was intended to  have  the  same  effect.  The
                question again is what is "reasonable"  for  the  child.  As
                Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration
                and Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016] 1 WLR  5093,
                para 36, there is nothing in  the  subsection  to  import  a
                reference to the conduct of the parent.  Section  117B  sets
                out a number of factors relating to those seeking  leave  to
                enter or  remain,  but  criminality  is  not  one  of  them.
                Subsection 117B(6) is on its face  free-standing,  the  only
                qualification being that the person relying  on  it  is  not
                liable to deportation. The list of relevant factors set  out
                in the IDI guidance (para  10  above)  seems  to  me  wholly
                appropriate and sound in law,  in  the  context  of  section
                117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


                18.    On the other hand, as the IDI guidance  acknowledges,
                it seems to me  inevitably  relevant  in  both  contexts  to
                consider  where  the  parents,  apart  from   the   relevant
                provision, are expected to be, since  it  will  normally  be
                reasonable for the child to be with them. To that extent the
                record of the parents may become indirectly material, if  it
                leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain  here,  and
                having to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,  it
                would not be reasonable for the  child  to  leave  that  the
                provision may give the parents a right to remain. The  point
                was  well-expressed  by  Lord  Boyd  in  SA  (Bangladesh)  v
                Secretary of State for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:


                  '22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                  whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
                  UK one has to address the question, 'Why would  the  child
                  be expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a  case  such
                  as this there can only be one answer: 'because the parents
                  have no right to  remain  in  the  UK'.  To  approach  the
                  question in any other way strips away the context in which
                  the assessment of reasonableness is being made ...'


                19.    He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar
                point in considering the 'best interests' of children in the
                context of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
                Immigration Act 2009 in  EV  (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of
                State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


                  '58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of  the
                  best interests of the children must be made on  the  basis
                  that the facts are as they are in the real world.  If  one
                  parent has no right to remain, but the other parent  does,
                  that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then
                  that is the background against  which  the  assessment  is
                  conducted. Thus the  ultimate  question  will  be:  is  it
                  reasonable to expect the child to follow the  parent  with
                  no right to remain to the country of origin?'

             To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully  disagree.  There  is
             nothing in the section to suggest that 'reasonableness' is  to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world  in  which  the
             children find themselves."

      14.  In  our  judgment,  the  statements  made  by  Judge  Herlihy  in
          paragraphs 52 and 53 of her  decision  reflect  the  ratio  of  KO
          entirely accurately. The unlawful status of the parents forms  the
          context for the assessment of whether it  is  reasonable  for  the
          child to leave the UK. Judge Herlihy clearly understood  this  and
          we were not taken to anything in the substance of  her  assessment
          that shows that when considering whether it was reasonable for  AH
          to leave the UK she approached  the  parents'  immigration  status
          otherwise.

      15. In paragraph 56 the Judge expands on the  immigration  history  of
          the parents - that  MH  entered  and  remained  illegally  and  TS
          remained after the  expiration  of  her  leave  and  continued  to
          develop  her  family  life  in  the  knowledge  that  she  had  no
          legitimate expectation of being able to remain to pursue the same.
          She also referred to deception perpetrated by TS and that  it  was
          not in the public interest for parents to be incentivised to flout
          immigration  control  by  developing  family  life  by   remaining
          illegally when they know they have no right of return. But  it  is
          clear from paragraph 56 that these issues  are  discussed  in  the
          context  of  the  wider  proportionality  exercise  and  not   the
          s.117B(6) assessment so Judge Herlihy is not seeking to visit  the
          sins of the parents on the  children,  but  merely  outlining  the
          conduct of the parents in the context of the parents' human rights
          claim.

      16. We therefore did not find that ground 6 had merit as there  is  no
          error of law in the Tribunal's approach to and application of  the
          ratio in KO.

      17. The second challenge, set out in ground 7, was that the First-tier
          Tribunal's findings  in  paragraphs  54  and  55  that  that  "any
          interaction [of AH] outside the family home and school is  largely
          within the Bangladeshi Diaspora" was  perverse  as  there  was  no
          evidence on which to base the finding.

      18. Mr Reynolds accepted that perversity is "a very  high  hurdle"  (R
          (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982) but includes a finding of  fact
          wholly unsupported by the evidence.  However, the grounds overlook
          two matters. Firstly the parents' evidence recited  at  paragraphs
          28 and 31 on the children's exposure to the Bangladeshi  community
          was not found to be  entirely  credible  by  the  Judge:  see  for
          example paragraph 48 and the contradictions and inconsistencies as
          between each of the parent's evidence about AH's interaction  with
          other Bangladeshis.

      19. Secondly, there was evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  which
          clearly permitted a rational  conclusion  that  the  children  had
          grown up with contact with the Bangladeshi community  in  the  UK.
          The evidence before Judge Herlihy was that the Appellants live  in
          an area where other Bangladeshis live and they  are  supported  by
          their uncle who is originally from Bangladesh. The grounds do  not
          challenge the conclusion that MH  is  likely  to  have  worked  in
          Bangladeshi restaurants when describing his employment as a  chef.
          The Tribunal found that MH does not speak good  English.  MH  gave
          evidence that members of the Bangladeshi community  visit  him  at
          his house and he was  disbelieved  when  he  said  they  spoke  in
          English together. MH volunteers at the local mosque and TS's  work
          was in a sari shop before she had children. Despite their  19  and
          10 years in the  UK  respectively  the  letters  of  support  came
          entirely  from  other  members  of  the   Bangladeshi   community.
          Furthermore, the letters of support  gave  almost  no  information
          about what the parents have being doing throughout their  time  in
          the UK and their level of integration. The Tribunal  was  entitled
          to note the absence of evidence of integration  and  ties  outside
          the Bengali community. There  was  therefore  sufficient  evidence
          before the Tribunal to draw the inference  that  "any  interaction
          [of AH] outside the family home and school is largely  within  the
          Bangladeshi Diaspora" and the finding was not perverse.

      20. Since the perversity challenge fails, it follows  that  there  has
          been no error of law by the tribunal in  its  conclusion  that  it
          would not be unreasonable to expect AH to leave the UK and her and
          her family's human rights have not been infringed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed:                                          Date:  5 November 2019

         HHJ Stacey
