
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01509/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21st January 2020                    |On 5th February 2020                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HALL

                                   Between

                                    'SR'

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

On the  basis  that  the  appeal  includes  discussion  of  the  appellant's
children and allegations of domestic violence, unless and until  a  Tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
member of his family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the appellant:              Mrs S Ahmad (morning) and Mr U Javed
(afternoon),
              representatives.
For the respondent:             Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                        REMAKING DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. These are a written record of the oral reasons given for our decision
      at the hearing.

 2. This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal  against
    the respondent's refusal of his human rights claim, in the  context  of
    his application for discretionary leave to remain.




 3. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, sought leave to remain in the  UK
    on the basis of his human rights, specifically his right  to  a  family
    life with  his  daughter,  with  whom  it  is  said  that  he  has  had
    intermittent contact and access over the years since he entered the  UK
    in August 2003 and she was born on 24 October 2004,  although  by  that
    time the appellant's marriage to the daughter's mother  had  ended  and
    the appellant alleged that he had been the victim of domestic violence.
     Through the period of his presence in the UK, the appellant  has  been
    lawfully present with a succession of short periods of leave, initially
    as a spouse and subsequently periods of discretionary leave,  in  order
    for him to maintain or gain access  to  his  daughter.  The  respondent
    refused his most recent application for discretionary leave  on  5  May
    2016, which the respondent refused in a decision dated 9 January  2017.
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and in a decision promulgated on
    15  December  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mathews  (the  'FtT')
    dismissed the appellant's appeal, concluding that the  appellant  could
    maintain indirect contact from his country of origin.



 4. The appellant appealed. The ground of  appeal  was  that  the  FtT  had
    failed to consider  the  respondent's  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    policy and the respondent's policy said to be in force  prior  to  July
    2012.  The  appellant  asserted  that  the  policy  suggested  that  an
    application for discretionary leave, on  the  same  basis  of  previous
    grants of leave, should be granted, with a view to an  applicant  being
    on a path to settled leave to remain.




 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 2
    May 2018 on the basis of the FTT had  failed  to  consider  the  policy
    under article 8 outside the Rules.



 6. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman set aside the FtT's decision  in  a
    decision promulgated on 7  June  2019.    She  noted  that  a  previous
    application for indefinite leave to remain had been refused and when  a
    challenge to that earlier refusal was raised before her for  the  first
    time, she refused that ground  of  the  appeal,  noting  that  no  such
    application to amend had been included in  the  grounds  and  that  the
    issue had not been raised before the  FtT.  However,  she  allowed  the
    appeal on the basis that the FtT  had  not  adequately  considered  the
    lawfulness of the appellant's presence since August 2003.  The error of
    law found related to the period of time spent by the appellant  in  the
    UK, rather than the policy which might be a path to settlement,  noting
    that the appellant's application for settled leave to remain  had  been
    refused and was not the subject of the appeal.  Judge  Chapman's  error
    of law decision is annexed to this decision.

The issues in our remaking decision

 7. The issues which we needed to consider  changed  significantly  on  the
    morning of the hearing,  following  discussions  with  the  appellant's
    representative, Mrs  Ahmad.   It  related  solely  to  the  appellant's
    private  life,  rather  than  any  family  life  with  the  appellant's
    daughter.  There had been earlier disclosure by  the  Family  Court  in
    accordance with the Family Protocol of documents which  suggested  that
    the appellant had gained indirect contact with  his  daughter  and  the
    appellant could apply to the court to expand the basis of his  contact,
    from  1  August  2019.    Mrs  Ahmad  accepted,  as  confirmed   in   a
    supplementary witness statement from the appellant, which was  produced
    on the morning of the hearing, that on legal advice, he had not applied
    to vary the existing Child Arrangements Order, and did not rely on  any
    relationship with a qualifying child for the purposes of appealing  the
    refusal of leave to remain.  Instead, he relied on the fact that he had
    been in the UK lawfully since his arrival in 2003.   He  had  completed
    relevant English language tests.

 8. We agreed with Mrs Ahmad that the sole issue related to the appellant's
    private life and that we needed to consider the following questions:

             a. First, noting that it was an appeal outside the  Immigration
                Rules but nevertheless taking those Immigration Rules as our
                starting point, we had to consider paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),
                and whether there are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
                appellant's integration to Pakistan.

             b. Second, whether, on a  free-standing  analysis  outside  the
                Immigration Rules, and noting in particular at sections 117A-
                B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  the
                respondent's refusal was proportionate.

Discussion on evidence

 9. We discussed with Mrs Ahmad that the appellant's claim and evidence was
    based on solely on the period of time  spent  in  the  UK  and  a  bare
    assertion that if he were removed, it would  breach  his  rights  under
    article 8.  The supplemental written witness  statement  did  not  deal
    with any obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  Pakistan.   We
    discussed with Mrs Ahmad that the bare assertion of a loss of all  ties
    to Pakistan may not assist  this  Tribunal,  noting  the  authority  of
    Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932.  We emphasised that it was entirely
    a matter for the appellant as to what evidence he wished to adduce.  In
    response, Mrs  Ahmad  began  by  explaining  that  as  there  had  been
    difficulties  in  obtaining  instructions  from  the   appellant,   his
    supplemental witness statement had only been  obtained  on  14  January
    2020 and he had not had the opportunity to seek evidence to prove  that
    he no longer had  any  family  relatives  in  Pakistan.   On  receiving
    further instructions, she confirmed that he did in fact have  relatives
    in Pakistan; in particular his  mother,  maternal  aunt  and  a  cousin
    living in a family property and she was content  in  the  circumstances
    that we should proceed with a hearing.   We  agreed  that  the  hearing
    would restart after the lunchbreak, to give the appellant a  chance  to
    produce a further written statement, and Ms Aboni raised  no  objection
    to this.

10. On restarting the hearing with Mrs Ahmad's colleague, Mr Javed, in  the
    afternoon, he began by indicating that a further witness statement  had
    not been finalised and  that  he  intended  to  rely  solely  on  legal
    submissions.  We referred him back to our earlier discussions with  Mrs
    Ahmad, at which point Mr Javed  indicated  a  desire  to  finalise  the
    statement, albeit it  delayed  the  hearing  to  even  later  into  the
    afternoon.  It was around 3.15pm  that  he  was  able  to  produce  the
    written statement and we are grateful to Ms Aboni that she was able  to
    prepare swiftly her cross-examination, to enable us to proceed.

11. The gist of the appellant's evidence is as  follows.   In  his  earlier
    statements, he referred to having lived in the UK lawfully since  2003,
    so that it would difficult for him to relocate to Pakistan after such a
    period of time.  In his additional statement, he conceded that  he  had
    visited his  family  in  Pakistan,  in  2015,  but  that  the  family's
    circumstances had changed since then. He had no close family  relatives
    to turn to or with whom he had a relationship, except his  mother,  who
    was 70 years old and whom he described as 'elderly'.   The  family  did
    not have a property of their own and did not own any land  in  Pakistan
    but his mother lived with her sister and his cousin.   The  appellant's
    grandfather, with whom he had stayed in 2005, had died  in  2019.   The
    appellant had essentially lost all connections with  his  relatives  in
    Pakistan.  All of his close family members lived in the  UK,  including
    his brother, his nieces and his sister.  He  accepted  that  he  had  a
    'SIA' licence to work in the  security  industry  but  this  would  not
    assist him in finding work in Pakistan, and that  he  used  to  have  a
    provisional driving licence and fork-lift truck licence,  but  none  of
    this would assist him in finding work in Pakistan, although he did  not
    explain why in his statement. He had been out of work in the  UK  since
    2017  and  was  entirely  reliant  on  his  brother  to   support   him
    financially.   He did not have the  financial  means  to  fund  further
    studies in Pakistan and there were no support organisations  to  assist
    him in Pakistan.

12. In oral evidence, when we  asked  him  to  explain  further  about  the
    obstacles   to   integration   in   Pakistan,   he   mentioned   first,
    accommodation. He would be unable to live with his mother and  maternal
    aunt and cousin because they lived in a small property.   In  terms  of
    work, his SIA licence would not help him as security guards in Pakistan
    had guns and he had no firearms training. While the  documents  in  his
    bundle  suggested  he  had  qualifications  to  work   as   an   animal
    slaughterer, he said that he had only ever hung animals  on  hooks.  He
    had never seen large-scale food processing plants in Pakistan. Instead,
    slaughter took place in small family run shops. He also had a bad  back
    and shoulder so couldn't lift heavy carcasses  now.   While  he  had  a
    provisional driving licence it had since lapsed.

13. The appellant had seen no forklift truck-drivers in  Pakistan  and  did
    not believe he could find work  as  one.   He  had  only  seen  porters
    carried things by hand in markets.  He accepted, however, that  he  was
    basing his knowledge on what  he  had  seen,  having  never  worked  in
    Pakistan prior to leaving there and having done no independent research
    of his own on the availability of jobs.  He accepted that he  had  also
    worked in a bed factory as a machine operator  and  in  a  retail  shop
    while in the UK.  When asked  whether  he  could  work  in  a  shop  in
    Pakistan he said that the shops were small family businesses. While  he
    accepted that he had done manual work before, he could not do so now as
    he was 39 years' old.  Whilst he referred in his witness  statement  to
    not owning any property  or  family  members  owning  any  property  in
    Pakistan he accepted that were he in a position to  work  he  would  be
    able to generally rent a property.   Whilst  he  had  provided  regular
    financial support to his brother prior to 14 November 2017, he had  not
    worked since November 2017.  While he had the right to work,  he  could
    not find employment in the UK.  He had been living with his brother, on
    whom he relied entirely.

14. When he was asked why his brother  and  family  in  the  UK  would  not
    continue to provide financial support, he said that his  brother  would
    need to be asked. He suggested that this issue had been considered when
    the brother had given evidence to the FtT,  but  having  reviewed  that
    decision carefully, we observed there was no suggestion or reference to
    the appellant's brother asserting that he would be unwilling or  unable
    to provide financial support to  the  appellant,  were  he  removed  to
    Pakistan.

15. The appellant accepted that whilst there had been an absence of contact
    for three to four months since he had last spoken with his mother, they
    had a good relationship.  His  relationship  with  his  aunt  was  more
    distant.  He had completed education at high school but not beyond that
    to university level.

Discussion and Findings

16. Following our discussions with Mrs  Ahmad,  we  did  not  consider  the
    respondent's policy prior to July 2012, noting that this  was  relevant
    to the issue of a route to settlement and the  appellant's  application
    for indefinite leave to remain had been refused, without challenge.

17. First, we considered whether there were very significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration into Pakistan.  We  were  mindful  that  we
    should not add a gloss to that and indeed that it would be unhelpful to
    do so (see Parveen). We had to identify what  the  obstacles  were  and
    assess whether they were  very  significant.   The  obstacles,  broadly
    speaking, fell into under three  areas.   The  first  obstacle  was  in
    relation  to  the  appellant's  ability  to  finance  himself  or  seek
    financial support from others to assist his integration into  Pakistan.
    The second connected obstacle was in relation to the ability  to  house
    himself.  The third obstacle was the question of his  social  isolation
    and the extent to which he could meaningfully integrate into  Pakistani
    society.

18. We do not accept the appellant's assertion that he would be  unable  to
    find work, for the following reasons.  First, he can  speak  Urdu,  the
    language of his country of origin, as  exemplified  by  his  choice  in
    giving evidence before us in Urdu.  He has no linguistic barrier.

19. Second, he was been educated to high school level  and  since  entering
    the UK, has experience in skilled manual  work  (not  merely  unskilled
    labouring), with practical experience and qualifications as  a  machine
    operator,  forklift  truck  driver,  working  in  a  shop,  and  in   a
    slaughterhouse. In relation to each  of  those  points,  the  appellant
    suggested that there would be barriers preventing him from working, for
    example the need for security guards to have firearms experience.    We
    do not accept the appellant's evidence on these barriers.  He has never
    worked in Pakistan.  Whilst that alone might be a  potential  obstacle,
    it undermines the reliability of his evidence about experience  of  the
    limitations of employment in Pakistan.  Moreover, his lack of  work  in
    Pakistan cannot be considered in  isolation  to  his  substantial  work
    experience in the UK, noting that he has worked consistently from  2003
    to 2017. His own brother referred at [8] of his  witness  statement  to
    the  applicant's  various  employments  in  the  past  and  his   'many
    qualifications,'  as  a  result  of  which   the   appellant   provided
    substantial support to his brother.  By way  of  example,  he  has  not
    explained why he could not work as a machine operator in a  factory,  a
    previous role he has carried out.

20. Third, in relation to financial support from  others,  the  appellant's
    brother has, on the  appellant's  own  evidence,  provided  significant
    support in terms of accommodation and finances.  The appellant has  not
    said that his brother would be unwilling to provide him support and  no
    evidence was ever put before us that the appellant's brother and sister
    would be unable to assist in financially supporting the appellant, even
    if for a brief period, to help his integration in Pakistan.

21. In relation to the potential obstacle of accommodation in Pakistan,  we
    do not accept the assertion that merely because the family do  not  own
    property in Pakistan that he would be unable to integrate there and the
    appellant candidly accepted that if he could work in Pakistan he  would
    be able to rent property.

22. In relation to the third potential obstacle, lack of family connections
    and  isolation,  we  have  significant  doubts  about  the  appellant's
    candour.  We noted that in his application for  leave  to  remain,  the
    refusal of which he is challenging, the form asked at page [23] of [41]
    whether he had any family, friends or connections with Pakistan, and he
    said that he had no family in Pakistan, with all of his family  in  the
    UK, which on his own admission, was not accurate and  was  rejected  by
    the FtT. We noted in the FtT's record of evidence that the  appellant's
    stay in Pakistan in 2015 was not a short one - he stayed  for  a  four-
    month period from July to November 2015, when he was dealing  with  the
    passing away of one of his brothers.  The length of such a stay and the
    fact that he  was  of  sufficient  standing  within  the  community  in
    Pakistan to be the person dealing with the passing away of one  of  his
    brothers, is indicative  of  his  ties  and  ability  to  integrate  in
    Pakistan. The passing away of his grandfather in 2019,  which  prevents
    him from staying in that property, does not begin to  explain  why  his
    standing and connections have disappeared since 2015.   He continues to
    have a good relationship with his  mother,  with  whom  he  remains  in
    contact and combined with his close relationships  with  UK  relatives,
    who would continue to provide him with emotional  support,  we  do  not
    accept that he would be isolated and unable to integrate in Pakistan.

23. We conclude that there are no obstacles to his integration in Pakistan,
    let alone very significant ones, so that he  does  not  meet  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. Nevertheless, it  is  important
    that we consider his appeal outside the Immigration Rules, in  a  free-
    standing assessment, including by reference to sections 117A and  B  of
    the 2002 Act.

24. The appellant has unquestionably established a private life in  the  UK
    since 2003, working in a variety of jobs and  obtaining  a  variety  of
    qualifications.  That  private  life  will  be  interfered  with  as  a
    consequence of the appellant's  removal,  to  a  sufficient  extent  to
    engage article  8.   Noting  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules, the refusal is lawful and for a legitimate aim,  ie.
    the maintenance of immigration controls.  The all-important question is
    whether refusal of leave to remain is proportionate. Using  a  'balance
    sheet' analysis, in his favour, the appellant's presence in the  UK  is
    for a significant period. He has worked over many years and paid taxes.
     On neutral points, whilst the appellant has recently relied  upon  the
    financial support of his brother, he has not been in receipt  of  state
    benefits and  therefore  he  remains  for  those  purposes  financially
    independent.  He also has a relevant  English  language  qualification,
    which again is a neutral factor.   Against  the  appellant,  while  his
    private life has  been  established  over  a  lengthy  period,  section
    117B(5) of the 2002 Act confirms that little weight should be  attached
    to  this  as  while  lawful,  it  was  developed  when  his  leave  was
    precarious.    His leave  was  obtained  as  a  series  of  periods  of
    discretionary leave to access his daughter and he has confirmed that he
    does not intend to seek to widen  that  access,  which  is  limited  to
    sending birthday cards and presents indirectly to his daughter.   There
    is no reason that this limited indirect contact  cannot  continue  from
    Pakistan.  While Judge Chapman had concerns  that  the  period  of  the
    appellant's presence in  the  UK  had  not  been  considered,  we  have
    considered such presence, but confirm that nevertheless,  the  decision
    to refuse the appellant leave  to  remain,  where  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain has been refused, is proportionate and  does
    not breach the appellant's rights under article 8 ECHR.

Remaking decision

25. We remake the appellant's appeal by  dismissing  his  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

Signed   J Keith                             Date     4 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal so that there can be no fee award.

Signed   J Keith                             Date     4 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01509/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 May 2019                                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   mr s r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born  on  23  March  1980.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom in August 2003  in  possession  of  entry
    clearance as a spouse for twelve months.  He subsequently  applied  for
    further leave to remain  on  31  March  2006  on  the  basis  that  his
    relationship had broken down as a  result  of  domestic  violence.  His
    application  for  indefinite  leave  to   remain   was   refused,   but
    discretionary leave to remain was granted on 28 November 2008 for three
    years.  The basis of the grant of leave appears to have been  that  the
    Appellant was in contact with a daughter of the  marriage  born  on  24
    October 2004. On 3 November 2011, the Appellant made a further leave to
    remain application and on 23 February 2012 he was granted discretionary
    leave to remain for three years.  The Appellant applied to  extend  his
    leave and his leave was extended until February 2015.

 2. On 3 February 2015, the Appellant made an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain based on  six  years'  residence  with  regard  to  the
    transitional provisions of the Secretary of State's discretionary leave
    policy.  On 5 May 2015, he was granted twelve months' leave outside the
    Rules due to the fact that there were ongoing Family Court proceedings.



 3. On 5 May 2016, an application was made on form FLR(O) with  a  covering
    letter from his representatives requesting  a  further  twelve  months'
    leave to remain. This application was refused in  a  decision  dated  9
    January 2017.  The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mathews for hearing
    at Stoke on 24 November 2017.

 4. In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 15 December  2017,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal, essentially on the basis that  the  Family  Court
    had seen fit to grant the Appellant indirect contact with his  daughter
    and that he could maintain such contact with her from Pakistan.

 5. The Appellant appealed against that decision.  The sole  ground  raised
    in respect of the application for permission to  appeal  was  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  consider  the  discretionary
    leave to remain policy and the transitional  provisions  that  were  in
    force prior to July 2012.  It was  submitted  that  the  Appellant  had
    completed the residential requirement pursuant to that  policy  of  six
    years, that the transitional provisions  provide  that  a  person  will
    normally continue to  be  dealt  with  under  that  policy  through  to
    settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave to  remain  on
    the same basis as the original discretionary leave was granted.  It was
    asserted his position had not changed and that the judge had  erred  in
    failing to take this into account.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio in a
    decision dated 2 May 2018 on the basis that:-

         "The decision does not address the application of the discretionary
         leave policy under Article 8 outside the Rules and this would  have
         been a key issue in deciding the  issue  of  proportionality.   The
         Appellant's grounds raise an arguable error of law."

 7. In the Rule 24 response dated 21 June 2018, the Respondent opposed  the
    appeal and raised the point that it appeared on the face of the judge's
    Decision and Reasons that the argument raised in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal had not been raised  at  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should   not   be
    criticised for not dealing with an argument that was not  before  them.
    The Respondent  further  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain in 2016 and this had been  refused,  but  he
    had been granted further limited  leave  to  pursue  the  Family  Court
    proceedings.  The current application was for further  leave  following
    the outcome of that case, which resulted in  the  continuation  of  and
    direct contact with his child.  On the face of it, the Appellant had no
    legitimate expectation that further  leave  or  ILR  could  be  granted
    outside the Rules and that the First-tier Tribunal had fully  addressed
    the issue before them.

 8. The appeal then came before the Upper Tribunal on 7  March  2019,  when
    the parties made a joint request  for  an  adjournment  in  order  that
    directions could be made for proper determination of the  issue  raised
    in the grounds of appeal at the next hearing, bearing in mind that  the
    grant of permission to appeal was based on  a  matter  raised  for  the
    first time in the application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I made directions, which are appended to this decision.

     Hearing

 9. At the resumed error of law hearing, I was handed a copy of a  response
    to  directions  from  the  Respondent  dated  29   April   2019   which
    unfortunately had not previously reached the file and I was also handed
    a skeleton argument on behalf of the Appellant which is undated but did
    not appear to have been previously served, contrary to the terms of the
    directions.  I set out the content of those documents.

10. The Respondent's letter of 29 April  2019  sets  out  an  extract  from
    Section 10 of the Home Office policy in respect of discretionary  leave
    which is  the  section  dealing  with  transitional  arrangements  that
    applicants granted leave under the discretionary leave policy in  force
    before 9 July 2012.  This provides as follows:-

         "10.1    Applicants granted discretionary leave before 9 July 2012

                Those granted leave under the discretionary leave policy  in
                force before 9 July 2012 will normally continue to be  dealt
                with  under  that  policy  through  to  settlement  if  they
                continue to qualify for further leave on the same  basis  as
                their  original  DL  was  granted  (normally  they  will  be
                eligible to apply for settlement after accruing  six  years'
                continuous DL or where appropriate a combination of  DL  and
                LOTR, see section 8 above) unless at the  date  of  decision
                they fall within the restrictive leave policy.   Caseworkers
                must consider whether the circumstances  prevailing  at  the
                time of the original grant of leave continue at the date  of
                the decision.  If the circumstances  remain  the  same,  the
                individual does not fall within the restricted leave  policy
                and the criminality  thresholds  do  not  apply,  a  further
                period of three years' DL should normally be granted.

                Caseworkers   must   consider   whether   there   are    any
                circumstances that may warrant departure from  the  standard
                period of leave".

11. The Respondent's letter noted that on  31  March  2006,  the  Appellant
    submitted an application for leave to remain based on domestic violence
    which was refused on 28 November 2008, however due to the circumstances
    the Appellant was granted DL until 27 November  2011.   On  3  November
    2011 he submitted a further application for leave to remain outside the
    Rules and was granted a further period of DL until  23  February  2015.
    On 3 February 2015 the Appellant applied for ILR on the  basis  of  six
    years' continuous discretionary leave.  This application was refused on
    5 May 2015 as the Appellant had not demonstrated that he had had direct
    contact with his daughter and his circumstances were not such as at the
    time that he was granted discretionary leave to remain in  the  UK  and
    therefore it was not considered appropriate to grant ILR.  However,  he
    was granted twelve months' leave exceptionally outside the Rules  until
    5 June 2016 in order to pursue contact with his  daughter  through  the
    Family Court.

12. A copy of the transitional arrangements and grant of  leave  on  5  May
    2015 and the application pursuant to that grant of leave dated 28 April
    2015 were appended along with a grant of discretionary leave  dated  28
    November 2008 and the notice granting the Appellant discretionary leave
    on 23 February 2012.

13. The caseworking notes for the 2015  decision  were  also  appended  and
    these provide, inter alia, at page 6  (these  were  drafted  on  5  May
    2015):-

         "Do the conditions that led to  the  original  grant  of  DL  still
         exist?  Please  note  that  although  the  circumstances  may  have
         changed it may still be appropriate to grant.

         No.  Any short and subsequent grant of DL was on the basis  of  his
         relationship with his British daughter.  I am not satisfied on  the
         evidence submitted that the applicant has maintained a relationship
         with his daughter.  Indeed it would appear he has  had  no  contact
         since February  2011  as  his  family  solicitors  have  lodged  an
         application with the Birmingham Family Court to gain direct contact
         with his daughter"

    and then at page 9:-

         "Leave outside the Rules consideration

         Applicant has a British daughter.  He has been  in  receipt  of  DL
         since November 2008 on this basis.  He however does not  appear  to
         have maintained contact with his  daughter  and  has  submitted  an
         application with Birmingham Family Court  to  gain  direct  contact
         with his daughter.  Following advice from Ian  Ballad  SEO  it  has
         been decided to grant a period of one  year  to  pursue  rights  of
         access through the court".

14. From the Appellant's side,  the  skeleton  argument  which  is  undated
    asserts at [7]:-

         "7.  Discretionary leave was granted  on  28  November  2008  until
             November 2011 and the Appellant's circumstances were  that  he
             was in limited contact with  his  daughter  at  the  time  the
             original DL was granted.

         8.   In September 2011 the Appellant was not in direct contact with
             his daughter and in November  2011  DL  was  further  extended
             until February 2015 within circumstances of indirect  contact.
             It was therefore asserted that there had  been  no  change  in
             circumstance from the discretionary leave application and that
             the Appellant had an  expectation  that  he  will  be  granted
             settlement".

15. At the outset of the hearing, I  requested  whether  either  party  had
    either the application or the caseworking  notes  in  relation  to  the
    decision by the Respondent dated 23 February 2012 as to whether or  not
    this had been granted. A further three months' DL had been granted  due
    to the Secretary of State's understanding that the Appellant had direct
    or indirect contact with his  daughter.  Unfortunately,  neither  party
    were able to assist and there is essentially no evidence on this issue.



16. I then heard submissions. Mr Ahmed  sought  to  rely  on  his  skeleton
    argument. He submitted that this was a historic  case.   The  Appellant
    had had numerous changes of legal representative and  thus  the  papers
    were not intact.  He sought to rely on the fact the Appellant had  been
    granted discretionary leave to remain twice.  He took  issue  with  the
    assertion by the Secretary of State that the Family  Court  matter  had
    been finally determined in light of the finding  of  Judge  Mathews  at
    [11] that the Appellant can renew an application for contact  following
    1 August 2019, so he is essentially in the  same  position  as  he  was
    previously and that this was clearly material to an assessment  of  his
    case.

17. In her submissions, Ms Aboni sought to rely on the Rule 24 response and
    her letter of 29 April 2019 and attached documents.  She submitted that
    whilst it is arguable that the Appellant has  had  various  changes  of
    solicitor which may explain the lack of documentary evidence  from  his
    side,  it  was  clear  that  the  Appellant's  current  solicitors  had
    previously been acting for him in his family matters as per the  letter
    from Kalam Solicitors dated 28 April  2015.   She  submitted  that  the
    issue of whether the Appellant  should  have  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain under the transitional provisions pursuant  to  the  DL
    policy was not a matter raised before the judge and  therefore  he  did
    not make any error of law  in  failing  to  consider  this.   Ms  Aboni
    submitted that when reaching the  decision  under  challenge  the  Home
    Office caseworker did consider the discretionary leave policy.  By  the
    time the matter came before Judge Mathews the Family Court  proceedings
    had concluded on the basis that the Appellant had indirect contact with
    his daughter.  She submitted it was open to him to find as  he  did  at
    [38] that the Appellant could maintain indirect contact from  Pakistan.
    Ms Aboni submitted the Appellant could make a further  application  for
    contact after 1 August 2019  and  that  he  could  pursue  any  further
    proceedings in this  respect  from  outside  the  UK  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  She submitted the  Appellant  had  not  established
    that there will be any breach of Article 8 and that the judge had  made
    appropriate findings which were open to him on the evidence before him.



18. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.



     Findings and reasons

19. In respect of the issue of whether or not the Appellant was entitled to
    indefinite leave to remain, I have concluded that the time to challenge
    that decision was when the Appellant was  granted  a  period  of  leave
    outside the Rules on 5 May 2015 by way of  judicial  review.   No  such
    application was made and it is now far too late to  seek  to  challenge
    that decision through the prism  of  the  Tribunal  appeal  procedures.
    Nevertheless, I  find  that  the  Appellant's  history  of  having  had
    continuous leave to be a material factor in any assessment of his human
    rights appeal and the proportionality of his removal.

20. I make this finding  albeit  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's  past  or
    possible entitlement to indefinite leave to remain was not argued as  a
    freestanding point before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is apparent from
    the judge's summary of the Appellant's immigration history at [2]  that
    he has remained with leave essentially throughout since his arrival  in
    August 2003 and the fact that he has  remained  with  leave  is  not  a
    factor that the judge gave any or  any  proper  consideration  to  when
    deciding that his removal would be proportionate.  On that basis I find
    a material error of law in the judge's decision.

21. In light of the fact that the Appellant intends  to  vary  his  contact
    with his daughter from indirect contact to direct contact on or after 1
    August 2019, I adjourn the appeal to the first available date after the
    hearing before the Family Court. I make the following directions:

21.2.    The appeal is  adjourned  for  a  further  hearing  in  respect  of
Article 8 to be listed for 1    hour not before 12 September 2019.

21.2.    If the Appellant intends to give oral evidence an  updated  witness
statement should  be served on the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Respondent  5
working days before the    hearing. If an interpreter is required  one  must
be specifically requested;

21.3.    If the parties become aware that any further Family  Court  hearing
will not take place    prior to 12 September 2019  then  they  shall  inform
the Upper Tribunal and  the       Respondent  accordingly  so  that  further
directions may be issued;

21.4.    The Upper Tribunal shall exercise the Family Protocol in  order  to
obtain copies of  any evidence relied  upon  by  the  Family  Court  in  the
forthcoming proceedings.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed  to  the  extent  that  the  decision  of  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Mathews contained a material error of law. That  decision  is
set aside and the appeal is adjourned  for  a  resumed  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Rebecca Chapman                         Date 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

