
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01159/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Manchester Civil Justice Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|(remote)                                   |On: 22nd September 2020         |
|On: 17th September 2020                    |                                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                  (for the Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Rutul Bharatkumar Patel
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Counsel instructed by Aschfords Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent Mr Patel is a national of India born on the 3rd February
    1994. On  the  23rd  September  2019  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Buckwell) allowed his appeal against a refusal of entry clearance.  The
    Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) now has permission[1] to  appeal  against
    that decision.

    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The matter in issue between the parties is whether Mr Patel  should  be
    permitted to enter the United Kingdom in order to live  here  with  his
    British wife. The ECO accepted that Mr Patel qualified for entry  under
    the substantive requirements of Appendix FM, but refused him  entry  as
    follows:

         "Home Office records show that you entered the UK using  a  student
         visa which expired on 10/12/14. You then submitted  an  application
         for LTR after your previous visa had expired and this  was  refused
         on 29/04/15. You did  not  attempt  to  regularise  your  stay  and
         subsequently became an overstayer in the UK. I  am  also  satisfied
         that there are other aggravating circs as you failed to  report  as
         required to the Home Office after your application was  refused  in
         April 2015 and you were later listed as  an  absconder.   You  only
         made yourself know to the Home Office when you wished to  voluntary
         depart  the  UK  in  June  2018.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  your
         willingness to voluntary depart  outweighs  the  severity  of  your
         previous disregard to the Immigration Rules whilst you were in UK.

         I am satisfied that this conduct is consistent with that  described
         in Entry Clearance Guidance chapter 26.18 as having contrived in  a
         significant way to frustrate the intentions of  the  rules  as  you
         have absconded after making an application in order to  attempt  to
         remain in the UK. Therefore I consider  it  appropriate  to  refuse
         your application under paragraph 320(11)" (sic)

 3. Paragraph 320(11) is one of the 'General Grounds for Refusal' found  at
    part 9 of the Immigration Rules. It reads:

         Grounds on which entry clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused


         ...

         (11) where the applicant has previously contrived in a  significant
         way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

             (i)  overstaying; or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
             leave to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents  from
             the Secretary of State or a third party required in support of
             the application (whether successful or not);

         and there are other aggravating circumstances, such as  absconding,
         not meeting  temporary  admission/reporting  restrictions  or  bail
         conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
         switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
         complying with the re-documentation process.

                                                           (emphasis added).

 4. Before the First-tier Tribunal two questions therefore arose:

      i) Had Mr Patel behaved in such a way so as to engage the  presumption
         of refusal under paragraph 320(11)  of  the  Rules  -  ie  had  the
         Respondent demonstrated that there were  aggravating  circumstances
         in his case?

     ii) If so was refusal of leave  nevertheless  disproportionate,  having
         regard to all relevant factors?

 5. In respect of Q1 the Tribunal found that Mr Patel had overstayed in the
    past: he had  admitted  as  much.  The  Tribunal  accepted  Mr  Patel's
    explanation that he had done so because he had been unwell, and because
    he had encountered various problems with his Tier 4 sponsors  etc.  The
    Tribunal properly directed itself that in order to justify a refusal of
    entry clearance in these circumstances there  would  need  to  be  some
    further, aggravating feature. The Entry Clearance Officer/Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department  had  failed  to  produce  evidence  to
    establish that this was the case. In those circumstances the discretion
    to apply this 'general ground for refusal' had been wrongly  exercised.
    That being the Tribunal's conclusion, it was not necessary  for  it  to
    proceed to consider Q2 in any detail: absent paragraph 320(11)  it  was
    accepted that Mr Patel met the requirements  of  the  rules,  and  that
    being the case, it would be disproportionate to refuse  him  entry  (TZ
    (Pakistan) and PG (India) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 applied).

 6. The ECO now appeals on the following grounds:

      i) It is submitted that Mr Patel "fell squarely within the category of
         applicants who should not be afforded discretion"  because  he  had
         knowingly overstayed in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a  considerable
         period of time and because he had absconded.

     ii) There should be "equal weight attached to the  Public  Interest  in
         the SSHD operating a robust deterrent";

    iii) It is arguable that had he not met his wife he would have  remained
         in the United Kingdom illegally;

     iv) Little weight should be attached to the relationship because it was
         forged when Mr  Patel  knew  he  was  here  illegally.  The  public
         interest in maintaining a  fair  and  just  system  of  immigration
         control should have prevailed;

      v) The Judge has failed to consider why the Sponsor could not move  to
         India to live with her husband.




    Discussion and Findings

 7. The somewhat discursive grounds were not easy  to  understand.  I  have
    done my best to summarise them above. Here I work backwards because, as
    Mrs Aboni accepted before me, the only ground of any remotely  arguable
    merit is ground (i).

 8. Ground (ii) as I have framed it above,  that  there  should  be  "equal
    weight attached to the Public Interest in the SSHD operating  a  robust
    deterrent" frankly makes no sense. The rule is  the  rule,  and  it  is
    there to reflect the public  interest.  There  is  no  requirement  for
    decision makers to go beyond the  terms  of  that  general  ground  for
    refusal  and  consider  some  wider  public   interest   matter,   here
    unspecified.

 9. Ground (iii) is equally  unfathomable.  What  the  point  would  be  of
    speculating as to what Mr Patel might have done  had  he  not  met  and
    fallen in love with his wife is difficult to discern.

10. Ground (iv) might be relevant had Mr Patel continued  to  overstay  and
    then made an in-country application to remain. He didn't  do  that.  He
    did, eventually, the right thing, going back to India to properly  make
    his application. Having done so he has established that he meets all of
    the "fair and just" substantive requirements of Appendix FM.

11. Similarly ground (v) was  entirely  irrelevant  to  the  enquiry  under
    320(11). Once that enquiry was completed in Mr Patel's favour, the fact
    that he met all of the requirements under Appendix FM  was  a  complete
    answer to the question of whether this decision was proportionate.

12. That leaves ground (i). The Secretary of State here  submits  that  the
    decision on 320(11) was flawed for  a  failure  to  take  two  material
    matters into account. The first is the length of  the  overstaying.  As
    Mrs Aboni accepted before me, this  point  is  not  a  good  one  since
    overstaying will not in itself justify refusal under this provision. It
    is difficult to see that anything is added by the fact  that  Mr  Patel
    knew that he was overstaying, since the vast  majority  of  individuals
    who overstay can be assumed to know that this is the case.  As for  the
    submission that Mr Patel overstayed for a "considerable amount of time"
    I am not satisfied that this is capable of establishing  any  error  of
    law on the part of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First  of  all  it  was
    actually a period of about three  years,  not  a  particularly  lengthy
    period at all. Secondly it is not apparent from the  rule  itself  that
    the length of the overstay is relevant to whether there are aggravating
    circumstances such that the rule should be invoked: had that  been  the
    intention of the drafters one would expect to see this in the  list  of
    admittedly non-exhaustive  factors  there  identified.    Third  it  is
    perfectly clear that the Tribunal was aware of the chronology  and  how
    long the period was, so it is not  arguable  that  it  overlooked  that
    matter.

13. The second point made under the heading of ground (i) is at  the  heart
    of this appeal. It is that the Judge failed to accept that Mr Patel had
    absconded and 'fallen off the radar', such  behaviour  constituting  an
    aggravating circumstance warranting refusal under 320(11).    This  was
    the assertion in the refusal letter.  At the outset of the hearing  the
    Judge specifically asked  the  Presenting  Officer  if  there  was  any
    evidence she would like to produce in support of that  allegation.  She
    had none. None  appears  in  the  bundle  produced  by  the  ECO.   The
    allegation was denied by Mr Patel and  his  wife,  whose  evidence  the
    Judge apparently accepted in its entirety. This led to  the  conclusion
    at the First-tier Tribunal's paragraph 86 that the ECO  had  failed  to
    bring evidence forward to confirm the allegation. The burden  of  proof
    lying on the ECO, the appeal fell to be allowed on the basis  that  the
    burden had not been discharged.

14. The appeal is therefore dismissed.




    Decisions

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.  The Entry Clearance Officer/ Secretary of State's appeal is
    dismissed.

16. There is no order for anonymity.


     [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         17th September 2020
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on
the 10th January 2020. It was granted upon renewed application by Upper
Tribunal Judge Keki |[pic] on the 12th February 2020.









                                                Appeal Number: HU/01159/2019

                                      5

          January 2020. It was granted upon renewed application by Upper
               Tribunal Judge Keki? on the 12th February 2020.

