
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01136/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 24th July 2014                             |On 6th August 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     M n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid Ahmed
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  who  made  application  to  the
    Secretary of State for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of his Article 8 rights under the  European  Convention  for  the
    Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental  Freedoms.   The  respondent
    refused to grant the appellant leave  on  10th  January  2019  and  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His appeal was heard in
    Manchester on 16th  April,  2019  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark
    Davies.

2.   The  judge  concluded  that  there  was  no  family  life  between  the
    appellant and his daughter and then went on in the alternative to  find
    that if he was wrong  in  that  the  decision  of  the  respondent  was
    proportionate.  The determination  was  challenged  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant on the basis of the decisions in Berrehab v  the  Netherlands
    [1989] 11 EHRR 322 and Gul v Switzerland [1996] 22 EHRR 92.

3.   It was agreed between the representatives who appeared before me  today
    that the determination could not stand and must be set aside.  I agree.



4.   I set aside the determination of  Immigration  Judge  Mark  Davies  and
    remit this appeal for hearing afresh by the First-tier Tribunal,  given
    that effectively the appellant has been denied  a  fair  hearing.   Two
    hours should be allowed for the hearing and a Punjabi interpreter  will
    be required.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                             Date 30 July 2019

