
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01768/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On Wednesday 18 August 2021          |On Monday 04 October 2021            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                          MR NELSON ESSIET MACAULEY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr  T  Muman,  Counsel  instructed  by  Legal  Rights
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer.  For ease of
   reference, I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
   Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Freer promulgated on 15 March 2021 ("the Decision").  By
   the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 30 December 2019 refusing his human rights
   claim.  That claim was made in the context of the Appellant's application
   for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative to join his sister,
   Mercy Warden, who is a British citizen.  I refer to his sister hereafter
   as the Sponsor.


2. The Appellant and originally the Sponsor are nationals of Nigeria, but
   the Appellant has been living in The Gambia since 1995 and is now said to
   have permanent residence there. The Appellant suffers from visual
   impairment due to glaucoma and cataracts.  He receives some treatment in
   The Gambia but, as I will come to, it is said that other treatment is not
   available in that country. It is said that the Appellant's eyesight
   continues to deteriorate. The Appellant is still able to carry out many
   daily tasks for himself but has the assistance also of his flatmate,
   John.


3. The Judge found that the Appellant was unable to meet the Immigration
   Rules ("the Rules") as an adult dependent relative ("ADR").  Nonetheless,
   he went on to consider the Article 8 claim outside the Rules and allowed
   the appeal on that basis.


4. The Respondent appeals the Decision for a number of reasons which are
   encompassed under the one heading of "failing to give adequate reasons
   for findings on a material matter".  As I will come to, Ms Cunha in her
   oral submissions adopted and expanded to some extent on what is there
   said, grouping her criticisms of the Decision under two headings of
   findings on medical evidence/under the Rules and findings on the Article
   8 claim based on errors in the assessment of the public interest.


5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin as a
   First-tier Tribunal Judge on 28 April 2021 in the following terms:


    "... 2.  While I do not consider the ground that the Judge erred in
    dealing with the medical evidence to be strong, it is arguable that
    having found the appellant could not meet the dependant relative rule,
    the Judge erred in allowing the appeal under Article 8.  It is arguable
    that the Judge erred in finding family life existed between the
    appellant and his UK sponsor when they had not seen each other for 23
    years.  Their relationship has continued by telephone and arguably
    would continue.  Arguably the decision does not interfere with such
    family life as they have.
    3.   All the grounds may be argued."


6. There has been no Rule 24 response from the Appellant.  Having heard
   from Mr Muman by way of oral submissions in response to the Respondent's
   case, I indicated that I found there to be an error of law in the
   Decision but that I would set out my reasons in writing.  It was agreed
   that the appeal should be remitted for re-hearing by the First-tier
   Tribunal.  As I come to, the Judge's reasoning on the various elements of
   the appeal is somewhat muddled, some relevant factors have been ignored
   and other largely irrelevant factors have been taken into account.  The
   appeal will for that reason need to be re-determined entirely afresh with
   factual findings made on all elements.  It is therefore appropriate to
   remit the appeal.


7. The hearing took place remotely via Microsoft Teams. There were no
   technical difficulties affecting the conduct of the hearing.  I had
   before me a core bundle of documents including the Respondent's bundle,
   and the Appellant's bundle as before the First-tier Tribunal (running to
   179 pages) (hereafter referred to as [AB/xx]).

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


8. I deal with the grounds adopting Ms Cunha's division of them into the
   case within the ADR Rules and outside the Rules.

The ADR Rules and the Medical Evidence


9. I begin by noting that nowhere in the Decision does the Judge set out
   the ADR Rules (which are to be found at EC-DR of the Rules).  That is not
   a necessity.  However, it might have provided some structure to the part
   of the Decision dealing with the Rules.  The Judge does make reference at
   [43] of the Decision to the Immigration Directorate Instructions ("IDIs")
   underpinning the Rules and accurately notes at that juncture that the
   questions for him to answer in this context were "the basis on which long
   term care must be required, the inability of the Appellant to receive
   care in their country and there is no person in that country who can
   reasonably provide that care".  He went on to say that "[i]n detail, this
   means respectively that as a result of age, illness or disability, the
   applicant must require long term personal care to perform everyday tasks,
   for example washing, dressing and cooking."


10. As a result of his failure to refer to the ADR Rules themselves though,
   the Judge omits the reference to the need to show that care is not
   available in the country in which the applicant lives "even with the
   practical and financial help of the sponsor" because the treatment is not
   available or affordable.   He also omits the requirement to show that the
   applicant can be "maintained, accommodated and cared for in the UK by the
   sponsor without recourse to public funds".


11. I accept as Mr Muman pointed out, that the Judge resolved the issue
   under the ADR Rules at [50] of the Decision in the Respondent's favour
   stating as follows:


    "Under the Rules, I find that the Appellant has failed because they
    [sic] have not met in full the various requirements of the Rules, as
    explained with examples in the latest IDI.  I find that the sponsor can
    maintain and accommodate the Appellant.  His needs and the meeting of
    those needs in the Gambia are at the heart of the case under the Rules.
     I find that he does not match any successful example from those given
    in the IDI and that he matches most closely an unsuccessful example."


12. Nonetheless, the findings made in relation to the issue whether the
   Appellant met the ADR Rules were a necessary backdrop to the assessment
   of the Article 8 claim and the Respondent is therefore entitled to
   criticise those findings also even though the issue was determined in her
   favour overall.


13. I therefore turn to consider the findings which were made.  The main
   focus of the Respondent's criticism in this regard is the Judge's
   treatment of the medical evidence.  As the Judge himself noted at [50] of
   the Decision the Appellant's treatment needs and the meeting of those
   needs was at the core of the case both within and outside the Rules.


14. I begin however with a summary of what the Judge says prior to his
   consideration of the medical evidence.  He accepts at [45] of the
   Decision that there is no evidence that the Appellant does not have a
   required level of care in The Gambia.  The Appellant lives with a
   flatmate who helps him with cooking and eating.  It is not suggested that
   the flatmate is intending to leave or could not be replaced, if
   necessary, with care paid for by the Sponsor.  The conclusion reached in
   this regard is that "it has not been shown that there is no person in the
   Appellant's country who can reasonably provide such care".


15. The Judge considers the potential maintenance and accommodation
   situation in the UK at [46] of the Decision.  He there notes that the
   Sponsor would carry on working if the Appellant came to the UK.  The
   Appellant is not said to need round the clock supervision.  The Judge
   sets out at [41] of the Decision, the Sponsor's income and outgoings.  He
   notes that her income is likely to reduce in the coming years as part of
   it is derived from child benefit and her youngest child will soon no
   longer be eligible.  He accepts at [50] of the Decision that,
   nevertheless, the Sponsor could maintain and accommodate the Appellant.
   She sends financial remittances to the Appellant now and so that finding
   was open to the Judge.  However, what the Judge fails there to deal with
   is the need for the Sponsor also to be able to fund care in the UK
   without recourse to public funds so that the Appellant would not become a
   drain on the health service in the UK.  As I will come to, the Judge in
   fact finds that the Sponsor has not shown that she could afford private
   eye treatment in the UK.


16. I turn then to the medical evidence about treatment which the Appellant
   is receiving and needs and the availability of such treatment in The
   Gambia.


17. The Judge makes findings in this regard at [47] to [49] of the Decision
   as follows:


    "47. I have formed a very clear view that the medical help required to
    repair the damage to one eye is not available in The Gambia, at any
    cost.  It is important not to confuse this fixed fact with the other
    criteria that lie within either the Rules or the relevant IDIs.
    Looking at the examples on p.14/34, there is an eyesight case where
    money is sent to the relative to pay for a carer to help daily with
    washing dressing and cooking meals.  This example does not meet the
    criteria because the sponsor is able to arrange the required level of
    care.
    48.  I understand that family are the first port of call for daily care
    needs but the evidence shows that a person who is not related to the
    Appellant is willing and able to assist him.  This does not sit well
    with any suggestion or inference that only relatives will help.
    49.  The core of the needs of this Appellant is for surgery to be
    performed on one eye, because a doctor has explained in writing that it
    would benefit the Appellant.  I am not considering an application for a
    health visit visa, although it seems likely that a doctor at, for
    example, Moorfields Eye Hospital could provide, by performing surgery,
    long term practical help to improve if not wholly restore the vision of
    this Appellant.  There is no evidence before me suggesting that the
    sponsor can or will pay for private eye treatment of the sponsor in the
    UK.  It may be something that she can research.  I take judicial notice
    that the cost is likely to be in the low thousands of pounds.  Whether
    this is of any practical use, given that the travel restrictions due to
    the pandemic are continuing, I cannot say.  What does not seem to be
    possible is for the Appellant to receive that surgery in The Gambia, a
    point on which we have evidence."


18. I begin by noting Mr Muman's acceptance that what is said at [49] of
   the Decision about potential treatment in the UK is largely speculative.
   There is no evidence about that. Mr Muman suggested this may be something
   within the Judge's personal knowledge, but the Judge does not say that.
   I accept that Moorfields is a specialist eye facility which is likely for
   that reason to be able to offer a wide range of eye treatments.  However,
   there are two points of note in this regard.  The first is the need for
   an explanation of the treatment the Appellant actually needs as that will
   define both the ability of The Gambia to meet the need and to inform the
   likely benefit of and need for the Appellant to come to the UK for such
   treatment (and I add to settle).  The second is the cost of treatment and
   who is going to fund it.  The Judge has failed to note the reference in
   the ADR Rules to the need for a sponsor to be able to fund treatment as
   well as to maintain and accommodate an applicant.  That is relevant not
   only to the extent to which the Appellant can meet the ADR Rules but also
   to the public interest when one comes to the claim outside the Rules.


19. Remaining for now with the medical treatment aspect, however, I turn to
   the evidence which the Judge had which led to his findings at [47] of the
   Decision.  That evidence is to be found at [AB/12] and [AB/178-179].


20. The first of those documents is written by Dr Olaniyah, a Consultant
   Ophthalmologist at the Sheikh Regional Eye Care Centre in Banjul.  The
   letter is headed "Ministry of Health" with the address of the Eye Care
   Centre. It is a short letter dated 16 October 2019.  It makes reference
   to the Eye Care Centre having treated the Appellant for the past four
   years.  It sets out the history of treatment including, I note, "small
   incision cataract surgery" in 2017 (and therefore whilst the Appellant
   was in The Gambia).  It also details the medications the Appellant is
   receiving.  It refers to the readings from the eye tests on examination.
   It finishes with the following:

    "[The Appellant] has requested for a medical report for review by a
    Glaucoma and Cornea and anterior segment specialist to have surgical
    intervention OS (cataract surgery with posterior chamber intraocular
    lens and trabeculectomy) to improve his vision and quality of life."


   I observe that the writer of this document does not say either that the
   specialist required to carry out that review could not be found in The
   Gambia nor that, if such surgery were recommended, the Appellant would
   need to go elsewhere for treatment.


21. It is not clear to me whether the second document dated 20 October 2020
   is said to be the review or is simply another examination and
   conclusions.  The letter is written by an ophthalmologist (not a
   consultant and not a person said to be a specialist), Dr Okoh.  He again
   refers to the Appellant's history.  He says that the Appellant suffers
   with "bilateral painless progressive loss of vision".  The letter goes on
   to record the examination findings and treatment.  The Appellant has
   received medical treatment for glaucoma.  He is said to have shown
   "progressively decreasing vision in both eyes".  His eye pressure was
   said to be "poorly controlled" but that is said to be due to his poor
   compliance with medication.  The letter then says that he was "therefore
   right triple procedure, right cataract extraction, intraocular lens
   implantation and augmented trabulectomy".  As I read that sentence, it
   indicates that the "surgical intervention" potentially suggested
   following review by the previous consultant had been performed in the
   Appellant's right eye previously.  What is now recommended is "a possible
   triple procedure in the left eye".


22. Dr Okoh goes on to say this:


    "The overwhelming condition of the left eye cannot be handled here in
    the Gambia due to lack of facilities and the right not responding to
    medications as desired.
    Examination finding at presentation revealed severe irreversible visual
    loss of the left eye.
    He has undergone an operation in the right eye to lower his eye
    pressures but still he occasionally experience headache and visual
    disturbances.
    The difficulties visually impaired people experience in the Gambia is
    overwhelming.  The person has no support but only the family members.
    Most African Government do not adequately cater for people with visual
    impairment.  The majority of visual impaired patients are left to take
    care of their of own [sic] needs through begging in the streets and
    occasionally well to do family members give short term support.
    Nelson is not married and has no family relation in the Gambia, he is
    depending on the sister in the UK, she has been supporting greatly,
    since his visual impairment is causing a lot of difficulties to him and
    the family in Nigeria have no ability to support.
    The likely cost of medication and treatment cannot be estimated for
    reason being there is no such facility here.
    It is recommended that he seek further management to prevent his better
    eye from deterioration."


23. I can largely ignore the paragraphs dealing with family support as
   those were issues for the Judge to determine on the facts.  The Judge
   found that the Appellant's daily care is provided by his flatmate.  I
   observe however that it does appear from those paragraphs that the letter
   was written with a view to supporting the Appellant's appeal rather than
   as a medical report as such.


24. That does not mean of course that weight cannot be placed on the report
   to the extent that it informed the Judge's findings.  However, I make the
   following observations about this evidence which undermine the Judge's
   reliance placed on this report (and substantiate the Respondent's
   criticisms in that regard).

25. First, the report indicates that the Appellant has had an operation to
   his right eye of the same nature as that considered to be "a possible"
   treatment for his left eye.  That begs the question why, if an operation
   of that nature were previously available in The Gambia it is no longer
   available.


26. Second, it appears however that Dr Okoh is advocating some other
   treatment, but he does not say what other treatment would assist.  That
   is particularly notable when he says in the same breath that the loss of
   the left eye is "irreversible".  I note also that the Appellant himself
   says in his statement dated 27 January 2021 at [AB/5-8] that he has
   already lost sight in his left eye "completely about a year ago".


27. Third, and finally, Dr Okoh does not say how he knows that the
   unidentified treatment is not available in The Gambia.  It is difficult
   to see how he can say that there are no facilities to offer treatment
   without saying what is the treatment which is needed.  If that is the
   "possible triple procedure" he does not say why that is not available
   when it was previously nor whether it would offer any benefit given his
   conclusion that loss of the left eye is "irreversible".


28. In light of that evidence, it is very difficult to see how the Judge
   has "formed a very clear view that the medical help required to repair
   the damage to one eye is not available in The Gambia, at any cost".
   Leaving aside the issue of availability, it is not even clear on the
   evidence what medical help is even suggested let alone required and what
   difference that would make to the Appellant's eyesight.  At the very
   least, the Judge needed to explain why and how he reached that finding on
   the evidence.  I have explained why I am unable to understand how it is
   reached when one looks at the detail of the evidence.


29. The Respondent has criticised also the Judge's reliance on this
   evidence as regards availability of treatment.  The focus of her
   criticism relates to what treatment may be available in Nigeria but
   equally the report does not show how Dr Okoh's evidence could assist the
   Judge even as regards treatment in The Gambia.  He does not set out his
   credentials or say what enquiries he has made.


30. Mr Muman appeared to accept that Dr Okoh could not be viewed as an
   expert in relation to medical treatment available in The Gambia.  He
   directed my attention to the submission made by the Presenting Officer at
   [16] of the Decision that there was no report from an expert.  He
   accepted that to be the case.  Nonetheless, he said that as Dr Okoh was
   practising at an Eye Care Centre within the Ministry of Health, he could
   be expected to know what treatment was available in The Gambia generally.
    That is like saying that any doctor or nurse working in one NHS hospital
   in the UK would know what treatments are on offer within the NHS
   throughout the UK.  There is no evidence that Dr Okoh has researched the
   position or that he has any personal knowledge of the situation in other
   medical establishments.


31. In any event, as I come back to, and as the Respondent also says in her
   grounds, it is entirely unclear what treatment is being advocated in the
   first place.  That is a necessary first step to establishing what is
   available.  The Judge has failed to explain his findings in this regard
   particularly in light of the scant and slightly contradictory evidence.
   For that reason, the Respondent's grounds in this regard are made out.

Article 8 ECHR


32. Although the Judge's conclusion in relation to the position under the
   Rules was in the Respondent's favour, the error in his findings is
   capable of impacting on his assessment outside the Rules which was in the
   Appellant's favour.  I therefore turn to examine how those findings have
   impacted in order to explain the materiality of the error as well as to
   consider the Respondent's challenge to the assessment itself.

33. As Judge Martin observed when granting permission to appeal, it is
   difficult to see how the Judge reaches his conclusion regarding the
   existence of family life at [55] of the Decision.  I accept that the
   Sponsor makes regular financial remittances but there is scant evidence
   that I can see of the Appellant's dependency on those.  He lives with a
   flatmate.  It is not clear what are the financial arrangements between
   them for example as to the cost of accommodation and food.  That flatmate
   provides the Appellant's daily care.  It may well be as the Judge finds
   that the Sponsor speaks with the Appellant regularly to provide comfort
   and support.  However, as the Sponsor's and Appellant's statements show
   they have not seen each other since 1997 (about twenty-four years). Their
   contact since has all been remotely. The Appellant says that his sister
   has been "very kind and supportive", but his flatmate has been
   "tremendously supportive".  I accept of course that the Appellant is
   likely to derive the greater day to day support from the person
   physically present, but the Judge did need to explain how he reached the
   finding he did based on the evidence he had.


34. Second, and coming back to the medical evidence, it is not clear how
   the Judge reaches the finding at [57] of the Decision that the
   Appellant's situation "could be ameliorated by eye surgery".  Still less
   can I see that there is any evidential support for or explanation by the
   Judge of his finding at [68] of the Decision that "[t]ime requires
   expedited eye surgery to be performed".

35. Third, I am not clear on what evidence the Judge bases his suggestion
   at [59] of the Decision that the Appellant may not be able to remain in
   Gambia.  He may not have citizenship, but he has lived and worked there
   for about twenty-five years.  He says in his application that he has
   permanent residence.  Although the Appellant says in his statement that
   there is no support for those with disabilities in The Gambia, he does
   not say that he is not permitted to stay there even if he is unable to
   work.  Similarly, although it is right to say that the Appellant does not
   have family ties in The Gambia, it is clear from his statement that he
   has friends there who have supported him in recent years.


36. Fourth, it is not entirely clear to me why the Judge found it necessary
   to embark on a consideration of the Sponsor's ability to move to The
   Gambia.  It is perhaps just relevant to the issue whether family life
   could be continued there.  However, the rather more relevant question is
   why family life (if the relationship is properly found as such) could not
   be continued remotely as it has been for many years with the Sponsor
   providing emotional and financial support as she has done by remote
   contact.


37. Fifth and most importantly, the Judge's assessment is flawed by the
   failure properly to recognise the public interest in this case.  That is
   the criticism made by the Respondent and alluded to by Judge Martin when
   granting permission.  As Mr Muman accepted, there is no recognition by
   the Judge of the importance of immigration control in light of the
   finding that the Appellant cannot meet the Rules.  As I have already
   noted, the findings about the extent to which the Appellant might be able
   to meet the Rules are flawed by a failure to provide reasons based on the
   evidence.  Even if those findings had been open to the Judge on the
   evidence, however, the Judge does not have any regard at [64] to [68] of
   the Decision to that factor.  There is mention at [68] of section 117B
   (1) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117B") but no
   recognition of how that might be engaged in these circumstances.


38. Similarly, as the Respondent has pointed out, there is no proper
   consideration of the impact on resources of the Appellant's admission.
   At [65] of the Decision, the Judge says that "[t]here is no evidence [the
   Appellant] will have recourse to public funds during his stay".  However,
   we are not here concerned with merely "a stay" but settlement.  The
   finding there made is contradicted by the Judge's finding at [49] of the
   Decision that there was no evidence that the Sponsor could or would pay
   for private treatment, the inference being that the Appellant would need
   to obtain publicly funded treatment.  I observe of course that the whole
   underpinning of the Judge's conclusion is that the Appellant needs to
   come here for that treatment.  On a proper analysis of the findings,
   therefore, there would be a call on the public purse which is not taken
   into account.  The Judge says that the Appellant would be able to work
   "particularly after eye surgery is performed".  There is no medical or
   other evidence underpinning that finding and in any event that does not
   overcome the recourse to public funds involved in having such surgery in
   the first place.


39. Whilst, as I have already said, the Sponsor's ability to go to live in
   The Gambia might be tangentially relevant, it is not relevant to the
   extent of making the best interests of her minor child a "major factor".
   The real question was whether it was unjustifiably harsh to refuse to
   admit the Appellant or for him to continue his relationship with his
   sister and her children via remote means not whether it would be
   unjustifiably harsh for them to go to live in The Gambia.  The Judge's
   finding at [66] of the Decision is particularly difficult to follow in
   that regard.  The Sponsor clearly has a parental relationship with a
   minor child but there can be no question of requiring her or that child
   to leave the UK. The Sponsor is not a parent being removed.  It is
   therefore difficult to see how Section 117B (6) could have any relevance
   whatsoever let alone a decisive one when conducting the balancing
   exercise.


40. In conclusion, the Judge's findings and assessment outside the Rules
   are flawed by the taking into account of irrelevant considerations,
   failures properly to take account of relevant factors, in particular as
   regards the public interest, and failure to explain the findings by
   reference to the evidence.

CONCLUSION


41. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude, as indicated at the hearing and
   the start of this decision, that there is an error of law disclosed in
   the Decision. I do not preserve any of the findings.  I therefore set the
   Decision aside in its entirety.  For the reasons set out at the hearing
   and at the start of this decision, it is appropriate for the appeal to be
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal as all factual findings will need to
   be made afresh.  The Appellant and the Sponsor may wish to consider the
   observations I have made above about the evidence with a view to
   providing better evidence on the next occasion in relation to the issues
   relevant to the Appellant's case.


   DECISION
   The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer promulgated on 15 March
   2021 involves the making of an error on a point of law. I therefore set
   aside the Decision.  I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
   hearing before a Judge other than Judge Freer.


   Signed: L K Smith

   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

   Dated: 20 August 2021

