
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/01419/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 April 2021                      |On 23 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GURPREET KAUR
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Duheric and Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals, on three grounds, against the decision of  FtT  Judge
    Prudham, promulgated on  29  October  2020,  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal under article 3 of the ECHR.

 3. The first ground, "making a material misdirection of law",  points  out
    (i) that the appellant applied to the SSHD on article  8  grounds,  not
    article 3 and (ii) that she stated to an expert preparing a report that
    she would return to India to visit her husband  if  she  had  leave  to
    return to the  UK.   This  is  said  to  be  "indicative  of  the  true
    position".

 4. It is not at all clear what error of law this ground seeks to allege.

 5. Mr Bates clarified that  there  was  no  suggestion  of  error  through
    permitting the appellant to raise a "new matter" (a misconception which
    appears to have triggered the grant of permission).

 6. Mr Caskie referred to the history of the case in the FtT, prior to  the
    hearing, placing it on article 3 grounds, without  objection  from  the
    SSHD.

 7. The appellant's statement to the  expert  was  a  point  the  SSHD  was
    entitled to found upon in the FtT, but Mr Bates did not suggest that it
    was one by which it would be perverse to do anything but to dismiss the
    appeal.

 8. Ground 1 leads nowhere.

 9. Mr Bates submitted that grounds 2  and  3,  taken  together,  disclosed
    inadequacy of reasoning.  Mr Caskie submitted that even if the decision
    might have been better expressed, and even if it might have gone either
    way, the conclusion reached was within the judge's  lawful  scope,  and
    involved no error on any point of law.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. The grounds say that the finding that the appellant's activities in the
    UK place her at risk is  "in  complete  contradiction"  of  her  expert
    report, which says that a high profile reduces the risk of  abuse,  and
    that the "current administration has a leniency towards Sikhs".

12. These are simply matters of fact and degree.  This part of the  grounds
    re-argues a possible view of the  case,  but  does  not  show  that  an
    alternative view is wrong in law.

13. The thrust of the next part of the grounds is that as  there  had  been
    prior discussion of the case of the  appellant's  husband  between  the
    Prime Ministers of the UK and India,  and  prior  contact  between  the
    family and the UK  government,  her  later  meeting  with  the  Foreign
    Secretary could not place her at risk, when the Indian authorities  had
    not previously acted against her.

14. Again, this is not more than insistence on one view  of  the  evidence.
    The aspects referred to were accepted by the appellant,  as  the  judge
    noted at [43].

15. The final point in the grounds is the partiality of the expert  report,
    and that it was an error "to place such heavy relance upon  it",  which
    "renders the determination as a whole unsound".

16. This mispresents what the decision says.  At [45] the judge  found  the
    report speculative, insufficient to  make  the  appellant's  case,  and
    viewed it "in the  light  of  the  evidence  of  Mr  Singh  Johal  [the
    appellant's brother-in-law], the appellant, and the general  background
    of events that led to this appeal".

17. The judge found both the appellant and Mr Singh Johal  to  be  credible
    witnesses.  The SSHD suggests no error in that.

18. The grounds disagree on the facts, but they are both selective and,  to
    an extent, misleading.

19. The case may have succeeded by a narrow  margin.   As  was  effectively
    conceded, it is quite possible that another judge  might  have  decided
    otherwise.  However, the conclusion reached was within reason, and  the
    SSHD has not shown that the decision, read fairly and as a whole, gives
    a less than legally adequate explanation for coming down on the side it
    did.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      13 April 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

