
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01838/2016
                                                               HU/01843/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2017                   |On 31 January 2018                   |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     ae
                                     so
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Jaquiss, Counsel instructed by Cale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision sent on 22 February 2017 Judge Henderson  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissed  the  appellants'  appeal  against  the
    decision made by the respondent on 7 January  2016  refusing  leave  to
    remain.  The grounds of appeal on the basis  of  which  permission  was
    granted were that the judge erred  in  (1)  failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the first appellant's account of the breakdown in
    her relationship with her  EEA  partner  (and  so  wrongly  failing  to
    recognise that she made her application for ILR within 28 days  of  her
    relationship  ending  at  the  latest);  (2)   wrongly   applying   the
    reasonableness  test  as  regards  the  second  appellant  (the   first
    appellant's daughter, S); and (3) wrongly assessing the  overall  state
    of the public interest factors in play on the facts of the  appellants'
    case.

2.   I am grateful to Ms Jaquiss and Mr Tufan for their  particularly  clear
    and fair submissions.

3.   Insofar as the challenge raised in ground 1 is to the judge's  findings
    of fact that the first appellant's relationship with her  EEA  national
    partner had ended by 30 April (and not in June as claimed by the  first
    appellant), I have no hesitation in rejecting it.  The judge considered
    all the relevant evidence and submissions relating to  this  issue  and
    was entitled to make the findings she did at para 34.  It was  open  to
    the judge in this regard  to  identify  and  count  against  the  first
    appellant a material inconsistency and implausibility in  her  evidence
    as to why she moved to London on 30 April 2015.  That said, I do regard
    the fact that the respondent did  not  see  fit  to  revoke  the  first
    appellant's residence card (which remains  technically  valid  until  8
    August 2018) as of relevance to the issue  of  the  reasonableness  and
    proportionality of the decision appealed against.

4.   This brings me to ground 2.  At paras 46-47 the judge wrote:

         "46. Turning then to the question of  whether,  having  established
             that it would be in [SO]'s best interests to remain in the UK,
             whether it would be reasonable to expect her to leave  to  UK?
             In MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on  the  application  of)  v  Upper
             Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor  [2016]  EWCA
             Civ 705 LJ Elias noted that, 'it would not in my  view  follow
             that leave must be granted whenever the child's best interests
             are in favour  of  remaining.   I  reject....  that  the  best
             interests assessment automatically resolves the reasonableness
             question.  If Parliament had wanted the child's best interests
             to dictate the outcome of the leave application, it would have
             said so.  The concept of 'best interests' is after all a well-
             established one.  Even where the child's best interests are to
             stay, it may still be not reasonable to require the  child  to
             leave.  That will depend upon a careful analysis of the nature
             and extent of the links in the UK and in the country where  it
             is proposed he should return.  What could  not  be  considered
             however, would be the conduct and immigration history  of  the
             parents'.

         47.  In this case, I have no accepted the appellant's evidence that
             she would be unable to build a life for herself and [SO]  upon
             return to Nigeria.  I accept that she would find it  difficult
             as a single mother and as someone who has not lived in Nigeria
             for over 12 years to return and build a  new  life.   However,
             that is not the test I have to apply.  I have found that there
             would be no very significant obstacles to her doing this under
             the test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and I find  that  she  has
             not shown that there would be any matters which would make  it
             unreasonable for [SO] to return to  Nigeria  with  her.   [SO]
             would be able to continue her education in Nigeria:  this  may
             not be of the same standard as that  in  the  UK,  but  state-
             funded education is  available.   [SO]  has  not  yet  entered
             secondary school and so a break in her education at this stage
             would  be  less  detrimental  than  in  another   2-3   years.
             Furthermore, I have not seen any evidence to  establish  on  a
             balance of probabilities that  there  are  serious  health  or
             medical reasons why [SO] could not  return  to  Nigeria.   The
             appellant referred to investigations relating to leukaemia but
             no  evidence  was  presented  to  support  this:  [SO]'s  only
             prescribed medication is a nasal spray.  All  the  appellant's
             explanations as to why she could not return  to  Nigeria  were
             effectively about her preference for her and [SO] to  live  in
             the UK."

5.   Given that the judge specifically  referred  to  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 and that I am only entitled  to  interfere  in  a  judge's
    assessment if it is vitiated by legal error, I am conscious of the need
    not to be overforensic when examining the judge's reasoning.  Even  so,
    I cannot ignore the evident fact that the judge has not applied one  of
    the cardinal features of the guidance given in  MA  (Pakistan),  namely
    the need to  require  the  respondent  to  show  "strong  reasons"  for
    refusing leave to a child who has been resident for  seven  years.   In
    [46] of MA (Pakistan) Elias LJ stated: -

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled 'Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes' in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be 'strong reasons' for refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

    At [116] His Lordship emphasised that it  was  important  for  decision
    makers to "recognise that particular weight had to be given to the fact
    that the child had been resident for seven years".

6.   In a nutshell, the judge selected a passage of from MA (Pakistan)  that
    suited her purposes in deciding the appeal without making sure to apply
    it in light of the above presumption required by this judgment.   Given
    that in paragraph 45 the judge had found that "on balance ... it  would
    be in S's best interests to remain in the UK, bearing in mind that  she
    has spent virtually all her life in the UK and has been educated here",
    the judge's need to require strong counterveiling  reasons  to  justify
    the child's removal was particularly acute.

7.   The above observations feed in to what I have to say  about  ground  3,
    which is interlined to  ground  2.  As  MA  (Pakistan)  confirmed,  the
    assessment of  reasonableness  incorporates  an  assessment  of  public
    interest factors.  Immediately following paragraphs 46  and  47  (which
    themselves  contain  no  express  assessment  of  any  public  interest
    factors) the judge stated:

         "48. I am also mindful of the relevant provisions of sections 117A-
             D of the NIA 2002 relating to the public interest question  to
             be  considered  as  part  of  the  proportionality  assessment
             required in questions 4 and 5 of Razgar.

         49.  The appellant speaks very good English (section 117B(2)).  The
             appellant has not been  reliant  on  state  benefits  (section
             117B(3).  The appellant's private life in the UK has primarily
             been established in the period 2004 - April 2015 when she  met
             S's father and then subsequently the EEA sponsor.  Her stay in
             the UK was lawful through the majority of that time.  (section
             117B(4)).  Therefore, none of the section 117B  factors  count
             against the appellant."

8.   If it was the case  that  "none  of  the  section  117B  factors  count
    against the appellant[s]", then it is very difficult  to  see  how  the
    judge could have concluded (had she properly  applied  MA  (Pakistan)'s
    guidance that  the  respondent  could  show  very  strong  reasons  for
    deciding to remove the second appellant.  In point of legal  fact,  the
    judge cannot be entirely right  to  conclude  there  were  no  s.  117B
    considerations weighing  against  the  appellants,  since  on  her  own
    analysis of the breakdown of the relationship with an EEA national, she
    had never had ILR and she become an overstayer in  April/May  2015  and
    hence her immigration status  was  precarious.   However,  as  I  shall
    explain below, that is not a factor that could or should  have  weighed
    heavily against the appellants given the precise circumstances  of  her
    history of residence.

9.   In my judgement grounds 2 and  3  identify  a  material  error  of  law
    necessitating that I set aside the judge's decision.

10.  Having reflected on the matter I consider I am in  a  position  to  re-
    make the decision without further ado.  There are no challenges to  the
    judge's primary findings of fact nor to her finding as regards the best
    interests of the second appellant.   Mr  Tufan  was  also  prepared  to
    accept  that  the  judge's  statement  that  there  were  no  s.   117B
    considerations that apply against the appellants was  broadly  correct.
    He was also prepared to accept that there was a further public interest
    factor which in fact weighed in the appellants'  favour,  arising  from
    the terms of the respondent's own long residence policy Version 15.0  3
    April 2017 which states at page 9 that:

         "Once an applicant has built up a paragraph of 10 years  continuous
         lawful residence there is no limit on the length of time afterwards
         when they can apply.  This means they could leave the UK,  re-enter
         on any lawful basis, and apply for settlement from  within  the  UK
         based on a 10 year period of continuous lawful residence they built
         up in the past.  There is also nothing to prevent a person  relying
         on a 10 year period that they may have  relied  on  in  a  previous
         application or grant".

11.  I  do  not  agree  with  Ms  Jaquiss  that  this  passage  endorses  an
    application under the 10 residence rules by someone  without  a  lawful
    basis of stay.  That it  does  not  is  confirmed  by  the  sub-section
    immediately following on p. 10 which  concerns  "Breaks  in  continuous
    residence"  and  a  later  sub-section  at  p.18  on   "Out   of   time
    applications".  Nevertheless the  last-mentioned  sub-section  requires
    consideration,  since  it  enjoins  caseworkers,   when   refusing   an
    application on the  grounds  it  was  made  by  an  applicant  who  has
    overstayed  by  more  than  28  days,  to  "consider  any  evidence  of
    exceptional circumstances which prevented the applicant  from  applying
    within the first 28 days of overstaying".

12.  Whilst it is moot  whether  the  first  appellant's  case  demonstrated
    exceptional circumstances preventing her from applying within the first
    28 days of overstaying, it is clear that (i) as of 8  August  2014  the
    appellant had achieved a period of over ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence; (ii) at the time she applied she had a valid residence  card
    not due to expire until August 2018; and (iii)  the respondent did  not
    see  fit  to  retrospectively  revoke  this  card  when  deciding   her
    relationship with the EEA national  had  ended  in  April  2015.   Even
    though  not  in  themselves  constituting   exceptional   circumstances
    preventing the appellant from applying for long residence prior to June
    2015, they do satisfy me, when  carrying  out  the  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of the second appellant's status under the Rules and the
    first appellant's eligibility under s. 117B(6) of the  2002  Act,  that
    there are no strong public interest factors to  justify  requiring  the
    second appellant to leave the UK or for requiring the  first  appellant
    to leave either.  In relation to the first appellant her removal  would
    have unjustifiably harsh consequences.

Notice of Decision

13.  For the above reasons:

    The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material  error  of  law
    although her primary findings of fact have been be preserved.

    The decision I re-make on the basis of these  facts  is  to  allow  the
    appellants' appeal on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 4 December 2017
     [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
