
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01057/2020
                                                                         (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 July 2021                       |On 28 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     ab
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant  or  members  of
her family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Good Advice UK
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is the re-making of the decision in the appellant's appeal against
    the respondent's refusal of her  human  rights  claim.  By  a  decision
    promulgated on 23 April 2021, I concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law and that its decision should be set aside.  The  error
    of law decision is appended to this re-making decision.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of India, based her Article 8 claim  primarily
    on the fact (this no longer being in  dispute,  following  a  preserved
    finding of the First-tier Tribunal) that she is a  victim  of  domestic
    abuse perpetrated by her now ex-husband, Mr RA. It is  said  that  this
    history, combined with lawful residence in the United Kingdom since her
    arrival in 2011 and all other circumstances, goes to show that it would
    be disproportionate to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.



The evidence

 3. In re-making the decision in this case, I have considered the following
    evidence:

          a) the respondent's original appeal bundle;

          b)  the  appellant's  First-tier  Tribunal  bundle,  indexed  and
             paginated 1-210;

          c) the appellant' supplementary bundle, indexed and paginated  1-
             145;

          d) the brief oral evidence given by the appellant at the hearing.

 4. In respect of (d), the appellant adopted her latest witness  statement,
    dated 19 May 2021. There was no cross-examination  by  Ms  Everett.  In
    response to questions from me, the appellant stated that Mr RA's family
    in India were very influential  and  lived  fairly  close  to  her  own
    family. False accusations and threats had been made by his family,  and
    letters had been sent to the appellant's parents. The appellant did not
    believe that she could go and live in another part of India.  She  told
    me that she had never lived anywhere else and that to do so will entail
    her giving up everything she had established in the United Kingdom. She
    also believed that Mr RA's family could find  her  wherever  she  might
    relocate to. The appellant confirmed that there were no pending  Family
    Court proceedings, following recent  resolution  of  certain  financial
    matters.



The parties' submissions

 5. Ms Everett relied on the respondent's decision letter and what had been
    said in my error of law decision. She did not  seek  to  challenge  the
    appellant's credibility or the reliability of the documentary evidence.
    She did, however, maintain the respondent's position that it would  not
    be disproportionate for the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  The
    relevant Immigration Rules ("the Rules") had not been met and this  was
    relevant. Whilst the appellant may hold  a  subjective  fear  of  being
    traced by Mr RA's family if she relocated within India, such a move was
    objectively possible and reasonable.

 6. Ms Jones relied on her skeleton argument, dated 30 April 2020, and  the
    evidence as  a  whole.  Mr  RA  had  behaved  appallingly  towards  the
    appellant over the course of time and this conduct  was  continuing  to
    date. Whilst the appellant could not meet the Rules, her  circumstances
    did fall within the objectives of the respondent's guidance on  victims
    of domestic abuse. The barrier to success under the  Rules  was  simply
    that the appellant had not, at the relevant time, had  a  visa  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom.  It  was
    submitted that the appellant has an important  support  network  around
    her, which is helping a deal with her  mental  health  difficulties.  A
    return to India would, it was submitted, result in losing  the  network
    and everything else built up  in  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant  had
    always been lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  and  remained  in
    employment. Ms Jones acknowledged  that  this  was  not  a  "historical
    injustice" case, but it was one involving exceptional circumstances.



Findings of fact

 7. There is in truth very little, if  any,  dispute  as  to  the  relevant
    facts. Having considered the evidence for myself, I regard Ms Everett's
    position as to the appellant credibility to be  sensible  and  correct.
    The appellant's own evidence is well  supported  by  the  documents  in
    almost all respects.

 8. I find the appellant to be  a  truthful  witness  and  the  documentary
    evidence to be reliable in all material respects.

 9. I find that the appellant married Mr RA in India in August 2014.

10. I am satisfied that the appellant is the victim  of  domestic  violence
    and abuse at the hands of Mr  RA.  I  find  all  of  the  incidents  of
    physical attacks and sustained and significant controlling and coercive
    behaviour by him, as set out in the appellant's two witness  statements
    and other evidential sources, have in fact occurred. I do not  need  to
    set out the details here. Suffice it to say that the serious misconduct
    has included hitting;  threats;  humiliation  in  private  and  public;
    emotional  blackmail;  oppressive   financial   control;   the   active
    harassment of third parties supporting  the  appellant  (including  her
    Family Law solicitors); making accusations  against  the  appellant  of
    deception  to  public  authorities  including  the  respondent;  making
    accusations against the appellant to her  employers;  and  deliberately
    engineering false information in order  to  prejudice  the  appellant's
    family law and immigration matters.

11. I make it very clear that the respondent has never suggested  that  the
    appellant has practised deception in any way and to  anyone,  nor  that
    she has engaged in any other  form  of  misconduct.  I  find  that  the
    appellant has an unblemished character.

12. I find that the appellant's marriage to Mr RA permanently broke down in
    or around May 2019.

13. I find that RA was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2017  and  was
    then naturalised as a British citizen in 2018. I find  that  the  abuse
    was ongoing throughout this period. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the
    respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  wished  to   make   an
    application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  and  that,  if  such  an
    application had been made, it was probable  that  it  would  have  been
    granted. The judge agreed with this and so do I. Whilst  the  appellant
    has not expressly stated in  evidence  before  me  that  RA  physically
    prevented her seeking to apply to vary her leave to that of  a  partner
    (spouse) of a person present and settled in the  United  Kingdom  or  a
    British citizen, I find it to be more likely than not that her  failure
    to do so was influenced by RA's abusive treatment of  her  during  this
    period. Her evidence, when read in the round,  indicates  that  RA  had
    been exerting financial and  emotional  control  and  had  specifically
    accused her of having had an  affair.  It  is  clear  to  me  that  the
    appellant was aware that RA was in a position of  strength  as  regards
    immigration status: he had become settled and soon thereafter a British
    citizen, whilst she remained in a precarious situation, both  in  terms
    of her status and on an emotional basis  as  well.  It  is  also  clear
    enough that a number of RA's actions were intended to  instil  fear  in
    the appellant as to the potential loss of any status in this country.

14. It is common ground that the  appellant  made  her  latest  application
    (deemed to constitute a human rights claim, the refusal of which led to
    the current appeal) prior to the expiry of her last  period  of  leave.
    Therefore, she continues to have leave by virtue of section 3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

15. I find that there is an extant  Non-Molestation  Order  issued  by  the
    Family Court in February  2021.  That  order  remains  in  place  until
    February 2022.

16. The reliable medical evidence indicates a history over the last fifteen
    months or so of anxiety, depression, and the onset of  a  hand  tremor.
    The psychiatric report by Dr Latifi, dated 16 January 2021, provides  a
    diagnosis of clinical depression of moderate intensity. I find this  to
    be the case. I find that the symptoms experienced by the appellant have
    included persistent low mood, feeling hopeless, disturbed  sleep,  poor
    appetite, and fleeting suicidal thoughts. The appellant is currently on
    relevant  anti-depressant  medication.  I  find  that  the  appellant's
    current problems are directly related to the abuse suffered.

17. The reliable evidence before me shows that Mr  RA  and  his  family  in
    India have endeavoured to threaten and harass both  the  appellant  and
    her family. With reference to the appellant's 2020  witness  statement,
    and the  letters  and  supporting  evidence  provided  by  her  sister,
    parents, and uncle, I find that both RA and his parents have  subjected
    her relatives  to  abusive  messages  containing,  for  example,  false
    accusations of adultery on the appellant's part.

18. I accept that Mr RA's family has a degree  of  influence  in  the  home
    area, which I accept is  close  to  that  of  the  appellant's  family.
    However, whilst not impugning the honesty of the  belief  held  by  the
    appellant, there is insufficient evidence to indicate that  his  family
    has significant influence beyond the home area of Bangalore.

19. Having said that, I am satisfied that, were the appellant to return  to
    her parents' home, it is more likely than not that Mr RA's family would
    come to know of this and that they, in combination with Mr RA  himself,
    would be likely to continue to harass and threaten the appellant  in  a
    manner similar to that undertaken in the United Kingdom.

20. In respect of other matters, the  appellant  plainly  speaks  excellent
    English and she is employed as a Senior Application Support Analyst  in
    a bank, earning �43,000 per annum. I find that  there  are  no  pending
    Family  Court  proceedings  following  a  resolution   of   outstanding
    financial  matters.  I  accept  that  the  appellant  has   established
    friendships in the United Kingdom  and  that  she  has  been  receiving
    support over the course of time.



Analysis and conclusions

21. It is common ground that the appellant has established a  private  life
    in the United Kingdom and that the respondent's decision constitutes an
    interference with that private life. There is no issue  concerning  the
    general legal framework within which the respondent's decision was made
    and the legitimate aim pursued by that decision.

22. The core issue in this appeal is that of  proportionality  and  whether
    the respondent's decision strikes a fair balance between,  on  the  one
    hand, the appellant's right to respect for her private life and, on the
    other,  the  important  public  interest   in   maintaining   effective
    immigration control.

23. In conducting the  appropriate  balancing  exercise,  I  have  directed
    myself to relevant case-law (including,  for  example,  Agyarko  [2017]
    UKSC 11; [2017] 1 WLR 823),  the  relevant  Rule  (section  E-DVILR  of
    Appendix FM), and the mandatory considerations set out in section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended  ("the
    2002 Act").




Factors weighing in the respondent's favour

24.  In  general  terms,  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  effective
    immigration control is significant.

25. It has been acknowledged throughout that the appellant could  not  have
    satisfied the requirements of section E-DVILR of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Rules, specifically the criterion under E-DVILR.1.2 that the last grant
    of leave must have been as the partner of a person present and  settled
    in the United Kingdom or a British citizen. The appellant's last  grant
    of leave was as  the  partner  of  a  Tier  2  migrant.  As  a  result,
    notwithstanding the fact that the appellant is  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence and abuse, she has been  unable  to  satisfy  the  immigration
    status element of the eligibility requirements.

26. An inability to satisfy a relevant Rule is a  factor  weighing  in  the
    respondent's favour (this being the logical inference of what  is  said
    at paragraph 47 of Agyarko and see also paragraph 52 of  Mobeen  [2021]
    EWCA Civ  886).  Accordingly,  I  attach  considerable  weight  to  the
    appellant's inability to meet the Rules.

27. It is undoubtedly the case that the appellant's status  in  the  United
    Kingdom has always been precarious, as that term has been construed  by
    the courts (it has never, however, been unlawful). To this extent,  the
    weight attributable to the appellant's private life is generally to  be
    reduced, although this reduction may be offset by a reduction of weight
    attributable to the public interest, a matter to which I  will  return,
    below.

28. I take into account the impermissibility of a "near miss"  argument  in
    respect of the Rules (see Miah [2012] EWCA Civ  261  and  Patel  [2013]
    UKSC 72; [2014] AC 651, at paragraph 56). Patel  also  makes  it  clear
    that Article 8 is not to be employed as a "general dispensing power".

29. Taking the evidence as a whole, I conclude  that  the  appellant  would
    face unjustifiably harsh consequences if she  were  to  return  to  her
    family home or its environs by  virtue  of  the  harassment  and  abuse
    likely to occur through RA and/or his family. However, I also  conclude
    that the appellant could seek to relocate to another part of  India.  I
    appreciate that this would be  very  upsetting  and  not  without  real
    difficulties. Such a course of action would not result in unjustifiably
    harsh  consequences  for  the  appellant,  given  her  educational  and
    employment record and the availability (as  I  find  it  to  exist)  of
    treatment for mental health in India.



Factors weighing in the appellant's favour

30. The basis on which  the  appellant  has  been  unable  to  satisfy  the
    eligibility requirements of  section  E-DVILR  of  Appendix  FM  is  of
    relevance in this case, even bearing well in mind the "near miss" issue
    highlighted above.  In  undertaking  a  proportionality  exercise,  all
    relevant matters should be accounted for. The particular  circumstances
    faced by the appellant over the course of  time  is  clearly  a  highly
    relevant matter.

31. The existence  of  section  E-DVILR  in  Appendix  FM  illustrates  the
    respondent's policy intention  to  provide  victims  with  a  route  to
    settlement in the United Kingdom, notwithstanding the  fact  that  they
    may not have established any significant wider  private  and/or  family
    life  here.  Underlying  this  appears   to   be   two   interconnected
    considerations: first, that the Article 8 rights of victims of domestic
    violence require a form of recognition; second, that victims with leave
    to enter or remain as the partner of  specified  persons  (present  and
    settled in this country, British  citizens,  refugees,  or  certain  EU
    nationals) should not have to remain in an abusive relationship out  of
    fear of losing all status and being removed from United Kingdom. It  is
    of some note  that  the  leave  granted  to  successful  applicants  is
    indefinite and not simply limited.

32. I have found as a fact that the appellant  was  subjected  to  domestic
    violence and abuse during the period in which RA was initially a Tier 2
    migrant, then a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom,  and
    finally a British citizen. The fact that the appellant is a  victim  is
    of itself a relatively significant  factor,  although  this  could  not
    alone be enough.

33. In theory, it had been open to the appellant to apply to vary her  last
    grant of leave once RA obtained his indefinite leave to remain or  when
    he  later  naturalised  as  a  British  citizen.  At  that  time,   the
    relationship had not permanently broken down. On the face of it,  there
    is no reason why such a  variation  application  would  not  have  been
    granted. Indeed, the likely  success  of  a  putative  application  was
    acknowledged by the Presenting Officer before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and accepted by  the  judge.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  held  an
    intention to make such application shows that she saw her future in the
    United Kingdom. I add to this my finding that the appellant  was  being
    subjected to domestic abuse throughout the period in question, that her
    failure to have made the application was  probably  influenced  by  the
    abusive nature of the relationship, and that a number of  RA's  actions
    show that he had intended to instil a fear in the  appellant  that  she
    would lose any status in this country.

34. I take into account the impact of the abuse on the  appellant's  mental
    health. Whilst it may not be severe and would not  of  itself  preclude
    relocation away from the home  area  in  India,  it  is  nonetheless  a
    relevant factor deserving of some weight.

35. My finding on the ability of RA and his family to harass and abuse (or,
    potentially worse) the appellant if she were to return to her home area
    in India is also relevant. Again, this would not  preclude  relocation,
    but it would involve her being separated from her parents and having to
    set up a new life as a divorced woman who has experienced abuse and  is
    suffering from mental health problems as a result. This factor  is  not
    decisive, but it attracts relatively significant  weight,  when  viewed
    cumulatively with all other considerations.

36. Viewed holistically, I regard the appellant's circumstances during  the
    relevant period during which she could have  made  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain and those pertaining to  her  life  in  this
    country  thereafter  as  constituting  a  factor  deserving   of   very
    significant weight in the balancing  exercise.  Put  another  way,  the
    particular facts of the case disclose very compelling reasons in favour
    of her Article 8 claim.

37. In attributing that weight, I  treat  it  as  reducing  the  importance
    ordinarily placed on the public interest,  with  reference  to  section
    117B(1) of the 2002 Act. I do not also place it  into  the  context  of
    section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act. In this way, I am not  double-counting
    the effect of the factor in question (see  Patel  (historic  injustice;
    NIAA Part 5A) [2020] UKUT 351(IAC), at paragraph 84).

38. This factor does not  constitute  the  application  of  a  "near  miss"
    argument. I am not saying that  the  appellant  should  be  treated  as
    though she had met the Rules. Nor am I saying  that  the  very  limited
    nature of the reason why she could not meet the Rules should, for  that
    reason  alone,  in  some  way  cancel  out  the   considerable   weight
    attributable to those Rules.

39. For the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  this  is  not  an  example  of  an
    "historical injustice" scenario. The appellant's failure to  have  made
    an application for indefinite leave to remain was not due to any  fault
    on the respondent's part. Again, I am  concerned  with  the  particular
    circumstances of the appellant's history and how these  relate  to  the
    overall balancing exercise.




Factors of neutral weight

40. The appellant speaks  excellent  English  and  is  clearly  financially
    independent. These two matters avoid the adverse consequences  if  they
    were not present.



Overall conclusion on the balancing exercise

41. Bringing all of the above together, I conclude  that  the  respondent's
    refusal of the appellant's human rights claim does not  strike  a  fair
    balance between her right to respect for private life  and  the  public
    interest. That decision  and  any  consequential  removal  from  United
    Kingdom  constitutes   a   disproportionate   interference   with   the
    appellant's private life and is therefore unlawful under section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998.

42. My conclusion is based on a  highly  fact-specific  evaluation  of  the
    competing factors in this case. The margin of success may not be  wide,
    but, put  shortly,  it  is  predicated  on  the  combination  of  three
    elements: the  general  importance  attached  to  victims  of  domestic
    violence and abuse; the specific nature of the abuse  suffered  by  the
    appellant over the course of time; and the consequences of  that  abuse
    in respect of the  appellant's  status  in  this  country,  her  mental
    health, and what she would have to do on return to India  in  order  to
    avoid further harassment and abuse.

43. I am not employing Article  8  as  a  "general  dispensing  power".  My
    conclusion is based on an evaluation of all relevant  factors,  not  on
    sympathy or a "near miss" basis.





Anonymity

44. It is entirely right that an anonymity direction remains in place.  The
    credible evidence before me shows that Mr RA has sought to discover  as
    much as possible about the appellant's various legal matters and to try
    and disrupt these and/or distort what she has said and/or  provided  in
    order to make her life as difficult as possible. The  need  to  protect
    the appellant plainly outweighs the public interest  in  disclosure  of
    her identity.





Notice of Decision

45. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

46. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date: 14 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of �140.00.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                      Date:  14 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01057/2020
      (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard remotely from Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 March 2021                             |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                   a s k b
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of her family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Good Advice UK
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Behan ("the judge"), promulgated on  27  October  2020.  That  decision
    dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision,
    dated 3 January 2020, to refuse a human rights claim.

 2. The appellant, a citizen of India born in  1989,  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2013 as a student. In August 2014 she married a Tier
    2 Migrant and was subsequently granted leave to remain in the  capacity
    of a dependent from October 2014 until  September  2020.  In  2017  her
    husband was granted indefinite leave to remain and he naturalised as  a
    British citizen a year later. In May 2018 the marriage  broke  down  as
    result of domestic violence perpetrated  by  the  husband  against  the
    appellant. The husband informed the respondent that the marriage was no
    longer subsisting with the result that the appellant's leave to  remain
    was curtailed so as to expire in August 2019. Prior to that expiry, the
    appellant made the human  rights  claim  leading  to  the  respondent's
    decision of January 2020. The human rights claim was based on Article 8
    ECHR, with particular reference to the claimed domestic violence.

 3. In making that decision, the respondent made only passing reference  to
    the domestic violence issue. The said  that  the  appellant  could  not
    satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), nor
    were there any "exceptional circumstances" in her case. In  respect  of
    any claimed fear in India as result of the breakdown of  the  marriage,
    it was suggested that the appellant could make a protection claim.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At [16] the judge noted the Presenting Officer's  acknowledgement  that
    the appellant would very probably have been granted  a  "spousal  visa"
    (in other words, leave to remain as the partner of a person settled  in
    the United Kingdom or a British citizen) if she  had  applied  for  one
    following her husband's grant of indefinite leave to remain in 2017  or
    his naturalisation as a British citizen in 2018. It was  also  accepted
    that the marriage had broken down as a result of domestic violence. The
    judge herself found that the appellant had an intention  to  apply  for
    indefinite leave to remain and that if this  had  in  fact  been  done,
    there was a likelihood that such leave would  have  been  granted.  She
    also found that, if applied for, the appellant would probably have been
    able to obtain leave to remain as a spouse under  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Rules.

 5. Between [43] and  [51],  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  domestic
    violence provisions within the Appendix FM. In so doing, she  noted  at
    [44] the public interest aim of reducing domestic violence through  the
    provisions of Appendix FM and the  "extra  weight"  attributable  to  a
    private life:

           "established during the probationary period set out in  Appendix
           FM because the purpose  of  the  appellant  leaving  their  home
           country and migrating to the UK is to join a spouse who  already
           has settled status and because of that than if they came to join
           a spouse with time-limited leave to remain."

 6. The judge noted that the appellant had not left India to join a settled
    spouse. She concluded  that  the  breakdown  of  the  marriage  due  to
    domestic violence did not add weight to the private life and  that  the
    appellant's status  in  the  United  Kingdom  had  remained  precarious
    throughout her residence. [50] to [53] of the decision read as follows:

           "50. I have considered whether the fact that the Respondent  has
           made provision for some domestic abuse survivors, whose position
           seem similar to the appellant's,  permits  me  to  increase  the
           weight I give to the appellant's  private  life  or  reduce  the
           weight I give to immigration control in this  appellant's  case.
           In my judgment it does not  because  how  two  competing  public
           interests, one the need for immigration control  and  the  other
           reducing domestic violence, are to be balanced is a  matter  for
           the Respondent and not the Tribunal.

           51. Likewise, it is not this Tribunal's role to  assess  whether
           the distinction drawn by the Respondent  between  a  spouse  who
           entered the UK with leave under Appendix FM and one who  entered
           as a family member of a Tier 2 migrant who is later granted  ILR
           is justified.

           52. However sympathetic one might be to this appellant,  article
           eight must not be used as a way to circumvent the rules  or  the
           provisions in s.117B of the 2002 Act,  expand  the  Respondent's
           policy or try to compensate the appellant for the actions of her
           husband.

           53. The role of the Tribunal in this appeal is to  (sic)  solely
           to assess whether the effect of the decision on this  particular
           appellant's private life  outweighs  the  need  for  immigration
           control."

 7. The judge went on  to  conclude  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    proportionate and lawful.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The somewhat lengthy grounds can be pared down to the following points.
    First, the judge erred by failing to take proper account of the fact of
    domestic  violence  when  undertaking  the  proportionality   exercise.
    Second, although the appellant could not meet  the  strict  immigration
    status criterion under Appendix FM, she had in fact been married  to  a
    person who had, prior to the breakdown of the marriage, become  settled
    and then a British citizen to her expectation  of  been  able  to  seek
    settlement herself the United Kingdom.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Holmes,
    in a decision dated  25  November  2020.  He  deemed  it  to  be  "well
    arguable" that,  amongst  other  matters,  the  judge  had  effectively
    treated the inability to satisfy Appendix FM as being determinative  of
    the Article 8 claim.



The hearing

10. Ms Jones relied on the grounds of appeal.  She  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant was unable to satisfy the particular Rule  because  her  last
    grant of leave to remain had been as the dependent of a Tier 2 Migrant,
    and not as the partner of  a  person  settled  or  a  British  citizen.
    However, she submitted that the judge  had  misconstrued  the  Rule  by
    linking the necessary leave with entry into this  country  rather  than
    the last grant of leave, which did not have to have been that  held  on
    entry. Ms Jones also submitted that the judge had failed  to  undertake
    her own assessment of proportionality above and beyond a  consideration
    of the Rules. The particular circumstances of the appellant,  including
    the fact that her Tier 2 dependent leave remained valid whilst she  was
    being subjected to domestic violence and that her  husband  had  become
    settled and then a British  citizen  prior  to  the  breakdown  of  the
    marriage, had not been adequately factored into the exercise.

11. Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant's  submission  was  nothing  more
    than a "near miss" argument. In respect of what was said  at  [50]  and
    [51], Mr Kotas submitted that even if  the  judge  had  not  approached
    proportionality in  this  way,  the  effect  of  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  was  to   give   the
    appellant's private life "little weight".  Thus,  any  error  would  be
    immaterial.

12. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Decision on error of law

13. For the reasons set out below, I conclude that the judge has  erred  in
    law and that her decision should be set aside.

14. There are two aspects to my reasoning on the error of law issue.

15.  The  first  relates  to  the   judge's   overall   approach   to   the
    proportionality exercise. It is long-established  that,  on  appeal,  a
    tribunal must reach its own conclusion on where the fair  balance  lies
    between, on the one hand, the public interest in maintaining  effective
    immigration control, and  on  the  other,  the  individual's  protected
    rights under Article 8 (see, for example, Huang [2007] UKHL 11;  [2007]
    2 WLR 581). The  fact  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  all  the
    requirements of the relevant Rule (in this case E-DVILR of Appendix FM)
    was not a complete answer to the Article 8 claim. An inability to  meet
    the Rules is certainly a relevant factor, but it is not the be-all  and
    end-all. With regards to what the judge stated  at  [50]  and  [51],  I
    agree with what Judge Holmes said in his grant  of  permission,  namely
    that the judge has effectively treated  the  ability  or  otherwise  to
    satisfy the Rule in question as being determinative. Whilst  it  is  of
    course for the respondent to decide the content of her Rules,  a  judge
    must conduct their own independent assessment, taking  account  of  all
    relevant factors (the Rules being one of these). In my  judgment,  [50]
    and [51] indicate that the judge failed  to  undertake  a  merits-based
    assessment of proportionality in its wider form. I do not  regard  what
    is said at [53] as rectifying or negating the  erroneous  approach  set
    out in the previous paragraphs.

16.  On  the  facts  found,  the  appellant's  circumstances  included  the
    following:

              a) she was the victim of domestic violence;




              b) that abuse had been ongoing during the currency of her Tier
                 2 dependent leave to remain;




              c) she had intended to apply for indefinite leave to remain;




              d) if she had applied, she would in all likelihood  have  been
                 successful;




              e) that the husband had become a settled  person  and  then  a
                 naturalised British citizen after her last grant  of  leave
                 to remain and whilst he was perpetrating abuse against her.

17. Whilst acknowledging that a "near miss"  argument  is,  to  an  extent,
    impermissible, factors such as those listed above were  relevant  to  a
    wider proportionality exercise, notwithstanding the fact that the  Rule
    in question could not be met. The judge's disinclination to  engage  in
    her own balancing exercise had  the  effect  of  either  leaving  these
    factors out of account entirely, or at least failing  to  assess  their
    weight in the appropriate context.

18. The second issue concerns the interaction between the specific terms of
    the  Rule  and  the  appellant's  particular  circumstances.   Strictly
    speaking, the appellant could not  satisfy  the  Rule  because  of  the
    nature of the leave last granted to her (i.e. as a dependent of a  Tier
    2 Migrant). However, there is force in Ms Jones'  submission  that  the
    judge appears to have misconstrued what is said in E-DVILR  as  regards
    immigration status. The requirement for  leave  to  have  been  granted
    under Appendix FM is  not  the  same  as  having  to  show  that  entry
    clearance was granted as a partner: it is the last grant of leave which
    is crucial, and that may have been connected to entry clearance  or  it
    may  have  arisen  subsequently.  In  my  view,  there  is  a   genuine
    possibility that this misapprehension on the judge's part may have  had
    a bearing on her assessment of  the  relevance  of  domestic  violence.
    Further, or in any event, there is a possibility  that  this  deflected
    the judge's attention from focusing on  the  particular  facts  of  the
    appellant's case, whether or not they brought her within the Rule.

19. The "little weight" mandatory consideration set out in section  117B(5)
    of the 2002 Act is not a fixity. In  appropriate  cases,  it  is  quite
    possible that a judge might attach more than a  "little  weight"  to  a
    private life established during the currency of precarious leave. In my
    view, this statutory requirement is not fatal to the  appellant's  case
    at this stage.

20. Ultimately, I conclude that the  errors  identified,  whether  seen  in
    isolation or cumulatively, are material. They might have  affected  the
    outcome of  the  appeal.  Taking  this  into  account,  I  exercise  my
    discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and set the judge's decision aside.




Disposal

21. I have considered whether  I  should  simply  go  on  and  re-make  the
    decision in this case based on the materials currently before me.  This
    was the course of action commended by Mr Kotas. However, I am,  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case, willing to accede to  Ms  Jones'
    request for a resumed hearing to take place in due course on the  basis
    that further evidence is to be sought by the appellant.

22. As matters stand, I see no reason why the resumed hearing should not be
    conducted remotely.

23. I preserve the finding of fact  that  the  appellant  is  a  victim  of
    domestic violence in the circumstances set out in the judge's decision.



Anonymity


24. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. I maintain that
    direction on the basis that the appellant is a victim of domestic
    violence perpetrated against her in this country.



Notice of Decision

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


26. I exercise my discretion  under  section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.

27. I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.



Directions to the parties

   1. No later than 7 days after this decision is sent  out,  the  appellant
      shall confirm with  the  Tribunal  and  respondent  whether  any  oral
      evidence is to be called in  this  case  and  whether  there  are  any
      objections to the resumed hearing being conducted remotely;


   2. No later than 14 days after this decision is sent out, the  respondent
      is to confirm with the Tribunal and the appellant  whether  there  are
      any objections to the resumed hearing being conducted remotely;


   3. No later than 28 days after this decision is sent out,  the  appellant
      is to file and serve a consolidated bundle of all evidence  relied  on
      (including any new evidence which must  be  accompanied  by  a  notice
      under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal's Procedure Rules);


   4. No later than 10 days before the resumed hearing, the  respondent  may
      file and serve any further evidence relied on;


   5. With liberty to apply.




Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  19 April 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
