
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/01850/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                          |                                  |
|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 April 2018                          | On 09 May 2018                   |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                DEEPAK Dangal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Benitez, Counsel instructed by Edwin Co LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal and his date of birth  is  11  July
    1988.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK on 30 October  2009  having  been  granted
    entry clearance which expired on 23 January 2012.  He was granted entry
    clearance under the points-based  system.   His  leave  expired  on  23
    January 2012.  Prior to his leave he made an application for  leave  to
    remain as the spouse of a settled person in the  UK,  Caroline  Dangal.
    This application was refused on 18 June 2013.  The  Appellant's  appeal
    against this decision was allowed on 7 November 2013.   Following  this
    he was granted leave to remain on 11 December 2013  until  11  December
    2015.  He made an application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  16
    November 2015 and this was refused by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
    decision of 31 December 2015.


3.    The  Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision.   His  appeal   was
    dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J K Swaney in a  decision
    dated 2 June 2017 following a hearing on 12 May 2017.   Permission  was
    granted to the Appellant by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  in  a
    decision of 25 January 2018.

4.      The UT received an  email  from  Caroline  Dangal  on  16  March2018
    stating that she and the Appellant were no longer living  together  and
    that she does not see him. She saw him on three times last  year.  They
    are not living together and she does not know where he  is  working  or
    living. She intends to issue divorce proceedings. The UT sent the email
    to the parties prior to the hearing on 12 April 2018.  At the hearing I
    was handed a statement from Ms Dangal stating that the email  had  been
    sent  after  an  intense  argument  and  sleep  deprivation.  She   had
    menopausal symptoms which caused her to feel unwell and angry with  the
    Appellant. She asked for the previous communication to be withdrawn  as
    it did not accurately reflect their relationship. They continue to love
    and support each other. This communication  was  not  material  to  the
    error of law matter and I disregarded it.
.
The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and  his  wife.  The  judge
    referred to the Appellant's wife as Ms Willoughby. It may be  that  she
    has changed her name since that hearing, but  nothing  turns  on  this.
    The judge made the following findings:-

         "42. The appellant and his wife remain married.   They  both  state
             that their relationship is continuing and that there have been
             no gaps in their relationship.  There was  evidence  of  their
             contact up to the date of decision.   The  appellant  and  his
             wife both provided their mobile phone records which show  very
             limited voice calls between them, but show  numerous,  regular
             text messages both from the appellant to  his  wife  and  vice
             versa.  I accept that the  appellant  and  his  wife  maintain
             regular contact by text message and that they did so as at the
             date of decision."

     The judge recorded  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  do  not  live
    together and that they had not done so since  2014.   The  judge  heard
    evidence that the Appellant had worked in Bournemouth in  a  restaurant
    however the restaurant closed down and he could  not  find  alternative
    employment  there.   Following  this,  he  worked   in   Bradford   for
    approximately a year and a half before moving to London in  around  May
    2016 where he remained employed.

5.   The judge recorded at [44] that the Appellant's evidence  was  that  he
    had travelled from Bradford to Bournemouth every two  weeks  whilst  he
    was working in Bradford.   However, the judge concluded that there  was
    no other evidence to support this.

6.   The judge went on to find the following:

         "45. I note that the appellant worked in Bradford  for  one  and  a
             half years according to his evidence from November 2014.  This
             would mean that he worked in Bradford until approximately  May
             2016.  The bank statements  therefore  cover  a  very  limited
             proportion of that time and  the  transactions  were  not  two
             weeks apart  or  in  any  particular  pattern  that  suggested
             regular travel as claimed.  The appellant stated at  interview
             that he has a friend in Bradford who has family in Bournemouth
             and that he would travel to Bournemouth with him some  of  the
             time.  There was no evidence from this person to confirm this.
              I do not accept the appellant travelled to  Bournemouth  from
             Bradford every two weeks as claimed although I accept  he  may
             have made occasional visits."

7.   The judge heard  evidence  relating  to  a  will.  He  found  that  the
    Appellant was not able to state correctly when it was  created  and  he
    demonstrated a superficial knowledge about the terms of it  whilst  his
    wife gave accurate evidence supported by documentary  evidence  on  the
    subject.

8.   The judge recorded that the Appellant's evidence was that  he  had  not
    worked in  Bournemouth  since  2012  although  the  Appellant's  wife's
    evidence  was  that  she  thought  that  he  had  looked  for  work  in
    Bournemouth as recently as 2015.

9.   The judge found that the Appellant's evidence  and  that  of  his  wife
    concerning the intention to open a restaurant in  Bournemouth  together
    to be inconsistent.  The judge in respect  of  the  Appellant's  living
    arrangements stated as follows:

         "49. I accept that many couples spend time apart  each  week  as  a
             result of work commitments.  There can  be  many  reasons  for
             this.  In the case of the appellant I find that is relevant to
             his intention to live with his wife permanently in the future.
              On the appellant's own evidence he has  made  no  efforts  to
             find work in Bournemouth since 2012.   Even  if  it  was  more
             recently than this given that his job in Bournemouth  did  not
             end until November 2014,  on  his  own  evidence  he  did  not
             attempt to find work in Bournemouth when his job  in  Bradford
             came to an end.


         50.  This does not in my view demonstrate an intention to desire to
             live with his wife in Bournemouth.  The appellant  has  worked
             in restaurants and stated several times in his  evidence  that
             he is a 'restaurant man'.  I accept that this is his preferred
             field of employment  however  it  would  appear  he  may  have
             transferable skills that  he  could  use  to  find  employment
             either elsewhere in the hospitality or catering industry or in
             some other industry, for example his managerial skills.  There
             is no suggestion he has tried this so as to find a way that he
             and his wife could continue to live together in Bournemouth."

10.  The judge recorded that the Appellant's wife's evidence  was  that  she
    had previously rented out her house and lived in  rented  accommodation
    and that  there  was  no  evidence  that  she  and  the  Appellant  had
    considered this as an option to enable them to live together whilst the
    Appellant was working in London.   The  judge  took  into  account  the
    Appellant's wife's evidence that she does not have  any  friends  aside
    from a neighbour and her family does not live in Bournemouth.

11.  The judge found an inconsistency in the evidence between the  Appellant
    and his wife about plans to move  to  Southend-on-Sea  which  would  be
    closer to London.

12.  In respect of the Appellant's evidence  relating  to  journeys  between
    London and Bournemouth the judge found as follows:

         "53. The appellant and his wife stated that the  appellant  travels
             to Bournemouth on a Monday and  stays  there  until  Wednesday
             when he returns to London.  I note there was evidence  in  the
             form of National Express booking confirmation showing trips to
             Bournemouth on the following dates: 28  November  2016  to  30
             November 2016; 5 December 2016 to 7 December 2016; 12 December
             2016 to 14 December 2016; 22  December  2016  to  27  December
             2016; 9 January 2017 to 12 January 2017; 30 January 2017 to  1
             February 2017; and 23 January 2017 to 25 January  2017.   This
             is a period of approximately two months  that  post-dates  the
             decision under appeal considerably.  I do  not  consider  that
             this evidence is indicative of the situation as it was at  the
             date of decision.  I have already set out  above  my  findings
             about the appellant's travel between Bradford, which is  where
             he was working at the time of the decision and Bournemouth."

13.  The judge at [54] found that the Appellant's name was added on  to  the
    British Gas account for no other purpose than to bolster his case.

14.  The judge found at [55] that the Appellant and  his  wife  demonstrated
    reasonably detailed knowledge of each other's  circumstances  and  that
    they lived together after  their  marriage  until  November  2014.   In
    addition, the judge found that there had been ongoing  contact  between
    them on a  regular  basis,  mainly  via  text  messages  and  that  the
    Appellant did travel to  Bournemouth  although  not  as  frequently  as
    claimed up to the date of the decision.  The judge concluded  that  "on
    this basis I  find  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  have  a  subsisting
    relationship on some level" however, the judge went on to find that the
    relationship was not anything more than a friendship.

15.  The judge found as follows:

         "56. There was very little evidence that the appellant and his wife
             share a life together.  The appellant and his wife stated that
             he contributes to bills; however  there  was  no  evidence  to
             support this assertion.   I  take  account  of  the  fact  the
             appellant claimed to provide cash to  his  wife,  which  would
             give rise to difficulties providing evidence.  However I  also
             take into account the appellant's evidence that his  wife  had
             her own money and her evidence that her bills are low and that
             she retained control of them because she owns  the  house.   I
             find on the balance of probabilities they do not  have  shared
             financial resources.


         57.  There was little or no evidence of public  acknowledgement  of
             their marriage.  I accept the appellant's wife has  taken  his
             name as evidenced by her  passport.   Balanced  against  that,
             there was very limited evidence of  them  engaging  in  social
             activities together; and aside from discussing the possibility
             of setting up a business and some visits by the  appellant  to
             Bournemouth, there was  little  evidence  that  the  plan  and
             organise their lives jointly.


         58.  The appellant and his wife stated  that  they  tend  to  spend
             their time together with each other and if separated for  most
             of the  week,  this  is  perhaps  understandable.   However  I
             balance that against the fact that the  appellant's  telephone
             records show a large volume of text messages to  people  other
             than his wife (in some cases  more  than  700  messages  in  a
             single day) suggesting he has a circle  of  friends  and  that
             some may remain  in  Bournemouth.   Aside  from  some  limited
             evidence the appellant and his wife spent  with  some  of  his
             friends prior to their marriage, there was  no  evidence  they
             have continued to enjoy a public social  life  together  after
             their marriage.


         59.  The  appellant  and  his  wife  largely  communicate  by  text
             message.  They call each other very occasionally based on  the
             telephone records before me and their oral  evidence.   It  is
             true they have some face to face contact during visits however
             the most contact between the appellant and his wife is limited
             to short text messages, which by its nature I find is  largely
             superficial."

     The judge attached little weight to greeting cards in  the  Appellant's
    bundle because few of them contained any kind of personal  message  and
    used the terms husband and wife which, according to the judge, gave the
    appearance that they were produced to  support  a  relationship  rather
    than as genuine tokens of that relationship (see [60]).

16.  The judge concluded at [61] that  the  marriage  was  not  genuine  and
    subsisting although there was a relationship of friendship between  the
    parties.

17.  The judge concluded at [62] that the Appellant did not intend  to  live
    with his wife permanently.  The judge concluded that there had  been  a
    change of circumstances since leave was granted.

18.  The judge found at [63] that neither party to the  marriage  had  taken
    active steps to live together despite expressing an intention to do so.
     The judge found that there had been opportunities in 2014 and 2016 but
    the Appellant on his own evidence did not take steps to  find  work  in
    Bournemouth.  The judge found "I accept things may have been  difficult
    in the past in terms of finding employment in Bournemouth, however  the
    economy has improved since then and  things  may  have  changed".   The
    judge found that the  Appellant  on  his  own  evidence  had  not  made
    enquiries about what might have changed  or  what  opportunities  there
    might be for employment in Bournemouth.

19.  The judge found that the Appellant's wife had  hought  about  how  they
    could live together but the Appellant did not mention this in  evidence
    and did not appear to have thought seriously about how he and his  wife
    could live together in  the  future.   The  judge  found  that  if  the
    Appellant living together with his wife is contingent on  them  setting
    up a business together, without consideration  of  other  alternatives,
    this was strongly suggestive of a lack of intention  to  live  together
    (see [64]).

20.  The judge at paragraph 65 stated:

         "65. I find that as at the date of decision the appellant  did  not
             satisfy  paragraph  287(a)(ii)  or  (iii).   This  means   the
             respondent was correct not to grant him  indefinite  leave  to
             remain under the Immigration Rules."

The Grounds of Appeal

21.  The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred  in  considering  the
    position at the date of decision whereas the appeal was  an  in-country
    appeal and the relevant date was the date of the hearing.

22.  It is asserted that the judge failed to take into account the  evidence
    of Keshan Paudel (page 251 of the Appellant's bundle).  It is  asserted
    that the judge placed "undue weight" on the fact that the  parties  had
    produced no evidence of a "public  social  life  together  after  their
    marriage" because the evidence of the Appellant and his wife  was  that
    when he returned home to Bournemouth they enjoyed spending quality time
    together (this was explained at page  2  of  Ms  Willoughby's   witness
    statement).  The judge did  not  take  into  account  the  photographic
    evidence and failed to have regard to the evidence that the couple were
    private who preferred spending time together rather  than  enjoying  an
    active social life.

23.  The grounds assert that the judge placed undue weight on the fact  that
    the parties had a joint will which was instigated  by  the  Appellant's
    wife.

24.  It is asserted that the judge placed undue weight on the evidence  that
    the parties were not currently living together and failed to place  due
    weight on the evidence of the Appellant's frequent visits to  his  wife
    in Bournemouth.

25.  The judge speculated in respect of  the  economy  and  the  Appellant's
    ability to find work in Bournemouth.


Submissions

26.  I heard oral submissions from both Ms Benitez  and  Mr  Nath.   I  have
    taken these into account when considering  whether  or  not  the  judge
    erred.


Conclusions

27.  The Appellant's case is that the judge assessed  the  position  at  the
    date of the decision and not the hearing. Ms  Benitez  referred  me  to
    examples of this in the decision.   The  Appellant  in  support  relied
    specifically on [42], [53] and [65].  I asked Ms  Benitez  to  identify
    post-decision  evidence  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  and  she
    submitted that the judge did not consider the evidence of trips made by
    the Appellant from London to Bournemouth set out at  [53].   The  judge
    did not take into account the mobile phone records.

28.  It is not arguable that  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account  the
    evidence of post-decision journeys between London and Bournemouth.  The
    judge accepted that the trips had been made as evidenced by  the  post-
    decision receipts. She considered the evidence and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant  had  made  post-decision   journeys   between   London   and
    Bournemouth. This was a piece of the evidence that the judge considered
    when assessing the issues in the case.  The point she made at  [53]  is
    that the post-decision evidence was generated with an appeal  in  mind.
    This was a finding open to her, in the light of the  evidence  of  less
    frequent trips having been made before the decision (see  [55]).  Prior
    to the Appellant moving to London he worked and lived in Bradford (from
    November 2014 until approximately May 2016). The judge did  not  accept
    his evidence to have made journeys to Bournemouth every two weeks  (see
    [45]).

29.  A proper reading of the judge's decision makes it clear that the  judge
    did not consider that she could not take into evidence that  post-dated
    the decision. She clearly did  take  it  into  account,  including  the
    evidence of journeys to Bournemouth and a utility  bill  (  see  [54]).
    The Appellant stated that his name was added to the  account  in  2016.
    The judge found that it was added to support the appeal.

30.  At [42] the judge accepted that the parties were in regular contact  by
    texting.  I am not troubled  by  the  reference  to  the  date  of  the
    decision in this paragraph  because  the  reality  is  that  the  judge
    considered all the material evidence relating to phone records.  I have
    taken into account [58] and  [59]  of  the  decision  where  the  judge
    engaged with mobile phone records.  There is  nothing  in  the  judge's
    decision which would suggest that there was post-decision evidence that
    she failed to consider.

31.  Whilst the judge referred to the date of the  decision  at  [42],  [53]
    and [65], a proper reading of the decision makes  it  abundantly  clear
    that she considered all the evidence before her and concluded  that  at
    the date of the hearing (and the date of the decision) the relationship
    was not genuine and subsisting and the parties did not intend  to  live
    together permanently.

32.  There is no mention in the decision of the evidence of  Keshan  Paudel.
    I have taken into account the evidence of this witness. It is  skeletal
    and wholly lacking in detail.   The undated six line letter purports to
    attach a copy of the author's passport.   The  evidence  is  of  little
    probative value. The failure of the judge  to  refer  to  it  does  not
    necessarily lead to a conclusion  that  she  failed  to  take  it  into
    account. In any event, the evidence is not material to the outcome.

33.  The judge was entitled to  attach  weight  to  the  evidence  that  the
    Appellant and his wife do not live together.  Whilst I accept that  the
    judge's observations about the economy were speculative, they were  not
    determinative of the outcome in this case.   The  judge  accepted  that
    many couples spend time apart because of work commitments.  However, in
    this case she found that it undermined the  Appellant's  intentions  to
    live with his wife permanently.  It was the  Appellant's  own  evidence
    that he had not looked for work in Bournemouth since 2012.   The  judge
    did not consider the issue of the parties  not  living  together  in  a
    vacuum.  There were other problematic areas  with  the  evidence.   For
    example, the Appellant's wife mentioned that they had  discussed  plans
    to live nearer to the Appellant's work  (see  [52]),  but  he  did  not
    mention this in his evidence.  Their evidence differed  in  respect  of
    plans to open a restaurant in Bournemouth (see [48]).  The mobile phone
    records revealed that they called each other occasionally  (see  [59]).
    The Appellant was not familiar with the terms of his wife's will.

34.   The judge was  entitled  to  attach  weight  to  the  lack  of  social
    activities which would support  a  marriage  (see  [57]).   Whilst  the
    evidence was that they enjoyed spending time together, this  would  not
    explain why there was no evidence that they  plan  and  organise  their
    lives together (see [57]).  In this context the judge was  entitled  to
    consider the Appellant's extensive social life as evidenced by the text
    message records.  The grounds insofar as they challenge these  findings
    are a disagreement with the findings of the judge and do  not  identify
    an error of law in the decision.

35.  As a matter of fact, the Appellant and his wife had not lived  together
    since 2014.  However, it is unarguable that this was  determinative  of
    the outcome.  It was nonetheless  a  factor  to  which  the  judge  was
    entitled to attach weight when considering the evidence as a whole.  It
    is  unarguable  that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  photographic
    evidence.  It is not necessary for the judge to mention each  piece  of
    evidence.  The judge found that they have a relationship  and  that  it
    was "at some level" subsisting (see [67]) and that the marriage was  in
    the past genuine and subsisting.

36.  For all of the above reasons I conclude that there is no error  of  law
    in the decision of the judge.  The decision to dismiss the appeal under
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 3 May 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
