
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/01500/2020
                                          HU /01501/2020, HU /01503/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Sent to parties on                 |
|On 2 August 2021                   |20 August 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MH
                                     LAO
                                     MAO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)


For the appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms G Patel, instructed by MCR Solicitors

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated that I found an error of law and briefly summarised my  reasons,
reserving the full reasons to a written decision,  which  I  now  give.  The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. For the purpose of this decision and in order  to  avoid  confusion,  I
    have referred below to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of the  Palestinian  Territories  with
    date of birth given as 18.3.94. The second and third appellants are her
    daughters, citizens of Syria, with dates of birth given as 31.12.16 and
    4.8.15, respectively.

 3. The Secretary of State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McCall)
    promulgated 27.1.21, allowing on human rights grounds  the  appellants'
    appeals against the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  dated
    7.1.20, and upheld in the Entry Clearance Manager's Review of  11.5.20,
    to refuse their applications  made  on  27.11.19  for  entry  clearance
    family reunion as the daughter-in-law and granddaughters of the sponsor
    with refugee status in the UK, pursuant to section EC-DR of Appendix FM
    and paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 23.3.21.
     However, when the application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal, Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman granted permission on 21.4.21, considering that
    it was arguably erroneous for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  decide  the
    case on the basis that it had been conceded that the appellants met the
    eligibility financial requirements  of  E-ECDR3.1-3.2,  as  incorrectly
    stated in the respondent's refusal decision. At the First-tier Tribunal
    appeal hearing, the judge refused, on grounds of fairness and as having
    not previously been raised, the presenting officer's submission that as
    the  sponsor  is  unemployed  and  dependent  on  state  benefits,  the
    eligibility financial requirements under the Rules could not be met.

 5. The grounds of application for permission to appeal  also  argued  that
    the judge materially misdirected himself  in  law,  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasoning for allowing the appeals, and erred in allowing  the
    appeals on article 8 exceptionality, finding that family life could not
    continue elsewhere, despite the fact that first appellant's parents and
    other family members live in Turkey.

 6. The Upper Tribunal  has  received  Ms  Patel's  Rule  24  Reply,  dated
    25.5.21.

 7. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the oral  and  written  submissions  and  the  grounds  of
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 8. Whilst at [33] the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  had
    provided financial support to the level and amount claimed,  the  judge
    accepted that some financial support had been provided and continued to
    be provided. However, it appears from [18] that the  financial  support
    had ceased when the sponsor came to the UK in 2017 and only recommenced
    after the death of the first appellant's husband in 2019.

 9. This was a human rights appeal in which the judge  had  to  assess  the
    circumstances, including the financial circumstances of the sponsor, as
    at the date of hearing. Although the respondent's refusal decision  did
    not challenge the eligibility financial  requirements  of  any  of  the
    appellants, I am satisfied that the judge was required to do so in  the
    light of the respondent's submissions made that  they  could  not  meet
    those requirements.

10. As the judge noted at [7], the Rules remained  relevant  to  the  human
    rights appeal as they represent the respondent's proportional  response
    to article 8 claims and, therefore, the extent to  which  an  appellant
    meets or does not mee the Rules  is  relevant  to  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise between the  public  interest  and  the  appellants'
    article 8 rights to respect for private and family life. It  is  beyond
    dispute that the  sponsor  was  unemployed  and  in  receipt  of  state
    benefits; provided for the support of himself and his own  family.  The
    respondent's case at the appeal hearing was that such benefit income is
    not  intended  and  would  not  be  sufficient  to  support  the  three
    appellants, even though the judge  found  that  the  sponsor  has  been
    sending some monies, although less than  the  amount  claimed,  to  the
    first appellant in Syria. The  respondent  was  effectively  submitting
    that the three appellants would inevitably become a burden on the state
    if permitted entry.

11. It is further relevant to the article 8 consideration  that  the  first
    appellant does not meet the relationship requirement of E-ECDR, as  the
    judge accepted at [24] of the decision.

12. The judge relied not only  on  the  refusal  decision's  acceptance  in
    respect of the first appellant that she met the  eligibility  financial
    requirements but in respect of the second  and  third  appellants  that
    they also met the adequate accommodation and  maintenance  requirements
    of paragraph 319X (vi) and (vii). However, the judge accepted that they
    could not meet 319X(v) because they have been living a life independent
    of the sponsor. At [37] and again at [38] the judge clearly  relied  on
    the respondent's acceptance that the second and third appellants  would
    not be a burden on the UK taxpayer.

13. Before me, Ms Patel accepted that the Rules could not be met regardless
    of the financial requirements. However, she pointed to the documents in
    the appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle relating  to  the  grant  of
    benefits and submitted that the sponsor was  in  receipt  of  Universal
    Credit, Personal Independent  Payment,  Carer's  Allowance,  and  Child
    Benefit. The UC document at AB93 indicated that it was granted  on  the
    basis of the sponsor's limited capacity for work.  Ms  Patel  not  only
    submitted that the sum total of the monies would be sufficient to  meet
    the 'income support'  level  for  adequate  maintenance  but  that  the
    sponsor was or should have been considered as exempt from the financial
    requirements given the excluded benefits he received.  Effectively,  Ms
    Patel was seeking to transpose the Appendix FM requirements in relation
    to the minimum income threshold figures to the considerations in E-ECDR
    and in paragraph 319X, referring to (unspecified) case law that parties
    are entitled to count certain benefits as income provided  there  would
    be no additional recourse to public funds. In summary, Ms Patel  argued
    first that the refusal decisions were correct to consider the financial
    eligibility requirements and the adequate maintenance requirements were
    met. In the alternative, she submitted that any error by the First-tier
    Tribunal was immaterial as it could be demonstrated  that  the  sponsor
    was either exempt, or his income sufficient, or the  requirements  met.
    She also pointed to the judge's consideration under article 8  at  [37]
    of the decision that the conditions in which the appellants were living
    were unjustifiably harsh  as  the  basis  upon  which  the  appeal  was
    allowed.

14. However, none of Ms Patel's arguments about the financial circumstances
    were advanced at the First-tier  Tribunal,  as  the  judge  effectively
    closed off all judicial consideration of the adequate  income  argument
    raised by the respondent's representative, and did so solely because of
    what was stated in the respondent's refusal decisions. It may  be  that
    with  some  thought  or  preparation  Ms  Patel,  who  represented  the
    appellants at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing,  could  have
    advanced the arguments she raised with me today so that they could have
    been properly considered by the First-tier Tribunal. The  fact  remains
    that there was no consideration of any of those  arguments  or  of  the
    maintenance requirements. In respect of all three appellants, the judge
    effectively turned a blind eye to the clear and indisputable facts  and
    the argument that the appellants could not be maintained adequately  by
    the sponsor and would inevitably  become  a  financial  burden  on  the
    state.

15. I am satisfied that relying on the refusal decisions to  the  exclusion
    of the facts as they really are in relation to the sponsor's  financial
    circumstances  to  allow  the  appeal  was  perverse  and   irrational,
    amounting to a clear and material error of law.  The correct remedy for
    any prejudice caused by  the  late  notification  by  the  respondent's
    representative that financial circumstances  were  relied  on,  was  to
    consider an adjournment to allow the appellants to provide any evidence
    to the contrary and prepare appropriate submissions. It was an error of
    law to simply ignore the argument that  the  appellants  could  not  be
    adequately maintained by the sponsor.

16. The financial  circumstances  were  also  relevant  to  the  article  8
    proportionality  assessment  in  respect   of   the   public   interest
    considerations of s117B of the 2002 Act. It follows that I am satisfied
    that the article 8  proportionality  balancing  exercise  was  entirely
    unbalanced and flawed by material error of law.

17. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find  such
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    it must be set aside to be remade.

18. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the Upper Tribunal. Where the facts are  unclear  on  a
    crucial issue at the heart of an appeal, as  they  are  in  this  case,
    effectively there has not been a valid determination of those issues.

19. In all the circumstances, I relist this appeal for a fresh  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, I do so on the basis that this is a case which
    falls squarely within the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2.

Decision

    The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to  be  remade  de
    novo with no findings of fact preserved.

    The remaking of the decision in the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 August 2021




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants
    are each granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him/her or any member of their  family.
    This direction applies to, amongst others, both the appellants and  the
    respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 August 2021





