

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
HU/01508/2015

                                                 HU/01512/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                  Decision and Reasons   |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 14 March  2018                |                  On: 9 April 2018       |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Mr Chakra Pahadur Thapa
                               Mr Deepak thapa
                       (anonymity directions not made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Respondents:   Ms N Nnamani, counsel (instructed by Howe & Co)
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the entry clearance officer  and  to
      the respondents as the claimants. The claimants are brothers  and  are
      nationals of Nepal, born on  27  December  1985  and  2  January  1987
      respectively.

   2. The entry  clearance  officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge I. M. Scott, promulgated  on  31
      May 2017.  He allowed their  appeals  under  Article  8,  against  the
      decision of the entry clearance officer  refusing  their  applications
      for entry clearance  to  come  to  the  UK  for  settlement  as  adult
      dependent relatives of an ex-Ghurkha solider.

   3. In the entry clearance officer's grounds it  was  contended  that  the
      limited evidence did not demonstrate emotional dependence '....to  the
      Kugathas standard'. Although  the  entry  clearance  officer  did  not
      dispute that family  life  exists  between  the  claimants  and  their
      sponsor, they did not show elements of dependency  beyond  the  normal
      emotional ties between adults.

   4. It was also contended that the Judge speculated when finding  that  if
      it were not for the historical injustice of Gurkha settlement  policy,
      the claimants would have been able to come  to  the  UK  much  sooner,
      despite there being no assertion by their mother that this  was  their
      father's intention.

   5. Mr Bramble, on behalf of the entry clearance  officer,  accepted  that
      contrary to the assertions in the  grounds,  the  Judge  did  in  fact
      consider Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 at [28].

   6. Moreover, he found on the evidence, that there  is  dependence  beyond
      normal emotional ties to be expected between a mother and adult  sons.
      This was particularly strong following the  death  of  the  claimants'
      father, with very frequent contact being maintained, especially as the
      claimants are unmarried and have not established independent lives.

   7. Mr Bramble also accepted that the public interest  considerations  set
      out in s.117B of the 2002 Act were properly considered.

   8. There had been no  relevant  policy  until  relatively  recently.  The
      sponsor had been required to make a decision  between  taking  up  the
      opportunity to settle in the UK which had long  been  denied  unjustly
      and losing the right after two years under  the  relevant  Immigration
      (Leave to Enter and  Remain)  Order  2000  and  paragraph  20  of  the
      Immigration  Rules.  The  claimants'  father  only  applied  in  2004.
      Different Rules were applicable.

   9. Ms Nnamani submitted that the Judge had properly directed  himself  in
      the circumstances. The appeal should be dismissed.

      Assessment

  10. I find that Mr Bramble has very  properly  and  fairly  accepted  that
      contrary to the grounds of appeal, the Judge had found that there  was
      relevant emotional dependence in accordance with Kugathas.

  11. Further, he accepted that the Judge had regard to the evidence that at
      the time of their father's discharge  from  the  army,  there  was  no
      settlement policy for British Ghurkhas and dependent families. If  the
      opportunity had arisen they would have applied for settlement at  that
      time. The Judge noted that it was always his dream to go to the UK and
      live there with his family. They had discussed the possibility in  the
      past and always said they would do so if they were able.

  12. The Judge also had proper regard to the sponsor's  responsibility  for
      maintaining and supporting  the  claimants.  There  was  also  regular
      contact with them. The family ties were very  strong.  They  speak  to
      each other very regularly. She has been back to Nepal  four  times  to
      see them.

  13. He also had regard to the earlier decision by the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge dated 3 June 2013 dismissing their claims against the refusal of
      their application made under paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules.

  14. Mr Bramble accepted that in the circumstances the Judge  had  made  no
      material error of law.

  15. In the circumstances I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal did not involve the making of any error of law.






      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 4 April 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer


