
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/01432/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 August 2021                   |On 14 September 2021               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     OEA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr N Khan of IIAS Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated that I found no error of law and briefly summarised my  reasons,
reserved full reasons to be provided in  writing,  which  I  now  give.  The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.

 1. The appellant, who is a Nigerian national with date of birth  given  as
    13.7.05, now 16 years of age, has appealed with permission to the Upper
    Tribunal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
    18.3.21 (Judge Holt), dismissing on all grounds her appeal against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer, dated 2.1.20,  and  upheld  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager on 8.4.20, to refuse  her  application  for
    entry clearance to the UK to join her sponsoring  father,  pursuant  to
    'sole  responsibility'  requirements  under  paragraph   297   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The grounds of application for permission to appeal submit  that  there
    were material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
    It is argued that at [30] the judge dealt cursorily with the  issue  of
    exceptional circumstances. It is also argued that given the findings at
    [15] that the sponsor had kept contact with his daughter in Nigeria and
    sent her gifts of money and other  things,  visited  her  when  he  has
    travelled to Nigeria, and that there is an emotional bond between them,
    the appeal should have been allowed, following NA  (Bangladesh)  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 128, where the Court of Appeal endorsed  factors  relevant  to
    the issue of 'sole responsibility' as including the source  and  degree
    of financial responsibility for the child, and whether there was cogent
    evidence of genuine interest in the sponsor's affection for the child.

 3. It is also argued that the judge made findings in absence of  objective
    evidence and speculated that the mother's new partner had not  required
    the appellant to leave the household. It is said that some of the other
    reasons given by the judge were about peripheral matters  to  which  no
    weight should have been attached.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    29.4.21, on the basis that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    "reads like a Home Office submission in places."

 5. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. I must first observe that the grant of  permission  is  inadequate  and
    fails to identify any arguable error of law. Nevertheless, I have given
    anxious consideration to the grounds and the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. For the reasons set out below, I am satisfied that  a  reading  of  the
    decision as a whole demonstrates that the  judge  made  clear  findings
    open to her on the evidence and applying the requirements of  paragraph
    297 of the Rules to the facts, before going on to properly consider the
    article 8 ECHR claim outside the Rules.

 8. Whilst at [15] the judge made the findings referred to above about  the
    sponsor's continuing involvement with the  appellant  in  Nigeria,  the
    judge pointed  out  at  [14]  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    appellant's mother  than  the  sponsoring  father  had  ever  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant. As the judge summarised at  [14]  the
    nature of the evidence was rather to the effect  that  the  mother  was
    happy to simply hand over responsibility to the  father.  At  [19]  the
    judge noted that  since  the  sponsor  left  Nigeria,  the  mother  has
    continued to look after the appellant, finding "Prima facie, she is the
    one who has had sole responsibility for the appellant."

 9. At [28] the judge summarised the claim that the mother had now rejected
    her daughter, that her  continued  presence  was  threatening  her  new
    relationship with  her  partner,  and  that  she  wanted  to  send  the
    appellant to the UK on the "whim" of her partner. However, as the judge
    pointed out, this evidence missed the point that the appellant  had  to
    show that the sponsor has had sole responsibility  for  the  appellant.
    That the mother now wished for the sponsor to take over responsibility,
    or  that  she  considers  her  daughter  an  impediment  to   her   new
    relationship with her partner, or even her  partner's  wishes  for  the
    daughter to leave the household, does not begin to demonstrate that the
    sponsor has had sole responsibility.

10.  At  [29]  the  judge  concluded  that  the  evidence  pointed  to  the
    appellant's mother having had and continues to have sole responsibility
    for the appellant, meeting her needs, with the sponsoring father at the
    most sending occasional money and visiting her on  holiday.  The  judge
    was "not remotely satisfied that he was making all of the key decisions
    regarding the appellant's life nor directing her life. I find that  all
    of the evidence points to the appellant's mother having cared  for  her
    daughter, making all the key decisions in her daughter's life and being
    and having been in control of how the appellant's life  has  unfolded."
    The judge stated that she did not find it remotely  credible  that  the
    mother would suddenly  stop  caring  about  her  daughter,  effectively
    abandoning her and stating that she had to leave the  home  because  of
    her new partner. These were all findings  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence. Whilst in his extensive submissions Mr Khan took  me  to  the
    evidence that supports the sponsor's involvement with the appellant, he
    also appeared to miss the point that what had to  be  demonstrated  was
    that he and not the mother had had sole responsibility.

11. Whilst the rather  poorly-drafted  grounds  also  purport  to  rely  on
    "serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the child undesirable..." under  paragraph  297(f),  I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave consideration to  the
    facts relied on to support this aspect of the claim.  Whether  directly
    referring to 297(f) or not, I am satisfied that  the  judge  considered
    the claim, made  rather  late  in  the  appeal  proceedings,  that  the
    mother's new partner required the appellant to leave the home and  that
    he had been sexually abusing the appellant.  The  judge  was  satisfied
    that that the child continued to live with her mother, as  the  sponsor
    confirmed in evidence, and was, therefore, entitled to point  out  that
    the child had, thus far, not been expelled from  the  home.  The  judge
    assessed in some detail the sponsor's evidence as to  the  more  recent
    assertions that the appellant had been harassed  by  her  mother's  new
    partner, inferring sexual harassment, explicitly  stating  in  evidence
    that he touched her in sexual assault, which it was  claimed  had  been
    reported to the police. There were some supporting documents  for  this
    in the appellant's supplementary bundle. However,  at  [30]  the  judge
    considered that the purported police report bore  the  hallmarks  of  a
    story simply concocted to bolster an otherwise weak case and considered
    the documentary evidence self-serving and unreliable, applying  Tanveer
    Ahmed principles. The judge did not make a finding that  the  documents
    were forged or fraudulent, as suggested in  submissions.   In  essence,
    this part of the the appellant's claim was found not credible.

12. Other than the matters addressed above, the grounds are in large part a
    mere disagreement with the decision  and  an  attempt  to  reargue  the
    appeal.  Lewison LJ in Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5
    at [114] explained the caution to be exercised by appellate  courts  in
    interfering with evaluative decisions  of  first  instance  judges.  At
    [114] to [115], the Lord Justice said this:

         "114.  Appellate courts have  been  repeatedly  warned,  by  recent
         cases at the highest level, not to interfere with findings of  fact
         by trial judges, unless compelled to do so. This applies  not  only
         to findings of primary fact, but also to the  evaluation  of  those
         facts and to inferences to be drawn from them."

13. I am satisfied that having had the opportunity to assess the  oral  and
    documentary evidence in the light of  the  claim  and  the  submissions
    made, it was open to the judge to reject both limbs of the  appellant's
    claim,  both  the  issues  of  sole  responsibility  and  "serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    child undesirable...", were resolved against the  appellant,  with  the
    judge  providing  cogent  reasoning  for  the  findings  made  and  the
    conclusions leading to the dismissal of the appeal.

14. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on human rights grounds.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 August 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       2 August 2021

