
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01645/2017
                                                               HU/01956/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd October 2018                           |On 16th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DAVIS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ct AND AG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Mr T Wilding, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   unrepresented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/291)

We make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the   Appellant.    This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



1.   We anonymise the Respondents.  They are mother (CT) and minor  daughter
    (AG). AG's date of birth is 18 May 2015. CT's date of birth is 22 April
    1995. Both are citizens of  Jamaica.  We  shall  refer  to  CT  as  the
    Appellant as she was before the First-tier Tribunal (the "FTT").

2.   On  27  June  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  decided  to  deport  the
    Appellant.  She made submissions setting out  why  she  should  not  be
    deported and those were considered and rejected  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 11 January 2017.

3.        The  Secretary  of  State's  case  is  that  the  Appellant  is  a
    persistent offender  having  received  ten  convictions  for  seventeen
    offences between 11 February 2009 and 28  March  2014.   The  Appellant
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision of 11 January  2017.
    Her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen, following  a
    hearing on 12 April 2018.  Permission was granted to the  Secretary  of
    State by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 5 June 2018.

4.   There is no need for us to set out the lengthy history relating to  the
    Appellant.  The judge found at  [20]  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    persistent offender.  He concluded that removal would breach her rights
    under Article 8. The judge concluded that the Appellant's offending was
    relatively minor and that the exception  to  deportation  in  paragraph
    399A(ii)(a) of  the  Immigration  Rules  applied.  The  thrust  of  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal is that the judge failed to give
    the required anxious  scrutiny  and  care  to  the  determination.   Mr
    Wilding made oral submissions that there  was  clear  cross-pollination
    with a different decision.

5.       In our view the grounds are made out. It is likely that the use  of
    cut and paste has caused cross- pollination with  another  decision  as
    asserted by  Mr  Wilding.   The  judge  made  significant  errors.  The
    decision shows a lack of care.  At  [19]  the  judge  referred  to  the
    Appellant as having been a model prisoner whilst she  has  at  no  time
    been sentenced to a term of imprisonment. He stated at  [22]  that  the
    Appellant was convicted "of sentences of 18 months years to  be  served
    consecutively".  This does not make sense and has no application to the
    Appellant in this case. He  stated  in  the  same  paragraph  that  the
    Appellant has six children and a stepchild.  This does  not  accurately
    reflect the circumstances of this Appellant. A further error  was  made
    by the judge at [23] where he referred to the Appellant's "family  life
    she has with his children (and wife)." This has no applicability to the
    appeal before the  judge.    The  judge  at  [24]  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was a child at the date of the application which  is  clearly
    wrong.  The judge at [27] concluded that the exception  to  deportation
    set out at paragraph 399 (a) (ii) (a) and (b)  applied.  CT  is  not  a
    British citizen and she has not been  resident  in  the  UK  for  seven
    years.  It  is  unarguable  that  she  met  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules at the time of the hearing.

9.   The judge concluded at [20] that the Appellant  was  not  a  persistent
    offender. That finding lacks reasoning and does not  rationally  follow
    from paragraphs 55 and 57 of the judgement in Chege ("is  a  persistent
    offender") [2016] UKUT 00187  quoted  by  the  judge  at  [19]  of  the
    decision. This finding was not the subject of a discrete challenge  but
    we are satisfied that it is another example of the judge having  failed
    to apply anxious scrutiny.

10.  We gave the unrepresented Appellant the opportunity to address us.  She
    understood that the judge had made errors. We expressed  our  sympathy.
    However, the only proper course of action available to  us  is  to  set
    aside the decision of Judge Cohen pursuant section 12(2) (b) (i) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (the "2007 Act").

11.      We have considered Paragraph 7 of  the  Practice  Statement  of  25
    September 2012 regarding the disposal  of  appeals.  In  our  view  the
    cumulative effect of the errors has been to deprive this Appellant of a
    fair hearing. In addition, none of the findings of  the  judge  can  be
    maintained. The extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
    in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is  such  that,
    having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/291)

We make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the   Appellant.    This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 10 October 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam




