
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/01973/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 20 March 2018                       |         On 09 May 2018             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                trina winsor
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Toal, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
         the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Black)  promulgated  on  the  4th
         October 2017, who allowed the respondent's appeal in respect of her
         claims both under Article 3 and under Article 8 of the Convention.


      2. Upon an application made for permission to  appeal  that  decision,
         the First-tier Tribunal granted limited  permission  to  appeal  in
         respect of the finding under Article 3 but refused permission under
         Article 8 on 31 October 2017.


      3. The Secretary of State renewed that application  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal in respect of the Article 8 ground on the papers and in  a
         decision by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 15 March 2018 she refused
         that application.


      4.  Accordingly, as Mr Clarke conceded, the Secretary of State has  no
         subsisting or viable appeal in respect of the  Article  8  finding.
         Given that in order to remove the appellant to the United States of
         America the Secretary of State needs to succeed  on  both  grounds,
         the Article 3 contention becomes academic.    Whatever  its  merits
         might be they cannot affect the outcome of the case  and  in  those
         circumstances and by a  perfectly  proper  concession  made  by  Mr
         Clarke we are driven to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal  in
         this case and do so.


Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed; the decision made by  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date 02 May 2018


Mr Justice Edis










