
                                    [pic]
IAC-HX-MH/11-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01413/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 November 2016                  |On 13 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              juhena Chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hussain, Maya Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Juhena Chowdhury, was born  on  1  September
    1989 and is a female citizen of Bangladesh.  By  a  decision  dated  25
    June 2015 the appellant was refused  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of her family and private life.  She  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  D  N  Harris)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7  March  2016,  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State argues; (i) By allowing the appeal on Article  8
    ECHR grounds, the judge completely  ignored  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This  prevented  the  judge  from  considering  the
    Article 8 appeal "through the lens" of the Immigration Rules.  (ii) The
    judge did not identify any compelling circumstances for considering the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.  (iii) Having failed to  engage  with  the
    Immigration Rules at all, the  judge  had  not  considered  the  public
    interest concerned with the appellant's removal.  (iv)  The  judge  had
    allowed the appeal by applying Section 117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  (as
    amended) finding it would "not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK".  This was  a  finding  "completely  unsupported  by  any
    reason".

 3. Judge Harris has undoubtedly short-circuited his analysis in  order  to
    achieve (in a little over three  pages  of  A4)  an  outcome  which  he
    clearly believed was obvious in the light of  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act.  That section provides as follows:

         In the case of a person who  is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

 4. In my opinion, the grounds are correct in stating that  the  judge  has
    bypassed the Rules entirely, an approach which, prima facie, would lead
    the Tribunal to conclude that the judge had erred in law.  A  question,
    however, remains as regards materiality.  Before I continue, I make the
    following observations: (i) The Secretary of State no longer  considers
    that the appellant has failed to establish that she is in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with her husband.  The Secretary of State  also
    appears to accept that her husband's  former  relationship  had  broken
    down completely; (ii) The children of the appellant and her husband are
    British citizens.

 5. It is important to consider the position the  Secretary  of  State  had
    adopted by the time this case reached the First-tier Tribunal.  I  have
    regard to Appendix FM R-LTRP.1.1(d):

         Section R-LTRPT: Requirements for limited  leave  to  remain  as  a
         parent

         R-LTRPT.1.1. The requirements to be met for limited leave to remain
         as a parent are-

         (a)  the applicant and the child must be in the UK;

         (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application  for  limited
         or indefinite leave to remain as a parent or partner; and either

         (c)

         (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal  under  Section  S-LTR:
         Suitability leave to remain; and

         (ii) the applicant meets all of the requirements of Section ELTRPT:
         Eligibility for leave to remain as a parent, or

         (d)

         (i)  the  applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal   under   S-LTR:
         Suitability leave to remain; and

         (ii) the applicant meets the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-
         2.4. and E-LTRPT.3.1-3.2.; and

         (iii) paragraph EX.1. applies.

 6. The Secretary of State does not argue  that  the  appellant  falls  for
    refusal under Section S-LTR.  At the date of the  refusal  letter,  the
    Secretary of State considered that the appellant failed to  satisfy  E-
    LTRP.1.7, 1.8 and 1.9.  Sub-paragraph  1.7  concerns  the  genuine  and
    subsisting nature of the  relationship;  the  Secretary  of  State  now
    accepts that the appellant and her husband enjoy such  a  relationship.
    Sub-paragraph 1.8 requires  that  the  applicant  and  her  partner  if
    married or in a civil partnership must be validly  married.   No  doubt
    has been cast on the claim by the appellant that she is validly married
    to  her  husband.   Sub-paragraph  1.9   requires   that   a   previous
    relationship of the applicant or their partner must  have  broken  down
    permanently; the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    husband's previous relationship had ended and that finding has not been
    challenged by the Secretary of State.  The question,  therefore,  given
    that the appellant satisfied the requirements of E-LTRP.1.2-1.12 and E-
    LTRP.2.1 is whether EX.1 should apply;

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if:

         (a) (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with a child who-

         (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years
         when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis  that  this
         paragraph applied;

         (bb) is in the UK;

         (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously  for
         at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of application;
         and

         (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK; or

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

 7.  Judge  Harris  made  no  firm  finding  as  to  whether   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  the  appellant's  husband
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  What was, however, accepted  by
    the Secretary of State is that it would not be reasonable to expect the
    British citizen  children  to  leave  the  UK.   Mr  McVeety,  for  the
    Secretary of State, accepted that, in light of  the  findings  made  by
    Judge Harris and the circumstances of the appellant now accepted by the
    Secretary of State, it is not possible to argue that the appellant  and
    her husband should remove their  family  life  together  to  Bangladesh
    whilst the children remain in the United Kingdom.   He  accepted  that,
    even though Judge Harris may have erred by moving directly to  consider
    Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules, the proper application of
    the provisions of the Rules should have led him to allow the appeal  on
    the basis that the appellant could meet the requirements  of  EX.1.   I
    agree.  In his haste to apply Section 117B(6) outside the Rules without
    first considering the Immigration Rules, the judge may have  overlooked
    the fact that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules as at the
    date  of  the  hearing  before   him.    In   the   circumstances   and
    notwithstanding that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law,  I  have
    exercised my discretion to refrain from setting  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

