
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01485/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated   |
|On  15th January 2018                    |On 17th January 2018              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 Alao Raimi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Paraskos, AO & Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Alao is a national of Nigeria date of birth 15th May  1960.  On  the
    20th March  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  his  appeal.  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department now has permission to appeal
    against that decision, on the grounds that  the  Tribunal  applied  the
    wrong legal framework and gives no intelligible reason for  the  appeal
    being allowed. The Judge in the First-tier Tribunal was Dr Majid.

 2. Mr Alao had applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds on  the
    basis of his relationship with his wife, a British national called  Mrs
    Ogunfolu, and by extension his parental relationship with her children.
     Leave had been refused on the 23rd December 2015 on the  grounds  that
    Mr Alao could not meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  principally
    because he had not established that his relationship with Mrs  Ogunfolu
    was genuine and subsisting.  When the matter came before the First-tier
    Tribunal the matters in issue therefore were:

          a) Was this a subsisting relationship?

          b) If so could the requirements of the rules be met?

          c) If the rules could not be met was the refusal to  grant  leave
             nevertheless  a  disproportionate   and   therefore   unlawful
             interference with the appellant's family life?

 3. The First-tier Tribunal begins its determination by directing itself to
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).
     It further refers to HC395 and the Immigration Acts 2014 and 2016  and
    goes on, over the following 20+ paragraphs to make reference to various
    cases, very few of which appear to have any application  to  Mr  Alao's
    case. The determination also devotes several paragraphs  to  discussion
    of the Conservative Party's antipathy towards the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.  The  determination  concludes  by  stating  that  the
    appeal is allowed.

 4. Although  Mr  Alao's  representatives  have  attempted  to  defend  the
    decision, I have no doubt at all that this is an appeal  that  must  be
    allowed, with the matter being remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be heard afresh. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no
    reasoned findings on any of the matters in  issue  (a)-(c)  above.   It
    contains many of the errors of law discussed by the Upper  Tribunal  in
    MM and Others (AA/06906/2014 unreported). It  contains  numerous  legal
    misdirections and almost entirely ignores the facts. The fact that  the
    decision  might  in  the  end  be  the  correct  one  cannot  save  the
    determination. I set it aside and remit the matter.

    Decisions and Directions

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside. The decision in the appeal  is  to
    be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
    15th January 2017
