
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01353/2016
     HU/02994/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th December 2017                         |On 16th  January 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     SAO
                                    AKEO
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Gentili of Counsel, instructed by Islington Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are  the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Devittie made following a hearing at  Taylor  House  on  10th  February
    2017.





Background

 2. The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria  born  on  [  ]  1987.  She
    arrived in the UK as a visitor on 13th June 2013.  Her first child  was
    born a year later, and is a British citizen.   Her  second  child,  the
    second appellant, was born on [ ]  2015.   She  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of her family and private  life  here  on
    4th August 2015 and was refused on 30th December 2015 and it  was  this
    refusal which was the subject of  the  appeal  before  the  Immigration
    Judge.

 3. The judge considered that the appellant had lied about her  purpose  in
    coming to the UK and concluded that the birth of her child was part  of
    a carefully contrived plan by her in order to gain residence status  in
    the UK.  The weight to be attached to the fact that  one  child  was  a
    British citizen was therefore limited.  The return of the  children  to
    Nigeria would not be adverse to their best interests in any  way  since
    all their family ties were in Nigeria.  He took into account the public
    interest and the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  and
    dismissed the appeal.

 4. The appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had taken into  consideration  immaterial  factors  in  order  to
    determine whether they qualified for leave to  remain  under  paragraph
    EX1 of Appendix FM and had failed to take into  account  relevant  case
    law and Home Office guidance in reaching his decision.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Doyle on 20th September 2017.



 6.  At  the  hearing  Mr  Duffy  said  that  he  could  not   defend   the
    determination.  He accepted that there was an error of law and  had  no
    objection to the decision being remade and allowed  in  favour  of  the
    appellants.

Findings and Conclusions

 7. The judge erred in law.

 8. First, his belief that the birth of the child was part of "a  carefully
    contrived plan" in order to gain residence in the UK was irrelevant  to
    the issue of whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the UK.

 9. Second, he failed to take into account, inter alia, the decision  in  R
    on the application of MA and Others [2016] EWCA Civ 705  where  it  was
    held that strong countervailing factors were  required  to  justify  an
    interference with a child's private life where  there  has  been  seven
    years' residence, the more so where as here, the child is British.

10. Third, he failed to take into account the Home  Office's  own  guidance
    set out in  the  current  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family
    Migration: Appendix FM, Section  10B  Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life: Ten Year Routes which reads:

         "11.2.3  Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen child
                to leave the UK?

                Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must
                not take a decision in relation to  the  parent  or  primary
                carer of a British citizen child where the  effect  of  that
                decision would be to force that British child to  leave  the
                EU, regardless of the age of that child.  This reflects  the
                European Court of Justice judgment in Zambrano.

                Where a decision to refuse the application would  require  a
                parent or primary carer to return to a country  outside  the
                EU, the case must always be assessed on the  basis  that  it
                would be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to
                leave the EU with that parent or primary carer."

11. Mr Duffy acknowledged that he could not pursue the  argument,  made  in
    the reasons for refusal letter, that the child was not  entitled  to  a
    British passport  since  there  had  been  clear  evidence  before  the
    passport office that the child was  so  entitled  and  he  had  no  DNA
    evidence to question that decision.  There was  no  evidence  that  the
    father of the child had any contact with the appellant or his son,  and
    no basis upon which to argue that he would be able or willing  to  care
    for the child in the UK..

12. In the light of Mr Duffy's proper concession, the  appellants'  appeal,
    in line with the respondent's own guidance, falls to be allowed.

Notice of Decision

13. The original judge erred in law.  The decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellants' appeals are allowed both within the
    Immigration Rules with respect to paragraph EX1 and outside  the  Rules
    under Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 13 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


