
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/01880/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12 January 2018                        |   On 08 February 2018            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                 miss k M k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer KINGSTON/NEW YORK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J M Rene
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Jamaica  whose  date  of  birth  is  19
    September 1977. She has lived in the UK since 1992 and was granted  ILR
    in 2005 on the basis of long residence. The appellant has 2 children in
    the UK. She made an application for  entry  clearance  as  a  returning
    resident having visited Jamaica for a holiday. Whilst  in  Jamaica  she
    lost or had her passport stolen. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused
    the application on 18 June 2015 because the  appellant  had  failed  to
    disclose her criminal convictions in the application form and that  she
    was a persistent offender so that exclusion from the UK  was  conducive
    to the public good.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against   the
    respondent's decision. In a decision  promulgated  on  13  March  2017,
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  C  M  Phillips  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant made a  false
    representation when stating 'no' on her application form giving rise to
    a mandatory refusal. The judge also  found  that  he  appellant  was  a
    'persistent offender'. In relation to Article 8 the  judge  found  that
    refusal of entry clearance was proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of
    effective immigration control.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 5  October  2017  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Pickup refused the appellant permission to  appeal.
    She renewed her application for permission to the Upper Tribunal and on
    17 November 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

The appellant's submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal set out that the approach of the judge denotes  a
    closed mind to the credible aspects of the appellant's evidence and  in
    paragraph 35 the judge discredits the appellant from  the  outset.  The
    judge's reasoning is not clear and difficult  to  follow.  The  judge's
    findings are unreasonable and  that  an  irrelevant  consideration  was
    taken into account (paragraph 39) in order to discredit the  appellant.
    The judge failed  to  consider  appropriately  the  evidence  that  the
    previous representative was negligent, failed to take  the  appellant's
    explanation into account and that steps had been taken  to  obtain  the
    appellant's file.

 6. It is submitted that the judge misdirected herself by considering  that
    the label 'persistent offender' is a permanent state and that there  is
    no analysis by the judge as to why she should still be  regarded  as  a
    persistent offender - Chege [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC).

 7. The judge when considering the evidence about the appellant's  youngest
    son ('J') has cherry picked points to justify dismissing the  appeal  -
    paragraph 71.  She  has  failed  to  consider  appropriately  the  best
    interests of the child and therefore the court cannot be confident that
    significant weight has been given to his best interests. The judge  has
    failed to take account of the child's opinion when considering s55. The
    judge made speculative findings regarding the child's father.

 8. The judge did not demonstrate a fair approach to the balancing exercise
    and erred by concluding that it is not unduly harsh for  the  child  to
    remain in the UK without his mother. If it was in the  public  interest
    for the appellant to be deported the  Secretary  of  State  would  have
    taken steps to deport her.

 9. In oral submissions Mr Rene submitted that the judge  when  considering
    the allegation of dishonesty should have first considered whether there
    was an innocent explanation. The approach taken  poisoned  the  judge's
    mind from the outset.  The  respondent  has  not  argued  that  on  the
    incorrect  form  (the  incorrect  form  completed  by  her  for   entry
    clearance) she filled in she did not disclose her  convictions.  Surely
    they would have done so if that was the case. We could infer from  that
    that the appellant did declare her convictions on the  incorrect  form.
    In answer  to  my  query  Mr  Rene  indicated  that  he  did  not  have
    instructions as to whether or not the appellant asserted that  she  did
    declare her convictions on the  incorrect  form.  He  argued  that  the
    failure of the previous solicitors to provide the appellant's  file  to
    her current solicitors is indicative of their failings and  from  which
    we can draw an inference that their conduct was negligent in failing to
    complete the form correctly by declaring her convictions.

10. He submitted that the judge has failed to undertake a proper assessment
    of the label persistent offender as set out in the case of Chege. There
    has to be an assessment in terms of fact and law. The judge simply says
    that there were 23 offences so the appellant is a persistent  offender.
    The judge has not taken into account that her  has  been  no  offending
    since 2012 and has not undertaken an assessment of the  nature  of  the
    offences and if there has been an escalation.

11. The judge did not undertake a proper assessment of the  best  interests
    of the appellant's youngest son. She found the appellant's mother to be
    a credible witness who  explained  the  effect  on  her  life  and  the
    difficulties she faces  looking  after  J.  The  judge  has  failed  to
    properly take into account J's letter and that he  has  lived  all  his
    life with his mother. The judge accepted that his father had had little
    involvement in his life. Reliance is placed on Kaur  and  the  approach
    required i.e. the best interests of the child must be considered first.
    With regard to the letter from the school the judge  has  ignored  this
    because it does not refer to J's failings in school as attributable  to
    the absence of the appellant. This however ignores the  letter  from  J
    which stated that it was hard for him to do well at school because  his
    mother might not come home.

12. Mr Walker (in response to Mr Rene's submission that the Entry Clearance
    Officer had not submitted the previous incorrect application  form  and
    had not argued that the appellant had failed to declare her convictions
    on that form) checked the file. In respect of  the  previous  incorrect
    form completed for entry clearance that was not on the  file.  However,
    the appellant's application for ILR was on file and he noted  that  she
    had not declared her convictions on that form. At that point she had  a
    number of criminal convictions. This was a matter that the Home  Office
    would now need to consider.

13. With regard to the persistent offender issue Mr Walker  submitted  that
    although the judge was required to consider the issue as at the date of
    the hearing the appellant's suggestion that the  fact  that  there  had
    been no convictions since 2012 ignores the fact that the appellant  has
    not been in the UK since late 2014.

14. The judge has considered the best interests of the appellant's son.  He
    is being perfectly well looked after by his grandmother. The judge  did
    consider his best interests in isolation form the other factors in  the
    case.

15. In reply Mr Rene submitted that the judge has not  taken  into  account
    the fact that the appellant's mother cannot carry on looking after  him
    for ever.


Discussion

16. There are essentially three grounds:

      a) The judge failed to consider the appellant's  innocent  explanation
         for the  fact  that  her  convictions  were  not  declared  on  her
         application form

      b) The judge failed to consider appropriately  whether  the  appellant
         should be considered to be a 'persistent offender'

      c) The judge failed to consider the best interests of J as a  separate
         issue and it is not clear that the judge gave significant weight to
         his interests in the proportionality balancing exercise.

17. The  judge  correctly  considered  the  evidence  with  regard  to  the
    application noting the findings in Shen about the approach to  evidence
    where dishonesty has been alleged. The judge found (not disputed)  that
    the application form was false as the  appellant  answered  no  to  the
    criminal convictions question and the appellant accepted that  she  had
    17  convictions  for  23  offences.  The  judge  then  considered   the
    explanation proffered by the appellant as to why the  convictions  were
    not declared on the form. These are set out with the  judge's  findings
    from paragraphs 36 - 45. The judge took into account the fact that  the
    representative had made other errors on the form  and  that  there  had
    been attempts by the new  representatives  to  obtain  the  appellant's
    file. The evidence was considered carefully and  in  some  detail.  The
    judge was not persuaded by the appellant's account  having  taken  into
    consideration various factors including: the appellant had not obtained
    her file in person from the former representative despite being invited
    to  do  so,  there  was  no  evidence  from  the   appellant's   former
    representative, there  was  nothing  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that
    suggested  she  had  informed  her  former  representatives  about  her
    convictions but they had failed to include them on the  form,  and  the
    fact  that  the  appellant,  having  recently  completed   a   rejected
    application, would have been well  aware  of  the  need  to  check  her
    application particularly in such an important  regard.  The  judge  was
    entitled to reach the conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    declare material  facts  and  that  she  therefore  had  made  a  false
    representation.

18. When considering the refusal  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant  as  a
    persistent offender the judge referred to the case of Chege setting out
    the relevant findings from that case in  respect  of  the  approach  to
    determination of whether a person is  to  be  considered  a  persistent
    offender. The judge took into account the  extent  and  nature  of  the
    offending noting that she had 23  offences  spanning  the  period  from
    October 1999 to 9 January 2012, a period of over  12  years.  She  took
    into account the fact that the offences were not committed  whilst  the
    appellant was a youth. Counterbalancing those factors  the  judge  took
    into account that there was not an escalation in the  type  of  offence
    and the time that had elapsed since her last  court  appearance.  There
    was no explanation for the offences or sustained failure to comply with
    the requirements of a community order.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge
    conducted an appropriate fact specific exercise  and  on  the  evidence
    reached a finding that was open to her.

19. With regard to the best interests  of  J,  the  judge  noted  that  the
    respondent had not carry out an assessment of  the  appellant's  rights
    under Article 8 despite the fact that the appellant set out her  family
    circumstances  in  her  application  form.  The  judge  considered  the
    respondent's obligations to be as set out in the Home  Office  guidance
    which states:

         You must carefully consider your statutory duty to  children  under
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009,
         before you apply  the  instructions  in  this  guidance  either  to
         children or to people with children.

20. The judge considered that the ECM review which asserted no grounds  had
    been raised that J's  welfare  has  been  compromised  did  not  engage
    properly with the ground of appeal that refers to J.

21. It is clear that the judge understood that J's best interests  must  be
    considered properly. However the approach  adopted  by  the  judge  was
    incorrect. At paragraph 56 the judge set out:

         56 I find by reference to Chege that to comply with Article  8  and
         the respondent's  section  55  duty,  the  appellant's  application
         should have been considered in a way that  is  no  less  favourable
         than the consideration given to in  country  deportation  decisions
         made on the same ground of persistent offending.

         ...

         58 In the interests of equivalence and as a framework, having heard
         the evidence about the circumstances of the appellant's  minor  son
         in the United Kingdom, I have considered  if  this  evidence  shows
         that the appellant meets the exceptions set out in  paragraphs  399
         and/or 399A of the Immigration Rules.

22. The judge then commenced  consideration  of  his  J's  best  interests.
    However, it is difficult to discern a  specific  consideration  of  J's
    best interests as a primary consideration rather than as  part  of  the
    balancing exercise under paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules. As set
    out in Kaur (children's best interests  /  public  interest  interface)
    [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC) at 16:

         2. Secondly, the assessment of a child's best interests must  focus
         on the child, while simultaneously evaluating the  reality  of  the
         child's life situation and circumstances. Factors such as  parental
         immigration misconduct must not  intrude  at  this  stage.  See  EV
         (Phillipines) (infra) at [33]. This requires care and discipline on
         the part of decision makers and Judges. The child's best interests,
         once  assessed,  are  an  important  component   of   the   overall
         proportionality balancing  exercise.  However,  they  have  a  free
         standing character. Avoidance of error is likely to be promoted  if
         the best  interests  assessment  is  carried  out  first.  Parental
         misconduct typically takes the  form  of  illegal  entry,  unlawful
         overstaying  or  illegal  working.  Factors  of   this   kind   may
         legitimately enter the equation at a later  stage  of  the  overall
         proportionality balancing exercise as they are clearly embraced  by
         the public interest in the maintenance of immigration control. This
         is  the  stage  at  which  a  child's  best  interests,  though   a
         consideration of primary importance, can potentially be  outweighed
         by the public interest. I shall revisit this  issue  infra  in  the
         context of a more detailed examination of Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

         3. Thirdly, in every case of this kind, there is  an  Article  8(2)
         proportionality balancing exercise to be performed. At  the  outset
         of the exercise, the scales are evenly balanced.  The  exercise  is
         then performed by identifying all material facts and considerations
         and attributing appropriate and rational weight to each.  The  best
         interests of an affected child feature in the  balancing  exercise.
         It is incumbent upon the court or tribunal  concerned  to  make  an
         assessment of those interests. The balance  must  then  be  struck,
         treating the child's best interests as a primary consideration.  As
         these do not have the status of the primary consideration they  are
         capable of being  outweighed  by  other  public  interest  factors,
         singly or cumulatively, in any given case.  If  the  "sins  of  the
         parents" principle has the unwavering potency which the Applicant's
         amended ground of challenge in substance  advances,  Zoumbas  would
         have been decided differently.

23. As set out in Kaur normally the best  interests  assessment  should  be
    carried out  first.  It  should  be  a  primary  consideration  in  the
    balancing exercise. In this case there is no initial  consideration  of
    J's best interests. Whilst this may be remedied by specific findings on
    a child's best interests that have  been  considered  in  isolation  to
    other factors, in this case there is  no  identification  of  what  the
    judge considers J's best interests are. That is an error  of  law.  The
    judge  has  meticulously  undertaken   a   thorough   and   appropriate
    proportionality balancing exercise considering  and  weighing  all  the
    relevant factors. However, I do not consider  that  this  remedies  the
    error of law  in  this  case  and  it  cannot  be  considered  that  an
    appropriate assessment of J's best interests and findings on  what  his
    best interests are could have no material effect on the outcome of this
    case.

24. I find that there was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision. I set that  decision  aside  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

25. Mr Rene submitted that if I were to find a material error  of  law  the
    matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  was,  at
    least partly, based on the disclosure  by  the  Home  Office  that  the
    appellant had not declared her convictions on her application for  ILR.
    This is not a factor that had any relevance to the error of law hearing
    before me (there was no suggestion that I should take it into account).
    As set out above it came to light purely in response to Mr Rene's  oral
    submissions. It may, however, be a relevant  factor  in  assessing  the
    proportionality of refusal of entry clearance.  Therefore,  I  consider
    that it is appropriate to remit this  case  for  a  re-hearing  on  the
    Article 8 and section 55 issues  only.  The  judge's  findings  on  the
    mandatory refusal under paragraph 320(7A)  and  the  finding  that  the
    appellant is a persistent offender stand.

26. I considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings.
    I am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact finding that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

27. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House before any  judge  other  than
    Judge C M Phillips  pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and  12(3)(a)  of  the
    TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.  I
remit the case for a new hearing on the Article  8  and  section  55  issues
only. The judge's findings on the mandatory refusal under paragraph  320(7A)
and the finding that the appellant is a persistent offender stand.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 5 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw













