
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01743/2019
                                                               HU/01746/2019
                                                               HU/01755/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 May 2021                       |On 17 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     EK
                                     GB
                                     DA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr Broachwalla, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellants.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana. The FtT did not make an anonymity
    order however UTJ Canavan made such an order on 28 May 2020 when giving
    directions for the further conduct of the appeals on the basis that the
    appeals involve child welfare issues. No party has sought to vary  that
    direction I therefore confirm that direction  as  set  out  below.  The
    relevant child is referred to as X within this decision.

    Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.

 2. The Secretary of state with permission, appeals against the decision of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Burns),  who,  in  a   determination
    promulgated on the 30 December 2019 allowed their appeals  against  the
    decision of the Respondent made on the 18 January  2019 to  refuse  the
    applications made for leave to remain.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson on
    the 1st of April 2020.

 4. Whilst this is the appeal brought on behalf of the Secretary of  State,
    for sake of convenience I intend to refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the FtT.

 5. The hearing took place on 28 May 2021, by means of Skype  for  Business
    which has been consented to and not objected to by the parties. A face-
    to-face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable  and  both
    parties agreed that all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.
    I  conducted  the  hearing  with  the  parties'  advocates.  The  first
    appellant and his former partner attended the hearing remotely so  that
    they could hear and  see  the  conduct  of  the  proceedings.  No  real
    technical problems  were  encountered  during  the  hearing  and  I  am
    satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases  by
    the chosen means.  The papers contained the bundles of documents  filed
    before the FtT and the supplementary bundle and statement of  X  (filed
    on behalf of the appellants) was sent electronically by email.

 6. I am grateful to Mr Walker and Mr Broachwalla for  their  detailed  and
    clear oral submissions.

Background:

 7. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter and  the
    determination. It can  be  summarised  as  follows.  The  1st  and  2nd
    appellant are in a subsisting partnership  and  the  3rd  appellant  is
    their minor child. The claims  made  on  behalf  of  the  2nd  and  3rd
    appellants rely upon that of the 1st appellant.  To  that  end,  it  is
    common ground that their appeals stand and fall with that  of  the  1st
    appellant.

 8. Turning to the circumstances of  the  1st  appellant,  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom illegally on 2 February 2002.

 9. He began a relationship with R in or about 2007 and they began to  live
    together. In 2007 a child X was born.

10. Whilst the relationship between the 1st appellant and R broke  down  in
    2009, he maintained a relationship with X which included X living  with
    him for periods of 6 months and sometimes for a  year  whilst  R  would
    undertake studies in the UK. Since that date X and  the  1st  appellant
    have maintained their relationships by regular  contact  during  school
    holidays and  undertaking  other  parental  duties  such  as  attending
    parents' evenings and sports days and  by  undertaking  some  financial
    responsibility for her.

11. In or about September 2014 the 1st appellant met  his  current  partner
    and in 2015 moved in to live with  him.  She  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2003 as a visitor and was  arrested  as  an  overstayer  and
    removed in October 2003. She was granted entry clearance as the  spouse
    of a settled person on 22 January 2010 until 22 April 2012 and  claimed
    to have entered the UK with this leave on the 16th of February 2010. On
    9 March 2012 she applied for indefinite leave to remain  as  a  spouse,
    but it was discovered that her prints differed from the prints used for
    her entry clearance application. On being interviewed she  admitted  to
    having a cousin make an entry clearance application. On  30th  of  July
    2012 she was convicted of obtaining leave to enter the UK by deception.
    On 6 September 2012 she was removed  from  the  UK  and  illegally  re-
    entered on a date between 6 September 2012 and 30 January  2013.  Since
    that date she has applied for leave to remain, but  those  applications
    have been refused.

12.  Since 2015 the 1st and 2nd appellant have lived together and  in  2016
    the 3rd appellant was born. They are expecting a second child.

13. In 2015 the 1st appellant applied for leave to remain under the  family
    and private life route, which was refused, and the appeal was dismissed
    on 22 October 2016. A further application was made in December 2017 but
    was rejected on 17 May 2018.

14. On 2 July 2018 he made a human rights claim in an application for leave
    to remain on the basis of his family life with his partner  and  child.
    This was refused in a decision letter dated 18 January 2019.

The respondent's decision:

15. The decision letter addressed the circumstances of all 3 appellants. It
    summarised the immigration histories  of  both  the  1st  and  the  2nd
    appellants as set out in the preceding paragraphs.

16. When considering the 1st appellant, and by reference to  the  basis  of
    his application made on family life in the UK with his partner, it  was
    noted that he was not eligible to apply as a partner, parent, or  child
    under Appendix FM because his partner was not British,  settled  or  in
    the UK with refugee or HP leave and because  he  lived  as  part  of  a
    family unit with his family members. Thus,  the  application  was  only
    considered under the private life route. At  paragraphs  10  -  17  the
    respondent set out reasons why he  could  not  meet  the  private  life
    requirements under the rules which included his length of residence  of
    16 years and 5 months and that it was not accepted that there would  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Ghana.

17. As to the circumstances of the 2nd appellant, her  immigration  history
    was summarised at paragraph 19 - 38 and for the reasons set out earlier
    her application was only considered  on  the  basis  of  private  life.
    Again, the respondent set out the reasons why the 2nd  appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE based on  her  length  of
    residence and that there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration into Ghana.

18. In respect of the 3rd appellant, his immigration history was set out at
    paragraphs 48 - 57 and whilst reference is made to him  having  entered
    the UK, it is common ground that he was born in the UK although was not
    a British citizen.

19. The relevant part of the decision letter is set out under  the  heading
    "exceptional circumstances". In that part of the decision  letter,  the
    respondent considered whether there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"
    which would render refusal a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR because it
    would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  appellants,
    relevant child, or another family member.  For  the  reasons  that  the
    respondent went on to state, it was not accepted that  there  were  any
    such circumstances that would  warrant  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain
    outside of the immigration rules.

20. In this  context,  the  Secretary  of  State  considered  the  parental
    relationship between X and the 1st appellant. However, at paragraph  63
    of the decision letter, the respondent set out that the  1st  appellant
    had failed to provide evidence of any direct  contact  between  himself
    and X and had failed to provide evidence  that  this  relationship  was
    anything above and beyond those ordinarily  expect  to  see  between  a
    child and former partner of their parent. Further reasons were set  out
    at paragraph 64. It was further noted that he  did  not  have  parental
    responsibility for X as she resided in the UK with her mother and  that
    if the 1st appellant were to leave the  UK,  X  and  her  mother  could
    reside in the UK. Thus, it  was  concluded  that  the  refusal  of  the
    application did not separate any children from their  parents  and  did
    not obligate X to leave the United Kingdom.

21. For sake of completeness, the respondent considered  the  circumstances
    of the 2nd appellant at paragraph 65 noting that her  cousin  attempted
    to user identity to gain leave and whilst the respondent was unable  to
    verify which of the 2  versions  of  the  2nd  appellant's  immigration
    history is the correct version, it did not affect the decision  in  the
    case and was not a basis for a grant of leave.

22. The 3rd appellant's circumstances were considered at paragraph 66.

23. The decision letter also set out that consideration had been  given  to
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship, and Immigration Act 2009  (duty
    regarding the welfare of children) and that this had  been  taken  into
    account in reaching the decision.

24. The application made on  behalf  of  the  3  appellants  was  therefore
    refused.

The decision of the FtTJ:

25. The Appellants appealed the decision and the  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  on  the  18  December  2019.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on the 30 December 2019 the Judge allowed  the  appeals  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8).  The FtTJ heard evidence from the 1st
    and 2nd appellant and also from R. The  judge  also  recorded  that  he
    heard from the relevant child X. From enquiries made during the hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal, X had provided a written  witness  statement
    to the FtT and it appears from the record or  minute  available  to  Mr
    Walker, that X confirmed the contents of  the  witness  statement  were
    true but that in  view  of  her  age  there  was  no  cross-examination
    conducted on behalf of the respondent.

26. Having heard the evidence, the FtTJ concluded at [5] that he found "the
    witnesses to be credible and consistent  with  the  various  supporting
    documentation." At paragraphs [5]-[9] he set out his  factual  findings
    from that evidence.

27. The FtTJ then undertook his analysis and  consideration  of  the  legal
    issues under the heading "consideration" and identified that  the  best
    interests of any relevant  children  must  be  treated  as  a  "primary
    consideration" and identified the children involved were X and the  3rd
    appellant.

28. The FtTJ then went on to address the human rights  claim  made  in  the
    context of Article 8 of the ECHR,  noting  that  the  appellant  had  a
    private and family life in the UK and that the family life extended  to
    include X.  The FtTJ adopted the structured approach  set  out  in  the
    well-known decision of Razgar and at [16] identified that the  relevant
    issue was that of proportionality. At [17] the FtTJ set out the  public
    interest considerations under section 117B, which included S 117B(6).

29. At paragraphs [18]-[19] the FtTJ  address  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant  had  a  genuine  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child. He set out the decision of R (on the  application  of
    RK) v SSHD (S117B(6)) "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031 at
    [18], and  at [19] concluded that he found that the 1st appellant and X
    had a "genuine subsisting parental relationship".  He  also  considered
    that it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK  to  go
    live in Ghana as she was born in the UK, is a British citizen in school
    and living with her mother who was herself settled in  the  UK.  Whilst
    the judge appeared  to  reach  that  conclusion  by  reference  to  the
    Immigration Rules (R-LTRPT read with EX1 of Appendix FM), the FtTJ also
    observed the same result was reached by applying section 117B(6)  as  X
    was a qualifying child. The FtTJ also found that it was "plainly in the
    best interests of X that the (1st appellant) remains in the UK".

30. When addressing the circumstances of the 2nd  and  3rd  appellants,  he
    took into account  that  the  2nd  appellant  was  not  in  a  parental
    relationship with X and that the 3rd appellant was  not  a  "qualifying
    child". He found that the 2nd appellant was born and grew  up  in  many
    years in Ghana could  return  there.  However,  the  judge  found  that
    requiring her and the 3rd appellant and the new baby to leave for Ghana
    would create a situation in which  the  1st  appellant  was  forced  to
    separate from them or forced to leave the UK with them contrary to  the
    provisions in section 117B(6) (at paragraph [20]).  At  [21]  he  found
    that if the 2nd and 3rd appellant and new baby were  forced  to  go  to
    Ghana without the 1st appellant then the 2nd appellant will be a single
    mother with 2 young children and that would mean that they would face a
    situation as described under paragraph 276 ADE  (1)  (iv)  namely  very
    significant obstacles to their integration. The judge also  found  that
    such an outcome would create an justifiably harsh consequences.

31. At [23] the FtTJ returned to the circumstances of the adult appellants.
    He found that both the 1st and 2nd appellants were in the UK unlawfully
    and that they had "little to recommend them". He further observed  that
    had it not been for the circumstances of X that he would have dismissed
    the appeals on the basis that it was reasonable for all 3 appellants to
    return to Ghana. However, having identified that the 1st appellant  met
    the requirements of section 117B (6), the conclusion  that  the  public
    interest in immigration control  was  outweighed  by  the  family  life
    considerations  and  that  refusal  was  disproportionate  applied.  He
    therefore allowed the appeals.

The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

32. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilson on
    the 1 April 2020.

33. Before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Walker relied upon the  written  grounds.
    In oral submissions he stated that this was  a  "narrow  point"  relied
    upon by the respondent.

34. The written grounds assert that the tribunal failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for its decision. In his oral submissions Mr  Walker  submitted
    that at [23]  the  judge  had  not  given  reasons  why  there  was  an
    "exceptional relationship" between the 1st appellant and X by reference
    to the  circumstances  in  which  the  2  families  lived.  He  further
    submitted that there was no adequate  reasoning  that  it  was  in  the
    child's best interests for the 1st appellant to stay in the UK.

35. The written grounds submit that the judge found that R-LTRP  read  with
    EX1 (which set out the conditions for  a  grant  of  limited  leave  to
    remain as a parent)  appeared  to  apply  to  the  1st  appellant  with
    reference to X with who he found  had  a  genuine  subsisting  parental
    relationship.

36. The grounds assert that the finding is inadequately  reasoned  and  not
    supported by the evidence and that it  was  unclear  how  the  tribunal
    reached that finding and in doing so  the  best  interest  argument  is
    "weakened and it is submitted that it would be proportionate to remove,
    and it is a fair balance with the needs of immigration control."

37. It is further submitted that the FtTJ found that it  was  in  X's  best
    interests for the 1st appellant to remain in the UK  at  paragraph  23.
    The respondent submits that  the  tribunal  had  failed  to  adequately
    reason why it would be in X's best interests  as  the  contact  between
    them is occasional and they do not live together in the same  house  or
    the same town. The appellant pays for  his  school  dinners  et  cetera
    arguably that does not  amount  to  a  parental  relationship.  It  was
    further argued that  it  was  "difficult  to  say  that  could  not  be
    maintained if the 1st appellant went back to his home country, he could
    continue to support if he chose to do so. In making these findings  the
    tribunal has erred in law."

38. Mr Broachwalla on behalf of the appellant did not provide  any  written
    submissions. However, in the documentation before  the  tribunal  there
    was a skeleton argument submitted on behalf of the appellant by counsel
    Mr Murphy who had represented the appellants at the  FtT  hearing  (see
    document dated 16 June 2020). The skeleton  argument  was  provided  in
    light of the directions given by UTJ Canavan which required the parties
    to consider whether there was a need for an oral hearing and to provide
    any further submissions.

39. I shall summarise at written document. It submits that the judge  found
    the appellants and the witnesses to be credible and that  the  decision
    was a "succinct and  well-reasoned  decision  disclosing  no  error  on
    public law grounds".

40. The skeleton argument sets out that the factual findings made  were  as
    follows:

      1) the 1st appellant "formed a close bond" with his daughter,

      2) the 1st appellant's daughter is a British citizen,

      3) she came to stay with him in his new partner in 2014 with  the  1st
         appellant's ex-partner went for an extended stay to Ghana,

      4) during school holidays she comes to  stay  with  him  and  his  new
         partner at their home,

      5) during school term the 1st appellant goes to visit X,

      6) the 1st appellant sends money to X and to help with the upkeep.

41. It is submitted that in the light of those factual findings,  the  FtTJ
    properly directed himself that the best interest of the children were a
    "primary consideration" (paragraph  10).  The  judge  at  paragraph  23
    directed himself to the immigration history of the adult appellants but
    correctly identified that their "sins" would  not  preclude  a  finding
    that the removal of the 1st appellant would breach section 117B (6). It
    is further submitted that having found the appellants' witnesses to  be
    credible, he was "bound to conclude that the 1st appellant did  have  a
    parental relationship with a qualifying child"

42. Mr Broachwalla submitted on behalf of the appellants that there was  no
    error of law disclosed  in  the  decision  which  was  a  well-reasoned
    decision having made factual findings in favour of the  appellants  and
    having concluded that  the  1st  appellant  had  a  genuine  subsisting
    parental relationship with the qualifying child.

43. By reference to the decision, Mr Broachwalla submitted  that  the  FtTJ
    had found all  the  witnesses  to  have  given  credible  evidence  and
    consistent with the documentary evidence  and  that  he  accepted  that
    separating the 1st appellant from the qualifying child would  interrupt
    the close bond. He pointed to the nature of the relationship  and  that
    is been accepted that X had lived with the  1st  appellant  whilst  her
    mother was in Ghana. In addition, the judge was entitled to  take  into
    account that they lived together during school holidays  and  vacations
    and that he would visit during the school holidays in the  alternative.
    There was other evidence including photographs of the parties  (in  the
    supplementary  bundle)  and  that  the  1st  appellant  also   provided
    financial support for X. He submitted this was all consistent with  the
    evidence provided.

44. He submitted that whilst the structure of the decision could have  been
    better, the question was whether the appellant had a genuine subsisting
    parental relationship and the judge found  that  he  did  have  such  a
    relationship.

45. The FtTJ did give reasons for this decision having cited  the  decision
    of RK at paragraph [18] and gave reasons at [19].

46. Mr Broachwalla  pointed  to  the  evidence  that  was  in  the  bundle,
    including the witness statements from each  of  the  adult  appellants,
    from the mother  of  X  and  the  witness  statement  from  X  herself.
    Reference was made to the financial outgoings referable  to  X  in  the
    bundle set out at pages 37 - 50 and also from pages 51 - 65.  Reference
    was made to the photographs showing the closeness of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and  X  and  having  found  the  1st  appellant's
    evidence credible along with the mother of X, he was entitled to accept
    that as the factual background.

47. It was further submitted that the evidence that  he  played  an  active
    role in decisions for X was supported by  the  evidence  that  attended
    parents' evenings and had pay for  school  trips  and  other  financial
    outgoings.

48. He submitted that the grounds were a  disagreement  with  the  decision
    reached but did not demonstrate any error of law.  He  pointed  to  the
    drafting  of  the  grounds  where  the  respondent  had  set  out   the
    circumstances and that  "arguably  that  does  not  amount  a  parental
    relationship" and that the use of the word "arguably" was  insufficient
    to demonstrate and error of law.

Discussion:

49. Having had the opportunity to hear the oral submissions of the  parties
    in the light of the decision of the FtTJ  and  the  evidence  that  was
    before him, I am satisfied that the FtTJ did not err in law in the  way
    that the respondent has advanced in the grounds.

50. Mr Walker submitted on behalf of the respondent that it was  a  "narrow
    point "that was advanced on behalf of the respondent. His emphasis  and
    that of the grounds is based upon the submission  that  the  FtTJ  gave
    inadequate reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant  has  a  "genuine
    subsisting parental relationship" with X and that it  was  unclear  how
    the tribunal reached the finding.

51. In this regard it is also submitted that whilst the FtTJ found that  it
    was in X's best interests for the 1st appellant to remain in the UK  at
    [23] the tribunal failed to adequately reason why it would so  be  when
    their contact is occasional and that they do not live together  in  the
    same house or the same town, and he pays  for  her  school  dinners  et
    cetera but that does not amount to a "parental relationship".

52. As Mr Broachwalla submitted, the grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent are a "reasons challenge".

53. Following Budhathoki (reasons for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  341  (IAC)
    judges need to resolve the key conflicts in  evidence  and  explain  in
    clear and brief terms their reasons for  preferring  one  case  to  the
    other so that parties can understand why they have lost.  Reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by a judge: Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
    set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC), at [10]. In my judgment the FtTJ  made
    a clear decision in which adequately reasoned findings were made and in
    accordance with the evidence.

54. The FtTJ had the opportunity to see and hear the  witnesses  give  oral
    evidence before the tribunal. This was an appeal that was  opposed  and
    therefore the witnesses before it were  subject  to  cross-examination.
    Having heard the evidence  and  considered  it  in  the  light  of  the
    documentary evidence, including the witness statements and evidence  in
    support, the FtTJ concluded at [5] that "I found the  witnesses  to  be
    credible and consistent with the various supporting documentation"  and
    then from paragraphs [6] -[9] set out his factual  findings  from  that
    evidence. The factual findings included the length of time that the 1st
    appellant and R lived together from 2006 until 2009 and that he  had  a
    "close bond" with X and that  after  separating  from  each  other,  he
    continued in contact with X. The type of contact that has  been  taking
    place is described at paragraph [9]; that X had  stayed  with  him  for
    extended periods of time when her mother went to  Ghana  in  2015/2016;
    after X moved to a different area, the 1st appellant help them move and
    that since then and during school holidays X has stayed at the 1st  and
    2nd appellants home and that contact  had  taken  place  during  school
    terms with either the 1st  appellant  visiting  X  or  vice  versa.  In
    addition, the 1st appellant makes financial contributions to her  well-
    being by sending money  to  help  with  the  upkeep,  pays  for  school
    dinners, buys clothes. This was supported by the documentation  in  the
    appellant's bundle. The FtTJ also found as a fact that X's  mother  was
    "very supportive" of the contact between X and the  1st  appellant  and
    that even though she was  heavily  pregnant,  she  travelled  with  her
    daughter to give evidence in support of the appeal.

55. None of those factual findings are challenged in the  grounds.  At  its
    highest, it is argued that the tribunal has failed to adequately reason
    why the contact between the appellant  and  X  amounts  to  a  parental
    relationship.

56. In my judgement those factual findings were open the FtTJ  to  make  on
    the evidence before him which he plainly accepted as credible  evidence
    which was consistent with the documentary  evidence  contained  in  the
    bundle. The evidence of X's mother was supportive of the nature of  the
    relationship between X and the  first  appellant  as  was  the  written
    statement for X herself. There was evidence of arrangements for contact
    between X and the appellant which included contact  during  the  school
    vacation periods and on weekends and there had been  reference  in  the
    evidence to extend periods of time where X would live  with  the  first
    appellant including periods of time when her mother  was  studying  and
    when in Ghana.

57. In  the  light  of  those  factual  findings,  the  FtTJ  undertook  an
    assessment of whether the appellant had  demonstrated  that  there  was
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship. Whilst the FtTJ  appeared
    to state that the Rules were met, at [19] the FtTJ correctly identified
    that the same result was reached by applying s117B (6).

58. The statutory provisions contained in section  117B  (6)  were  at  the
    forefront of the issues in this appeal, which states  that  the  public
    interest will not require the person's removal where that person has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a 'qualifying child',  and  it
    would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

59. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides:

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-"

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         United Kingdom."

60. The term "qualifying child" is defined  in  section  117D(1)  in  these
    terms:

         "'qualifying child' means a person who is under the age of 18 and
         who -

         (a) is a British citizen, or

         (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
         seven years or more..."

61. There is no dispute that the relevant child X is a  "qualifying  child"
    in the light of her status as a British  Citizen  and  being  under  18
    years of age.

62. When considering the issue  of  whether  there  was  a  "  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" the FtTJ addressed this in the  light
    of the decision in RK ( set out at [18]).Whilst  there  has  been  more
    recent jurisprudence than this, I am satisfied that the  FtTJ  properly
    addressed the substance of  those  decisions  in  the  context  of  the
    factual evidence before him.

63. In Secretary of State v AB (Jamaica and AO (Nigeria)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    661, the Court  of  Appeal  set  out  the  relevant  considerations  as
    follows:

         "86. Under Ground 4, Ms Patry's  primary  submission  is  that  the
             meaning of "a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child" in section 117B(6)(a) has the meaning
             that there must be some element of direct care for  the  child
             by the relevant person. In support of that submission Ms Patry
             relies on the decision of this Court in Secretary of State for
             the Home Department v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967, in
             which the main judgment was given by McFarlane LJ.

          1. In the alternative, Ms Patry submits that  the  conclusion  to
             which the UT came was one that was not reasonably open  to  it
             on the facts before it.

          1. I have already referred to the judgment of UTJ Plimmer  in SR
             (Pakistan). In  that  case  UTJ  Plimmer  also  addressed  the
             question of  whether  there  was  a  "genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship", as required by para.  (a)  of  section
             117B(6). At para. 35 UTJ Plimmer said:

                  "The  assessment  of  whether  there  is  a  'genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship' for the purposes of EX.1
                  and section 117B(6)(a) is different in form and  substance
                  to whether a parent has taken  an  'active  role'  in  the
                  child's 'upbringing' for the purposes of R-LTRPT1.1. It is
                  possible  to  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a child,  particularly  in  cases  where
                  contact has only recently resumed on a limited basis,  but
                  for that relationship not to include a parent  playing  an
                  active role in the child's upbringing. The  fact  that  SR
                  has not been involved in making important decisions in A's
                  life does not necessarily mean that he has not developed a
                  genuine and subsisting relationship. The nature and extent
                  of that relationship requires a consideration of  all  the
                  facts referred to RK at [42]. The child's  age  is  also
                  likely to be a relevant factor."

          1. Like UTJ Plimmer I also have found helpful the judgment of UTJ
             Grubb  in R  (RK)  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
             Department [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC). Although the facts of that
             case were quite different, as they concerned a grandmother and
             whether she needed to have  "parental  responsibility"  for  a
             child, what  UTJ  Grubb  said  at  paras.  42-43  contains  an
             analysis of the concept of "parental relationship" with  which
             I would respectfully agree:

                  "42. Whether a person is in a 'parental relationship' with
                  a  child  must,  necessarily,  depend  on  the  individual
                  circumstances. Those circumstances will include what  role
                  they actually play in caring for and making  decisions  in
                  relation to the  child.  That  is  likely  to  be  a  most
                  significant factor. However, it will also include  whether
                  that  relationship   arises   because   of   their   legal
                  obligations as a parent or in lieu of  a  parent  under  a
                  court order or other legal obligation. I accept that it is
                  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to   have   'parental
                  responsibility' in law for there to be a relevant  factor.
                  What is important is that  the  individual  can  establish
                  that they have taken on the role that a  'parent'  usually
                  plays in the life of their child.

                  43.  I agree  with  Mr  Mandalia's  formulation  that,  in
                  effect, an individual must  'step  into  the  shoes  of  a
                  parent' in order to establish a  'parental  relationship'.
                  If the role they play, whether as a relative or friend  of
                  the family, is as a caring relative or friend but  not  so
                  as to take on the role of a parent then it cannot be  said
                  that they have a 'parental relationship' with  the  child.
                  It is perhaps obvious to state that 'carers' are  not per
                  se 'parents'. A child may have carers who do not step into
                  the shoes of their parents but look after  the  child  for
                  specific periods of time (for example  where  the  parents
                  are travelling abroad for  a  holiday  or  family  visit).
                  Those carers may be professionally employed; they  may  be
                  relatives; or they may be friends. In all those cases,  it
                  may  properly  be  said  that  there  is  an  element   of
                  dependency between  the  child  and  his  or  her  carers.
                  However, that alone would not, in my judgment,  give  rise
                  to a 'parental relationship.'"

          1.  Returning  to  the  case  of SR  (Pakistan) I  would  also
             respectfully agree with what was said by UTJ Plimmer at  para.
             39:

                  "There are likely to be many cases in which  both  parents
                  play an important role in their child's life and therefore
                  both  have  subsisting  parental  relationships  with  the
                  child, even though the child resides with one  parent  and
                  not the other. There are also cases where the  nature  and
                  extent of contact and any break in contact  is  such  that
                  although  there  is   contact,   a   subsisting   parental
                  relationship cannot be said to have been formed. Each case
                  turns on its own facts."

64. On the factual findings made by the FtTJ,  he  reached  the  conclusion
    that the appellant did take on parental responsibility as evidenced  by
    the nature of his relationship and  his  ongoing  contribution  to  X's
    upbringing  and  development.   Whilst   the   relationship   was   not
    characterised by any legal order, it as a situation that had  been  the
    de-facto position from  the  time  they  had  lived  together  and  had
    continued post-separation and was a position that was supported by  X's
    mother. The nature of the relationship was set out in the  evidence  of
    her mother and X and evidence was given as to  the  continuing  contact
    for extended periods of  time,  the  active  steps  undertaken  by  the
    appellant including attendance at parents  evening  and  the  financial
    assistance provided for her upkeep. There  was  no  suggestion  in  the
    evidence that the extended periods where X stayed with her father  were
    by way of him acting as a carer who did not "step into the shoes  of  a
    parent" ( see description above at [89] of  AB (Jamaica))but did so  in
    the exercise of his responsibility

    The application of  S117B(6)  will  depend  on  an  assessment  by  the
    relevant court or tribunal of the facts of the particular  case  before
    it. The exercise is a  highly  fact-sensitive  one  and  one  that  was
    undertaken by the FtTJ. In the light of the factual findings  made,  it
    has not been demonstrated that the FtTJ was in error  in  reaching  the
    conclusion  that  there  was  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with X.

65. The grounds do not seek to challenge the remainder  of  S117B(6)  which
    refers to the (b) it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom." The FtTJ addressed this at [19]based on  the
    circumstances of X; that she was born in the  UK,  she  was  a  British
    Citizen, was settled in school and living with her mother  who  herself
    is settled  in  the  UK.  The  FtTJ  was  plainly  aware  of  the  poor
    immigration history of both the adult appellants set out in the summary
    of their immigration history and expressly at [23]. As the FtTJ stated,
    both appellants were in the UK unlawfully and in his view " had  little
    to recommend them". It is plain that he did not  reach  the  conclusion
    with any enthusiasm. However as explained in Runa v SSHD[2020] EWCA Civ
    514, under section 117B(6) there is no room for such an inquiry to take
    account of the conduct of the  parents:  that  is  the  effect  of  the
    decision of the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria),  which  overruled  the
    earlier decision in MM (Uganda) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617; [2016] Imm AR 954 and in that respect
    approved what had been said by Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) (as that case
    was known before it became KO (Nigeria) when it went to  the  Supreme
    Court), at para. 36.

    Under section 117B(6) the only  question  is  focussed  on  the  child.
    Having found the appellant to be in a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with X and also concluding that it would  be  unreasonable
    to expect the child to leave the UK,  there is no  need  to  go  on  to
    consider Article 8(2) more generally including the adverse  immigration
    history of the appellants.

66. The respondent does not challenge the decision made in respect  of  the
    other appellants. Against the factual  background set out by the  FtTJ,
    it was open to the FtTJ to  allow  the  appeals  of  the  other  family
    members. As the FtTJ sated , if the  second  appellant  and  the  first
    appellant's  child  were  removed  to  Ghana,  it  would  entail  their
    separation from the first appellant and would  " create a situation  in
    which E was forced to separate from  them  or  forced  to  leave  them,
    contrary to  the  provisions  of  S117B(6)  and  that  these  were  the
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences" that applied.

67. I remind myself that an appeal to the tribunal may only lie where there
    is an error of law. It is trite law that many judges will approach  the
    same set of facts very differently. The mere fact that one judge adopts
    a relatively favourable interpretation of the evidence they have  heard
    does not necessarily render that  finding  irrational,  simply  on  the
    basis that other judges, even many other judges,  may  have  approached
    the same question in a different manner.

68. I also remind myself of the observations of Floyd LJ in UT (Sri  Lanka)
    v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 at paragraph 19:

         "19. I start with two preliminary observations about the nature of,
         and approach to, and appeal to the UT. First, the right  of  appeal
         to the UT is "on any point of law arising from a decision  made  by
         the [FTT) other than an excluded decision":  Tribunal,  Courts  and
         Enforcement Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act"), section 11 (1) and  (2).  If
         the UT finds an error of law, the UT may set aside the decision  of
         the FTT and remake the decision: section 12 (1) and (2) of the 2007
         Act. If there is no  error  of  law  in  the  FTT's  decision,  the
         decision will stand. Secondly, although "error of  law"  is  widely
         defined, it is not the case that the UT is entitled to  remake  the
         decision of the FTT simply because it does not agree  with  it,  or
         because it thinks it can produce a better one.  Thus,  the  reasons
         given for considering there to be an error of  law  really  matter.
         Baroness Hale put it in this way in AH (Sudan) v SSHD at [30):

             "Appellate courts should not rush to  find  such  misdirection
             simply, because they might have reached a different conclusion
             on the facts or express themselves differently."

69. In my judgement it has not been demonstrated by the respondent that  on
    the particular factual circumstances of the appellants'  cases  and  on
    the evidence before the FtTJ that the decision was either  inadequately
    reasoned or that he failed to apply the  correct  legal  principles  in
    substance. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the decision  of  the
    FtTJ did not involve the making of a material error on a point  of  law
    so that the Upper Tribunal should set aside the decision.  I  therefore
    dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.


Signed
                                Date:  1 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

