
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01745/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 May 2019                       |On 05 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 HASHINI [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby, Counsel, instructed by Courtney Smith
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. My decision on the error of law in this case was given extempore at the
    hearing. I reserved my decision on the remaking issue.

 2. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Howard (the judge), promulgated on 27 February 2019,  in
    which he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's  decision  of  4
    December 2017, refusing her human rights  application  which  had  been
    made on 7 September 2017.   Significantly  for  the  purposes  of  this
    appeal the Appellant was aged 16 when that human rights claim was  made
    and 17 as at the date of decision.  By the time the appeal came  before
    the judge on 21 January 2019 the Appellant had attained her majority.




The judge's decision

 3. In considering the appeal, the judge first dealt with the issue of  the
    Immigration Rules, in particular paragraph 297.  Between paragraphs  11
    and 21 of his decision, the judge sets  out  a  number  of  factors  he
    regarded as  being  relevant  to  his  assessment,  cumulating  in  the
    conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not  been  able  to   meet   the
    requirements of the particular Rule in question.  Thereafter the  judge
    undertakes a wider Article 8 assessment  outside  the  context  of  the
    Rules.   Having  regard  to  factors  already  considered,  the   judge
    concludes that the Respondent's decision was proportionate in  all  the
    circumstances.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The succinct grounds of appeal make three assertions.  First, that  the
    judge failed to conduct a best interests' assessment;  second  that  in
    light of paragraph 27 of the Rules the judge had  erroneously  assessed
    the Appellant's case within the Rules as though she was an adult rather
    than still a child;  third, that the judge had made inadequate findings
    and/or had provided inadequate reasons on the Appellant's circumstances
    as a whole.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    11 April 2019.



The hearing

 6. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Sowerby  relied  on  the  grounds.  In
    particular, he submitted that the  judge  should  have  undertaken  the
    paragraph 297 assessment on the basis of the Appellant's  circumstances
    when she was still a child.  He submitted that this simply had not been
    done and in effect the judge had treated her throughout his  assessment
    as being an adult (as he acknowledged the Appellant indeed was  at  the
    date of hearing before the judge).  Mr Sowerby submitted that this  was
    a fundamental error.  He did accept, rightly in my view, that the judge
    had been entitled to deal with the Appellant as though she was an adult
    when making the wider Article 8 assessment outside the context  of  the
    Rules.

 7. Mr Tufan submitted that  there  were  no  errors.   He  indicated  that
    paragraph 27 of the Rules acted as a protective mechanism, as it  were,
    which meant that an applicant would not be refused or have their appeal
    dismissed solely on the basis that they had attained  majority  by  the
    time of a decision by either the Respondent or the First-tier Tribunal.
     However, he submitted that this did not mean that a judge was bound to
    consider the individual circumstances as though they were still a minor
    if this  was  not  in  fact  the  case  as  at  the  date  of  hearing.
    Alternatively, Mr Tufan submitted that even if there  had  been  errors
    these were on the facts of this particular case immaterial.



Decision on error of law

 8. In my view the judge has  materially  erred  in  law.   Taking  what  I
    consider to be a holistic and sensible approach to  the  decision,  and
    reading it in a fair manner, I conclude that what is said in paragraphs
    11 to 21 of the judge's decision indicates a strong possibility that he
    had in fact assessed the Appellant's case within  the  context  of  the
    Rules on the basis that she was an adult.  In other words, in light  of
    her situation as at the date of hearing.

 9. It is true that he has referred to her age  when  the  application  was
    made (that being 16). However, it is the case that he consistently uses
    the present tense when referring to her situation. In paragraph  13  he
    expressly refers to her  as  an  "18  year  old  woman"  and  again  in
    paragraph 19 makes a clear  reference  to  her  current  circumstances.
    Although I accept that the case of Mundeba (s.55  and  para  297(i)(f))
    [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC) has been referred to in paragraph 18,  this  is
    in my view outweighed by all of the other references in the surrounding
    paragraphs.

10. In my view paragraph 27 of the Rules operates not simply as a technical
    or protective mechanism in respect of an individual's age when applying
    as a child for entry clearance: this would be too narrow a reading  and
    would render a consideration of the case in the context  of  the  Rules
    artificial if the substantive criteria under  the  particular  Rule  in
    question (here paragraph 297) were not to be assessed in light  of  the
    circumstances of the individual as a child.  It  seems  to  me  that  a
    contrary interpretation would render paragraph 297 as being  of  little
    or no utility.

11. The judge's error is  in  my  view  material  because  the  Appellant's
    circumstances when she was still a child could, if  properly  assessed,
    have made a significant difference to the outcome of  her  case  within
    the context of the Rules.  Further, a satisfaction of the relevant Rule
    is of course extremely important in the  overall  determination  of  an
    Article 8 claim (see for example TZ (Pakistan) [2018] ECWA Civ).



Remaking the decision in this appeal

12. In remaking the decision, I have had regard to the  evidence  contained
    in the Appellant's bundle that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    together with the submissions made by Mr Sowerby and Mr Tufan.

13. In summary, Mr Sowerby's submissions were as  follows.  The  judge  had
    found the evidence to  be  reliable,  and  there  was  nothing  new  to
    displace that view. The Appellant's mother had in fact died only a  day
    after the Appellant received her GCSE results. There was  a  good  bond
    between the  Appellant  and  her  aunt  in  the  United  Kingdom:  this
    relationship had subsisted both before  and  after  the  death  of  the
    Appellant's mother. The living arrangements for the Appellant with  her
    great-aunt had only been temporary in nature. In addition,  the  great-
    aunt suffered from ill-health. Mr Sowerby emphasised the sexual assault
    that the Appellant had suffered on a bus  journey.  He  submitted  that
    there  were  indeed  serious  and  compelling  reasons  rendering   the
    Appellant's exclusion from United Kingdom undesirable.

14. Mr Tufan essentially relied on the points he had made  when  contending
    that there was no error of law in the judge's decision. In short terms,
    the facts of this case were insufficient to meet the relevant test.



Findings of fact

15. I find that the evidence before me is  reliable.  In  addition  to  the
    judge's view of it, there has been no  challenge  forthcoming  from  Mr
    Tufan before me.

16. On the basis of the evidence, I make the following findings of fact.

17. I find that the Appellant's father had never played an active  role  in
    her life. I find that her mother tragically passed away 29 March  2017,
    a day after the Appellant had received her exam results. The  Appellant
    then went to live with her  great-aunt,  with  whom  I  find  that  she
    continues to  reside  up  to  the  present  day.  I  accept  that  this
    arrangement was not thought of as being a permanent one. It is  however
    the case that the Appellant has been able to continue living with  this
    individual from approximately March 2017, throughout the  rest  of  her
    minority, and beyond her 18th birthday.

18. There is no suggestion in the evidence that the accommodation at  which
    the Appellant was living whilst she was still a minor was sub- standard
    or in any other way represented a risk to her well-being. I  find  that
    the property was rented, and that necessary payments were being made.

19. I find that despite the horrible circumstances of her  mother's  death,
    the Appellant went on to study her a-levels. That is very much  to  her
    credit.

20. On the basis of the doctor's letter at 61 of the Appellant's bundle,  I
    accept that the  Appellant's  great-aunt  suffered  from  diabetes  and
    neuralgia. It appears as though the great-aunt was unable to  undertake
    housework and depended on others  for  certain  aspects  of  her  daily
    routine. The evidence  does  not  show  that  the  great-aunt  actually
    required residential care at the material time, or that  the  Appellant
    was forced to act as a full-time carer.

21. I find that the Appellant was the victim of  a  sexual  assault  whilst
    making a bus journey alone. I do not have  details  of  what  precisely
    happened, but I am willing  to  accept  that  this  was  a  very  nasty
    experience.

22. I turn to the Appellant's relationship with  her  aunt  in  the  United
    Kingdom. I find that the aunt came  to  this  country  in  2003.  I  am
    willing to accept that the  Appellant  and  her  aunt  have  maintained
    contact over time, and it is likely that  this  contact  has  increased
    since the death of the Appellant's mother in 2017. I  accept  that  the
    Appellant aunt has provided financial support to her overtime.

23. I have no doubt that the  Appellant's  aunt  is  willing  and  able  to
    provide maintenance accommodation, and indeed a very  loving  home,  to
    her were she could to come to the United Kingdom.



Conclusions

24. I now apply my findings of fact to the issue  arising  under  paragraph
    297(i)(f) of the Rules, namely whether, at the time of the Respondent's
    decision and then during the remainder  of  her  minority,  there  were
    "serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations"  making  the
    Appellant's exclusion from the United Kingdom undesirable.

25. I take full account of the guidance set out in Mundeba. I direct myself
    that the phrase "serious and compelling" represents a high threshold.

26. For the reasons set out below, and whilst wishing  to  express  a  good
    deal of sympathy for the Appellant, I have concluded that she is unable
    to show that there  were  "serious  and  compelling"  family  or  other
    considerations in her particular case.

27. It is of course the case that the  Appellant  had  suffered  a  serious
    bereavement through the loss of her mother in March 2017. One can  only
    have sympathy for her. It is far from  my  intention  to  diminish  the
    sense of loss that the Appellant must have experienced  following  this
    event. However, it is the case that she was able to go  and  live  with
    her   great-aunt   inappropriate   accommodation,   receive   financial
    assistance from her aunt in the United Kingdom, and was  then  able  to
    continue on with her studies. Whilst of course every  individual  deals
    with difficult circumstances in their own particular way, there  is  no
    medical evidence of mental health problems having been suffered by  the
    Appellant. There is no evidence of neglect.

28. In terms of the Appellant's emotional needs, I would  certainly  accept
    that the aunt in the United Kingdom would have been able to provide for
    these. Yet the evidence before me does not show that there was  a  lack
    of emotional support for the Appellant in Sri  Lanka  at  the  relevant
    time which constituted serious and compelling circumstances.

29. I have taken account of  the  great-aunt's  health.  It  has  not  been
    suggested that the Appellant was having to act as a carer to the extent
    that this inappropriately impinged on her own life. I have  found  that
    the great-aunt did not require residential care at the  time  and  this
    has been borne out by the fact that the  Appellant  continues  to  live
    with her.

30. I have found that the Appellant's aunt had been away from Sri Lanka for
    many years prior to the time with which I  am  now  concerned.  I  have
    accepted that contact was maintained and I would  conclude  that  there
    clearly existed a  bond  between  the  two  which  is  likely  to  have
    strengthened following the death of the Appellant's mother. Having said
    that, taking the evidence as a whole, I would  not  conclude  that  the
    aunt had assumed the role of a substitute mother, as it were. Intending
    no disrespect to the aunt whatsoever, she clearly had her own family in
    the United Kingdom and was unable to have travelled out  to  Sri  Lanka
    and take on a caring role for the Appellant. Quite admirably,  she  was
    providing financial assistance to her niece, which in  turn  helped  to
    ensure that the latter was living in what I conclude to be  appropriate
    circumstances.

31. In respect of the assault on the bus, I reiterate the  fact  that  this
    would have been a nasty experience for the Appellant. There is, though,
    merit in Mr Tufan's submission (made in an  appropriate  fashion)  that
    the incident was isolated in nature did  not  represent  a  significant
    ongoing risk to the Appellant in terms of repetition. In a sense, it is
    something that could have occurred in this country almost others around
    the world. Nonetheless, I take this into account as a relevant factor.

32. I have no hesitation in concluding that the Appellant very much  wanted
    to join her aunt United Kingdom and that her aunt wished this to be so.
    Those feelings are entirely understandable. They do not, of themselves,
    represent a serious and compelling reason.

33. I take into account the fact that the Appellant had of course been born
    and brought up in Sri Lanka and, as at the relevant  time,  had  strong
    educational and social ties in that country. Whilst in no way decisive,
    these connections represent a relevant  factor  (see  paragraph  38  of
    Mundeba).

34. Taking all relevant  considerations  into  account  and  viewing  these
    cumulatively, I conclude that the Appellant's  best  interests  (whilst
    still a minor) did not lie in leaving her home country  and  coming  to
    reside with her aunt in the United Kingdom.

35. If I were wrong about that and the Appellant's best interests had  lain
    in coming to the United Kingdom, I would in any event conclude that  on
    the facts of this case they were not particularly strong.

36. On a cumulative evaluation of the relevant factors in  this  case,  and
    even if her best  interests  were  in  play  and  acted  as  a  primary
    consideration, the Appellant's circumstances at the material time  were
    insufficient to meet the high threshold.

37. I turn now to consider the Appellant's situation as at the date of  the
    hearing before me. Without intending any disrespect, I  can  deal  with
    this issue relatively briefly. In a sense, everything that I have  said
    in relation to the paragraph 297 issue, above, applies here,  but  with
    the additional factor that the Appellant is now  that  much  older  and
    has, on the evidence before me, continued to live her life in Sri Lanka
    at the very least to a reasonable level. There is certainly nothing  to
    indicate that her circumstances have significantly  deteriorated  since
    becoming an adult. It is clear that her support mechanisms are still in
    place and that  her  living  circumstances  are  appropriate.  She  has
    successfully continued with her education.

38. I conclude that the Appellant cannot show a sufficiently strong Article
    8 claim in order to succeed outside the context of the Rules.

39. In light of the above, the Appellant's appeal must be dismissed.



Additional comment

40. Whilst what I now  say  has  paid  no  material  part  in  my  remaking
    decision, it is in my view appropriate to state some observations about
    my conclusions on the First-tier Tribunal's error of law.

41. It is right to say that on reflection I have some misgivings about  the
    correctness of my error of law decision. In particular, I am now  aware
    of a judgement from the Court of Appeal which, whilst not on all  fours
    with the present case, would nonetheless appear to have a  considerably
    relevant  bearing  on  the  question  of  the  relevant  date  for  the
    assessment of a claim under the Rules in which a  child  applicant  has
    attained their majority between the date of  the  application  and  the
    date of the hearing of their appeal.

42. In SO (Nigeria) [2007] EWCA  Civ  76,  the  Court  was  concerned  with
    paragraph 298 of the Rules (dealing with  in-country  applications  for
    leave to remain by a dependent child). The Court was deeply unimpressed
    with arguments put forward by the appellant in that case to the  effect
    that a Tribunal was bound to consider the claim made by  an  individual
    when they were still a minor as though they  still  held  that  status,
    notwithstanding the fact that they were an adult by the time an  appeal
    was heard.

43. With reference to section 85(4) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (prior to its amendment by the Immigration  Act  2014),
    the Court stated:

          1. With respect  to  Mr Ehiribe's  ingenuity,  in  my  view  his
             interpretation of Section 85(4)  is  simply  unarguable.  The
             adjudicator was bound to apply the law as enshrined in statute
             and the statutory regulations. There is no  ambiguity  in  the
             statute; the words are clear. Whatever the guidance issued  by
             the department to  its  officers  and  whatever  the  generous
             interpretation given to that guidance by the Tribunal,  it  is
             absolutely plain that the Tribunal is expressly authorised  to
             consider evidence about any matter which it thinks relevant to
             the substance of  the  decision,  including  evidence  arising
             after  the  date  of  the  decision.  Nothing  restricts   the
             operation of Section 85(4) to appeals in asylum cases.


          1. The Tribunal rightly pointed out the absurdity if Mr Ehiribe's
             argument prevailed. Paragraph 298 is  directed  at  dependent
             children. On his analysis a tribunal faced with  an  applicant
             who by the time of the appeal was married,  with  children  of
             their own and living an independent life, would have to ignore
             reality and treat the Appellant as if he or  she  was  leading
             the life of a dependent child. That cannot have been  and,  in
             my view, was not  Parliament's  intention.  The  age,  growing
             maturity and independence of an applicant must be relevant  to
             the substance  of  a  decision  concerned  with  "serious  and
             compelling reasons" as to  whether  the  applicant  should  be
             allowed to stay as a dependent relative, which this case is. I
             fail to see, therefore, how the Adjudicator could have made  a
             determination without considering all that had happened  since
             the application had been made.


          1.  In  any  event  if  the  Tribunal's  interpretation  of   the
             instructions to immigration officers is correct, about which I
             have my doubts,  it  is  also  clear  on  my  reading  of  the
             Adjudicator's determination that she did not rely solely  upon
             the age of two of  the  Appellants  by  the  time  the  matter
             reached her. She relied upon a number  of  factors.  She  took
             into account all the circumstances. These Appellants were  all
             born and brought up in Nigeria. They had a mother  there  with
             whom  they  have  lived  all  their  lives  until   relatively
             recently. The Adjudicator found, as she was entitled to  find,
             that the mother is willing to offer them a home there. At  the
             time of the appeal two of the Appellants  were  over  eighteen
             and one over the age of sixteen. If they did not want to  live
             in Nigeria with their mother, the Adjudicator found they  have
             another option. The first Appellant could become the  head  of
             the household or that they can make a  proper  application  to
             move to this country from Nigeria with the assistance of their
             sponsors.


          1. It follows from those observations that, for my part, I  would
             therefore agree with the  Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal's
             conclusion that  there  was  here  no  error  of  law  in  the
             Adjudicator's taking into account the fact  that  two  of  the
             Appellants had reached the age of eighteen by the time of  her
             determination or in her emphasising the point in  the  way  in
             which she did. I am  mindful  of  the  basis  of  Latham LJ's
             decision to grant permission to appeal on this ground. He  was
             concerned about the effect of delay which is not  attributable
             to the Appellants where the passage of time turns  out  to  be
             crucial. I readily accept that  tribunals  will  give  anxious
             scrutiny to the passage of time between an application made by
             a child and an adjudication; if for no other reason than  what
             has happened in the course of that delay may well be  relevant
             for any Article 8 claim. But, Mr Ehiribe was not able to point
             to an administrative delay of any great significance  in  this
             case for which the respondent Secretary of State could be held
             responsible. There was only  a  matter  of  approximately  six
             months between application and the decision. For an  important
             decision of this kind, affecting  the  lives  of  three  young
             people, that cannot be described in my view  as  an  excessive
             delay; certainly not a delay of the kind referred  to  in  the
             decisions put before us by Mr Ehiribe. With respect to him, in
             my view this appeal was an attempt to appeal the  findings  of
             fact made on the evidence by the Adjudicator dressed up as  an
             appeal on the law.


44. The views of the Court bear real relevance  to  present  case  for  two
    primary  reasons.  First,  they  highlight  an   artificiality   of   a
    consideration of the claim of an adult on the basis that they are still
    a child. Second, after the amendments made  to  the  2002  Act  by  the
    Immigration  Act  2014,  section  85(4)  does  no  longer  contains   a
    restriction in entry clearance  cases  relating  to  the  circumstances
    pertaining as at the date of the  Respondent's  decision.  The  present
    case is of course governed by the amended section 85(4). Thus, what  is
    said in SO (Nigeria) now has much more force than would have  been  the
    case before the legislative amendments.

45. It may be that what I said in my error of law decision is incorrect. It
    seems to me as though the interplay between paragraph 27 and 297 of the
    Rules and  section  85(4)  of  the  2002  Act  may  require  particular
    consideration in an appropriate case.

46. I have carefully considered whether  I  should  invite  representations
    from the parties on SO (Nigeria) and my observations  set  out  in  the
    preceding paragraphs. However, as I have concluded that  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed in her appeal even on my original view  of  the  correct
    legal approach as expressed in  my  error  of  law  decision,  such  an
    exercise would be of  no  material  value:  it  could  not  affect  the
    outcome. Indeed, if I am  wrong  in  respect  of  my  approach  to  the
    Appellant's  case  and  the  correct  line  is  that  discussed  in  SO
    (Nigeria), the Appellant's appeal would certainly fail in any event.



Notice of Decision

I conclude that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  material
error of law and I have set it aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 3 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

