
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01399/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote means)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24th November 2020                 |On 3rd December 2020            |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                erika tesoro
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not in attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a decision promulgated on 30 June 2020, UTJ Lindsley found an  error
    of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul promulgated on
    24 December 2018.  A copy of that decision is appended to this  one  at
    Annex A.

 2. Directions were issued by the Upper Tribunal on 24 August 2020 for  the
    remake of this appeal to be heard by remote  video  means,  albeit  the
    Respondent indicated on  8  October  2020  that  the  appeal  could  be
    determined on the papers as no further submissions were to be  made  on
    her behalf.  The appeal was however listed for remote oral  hearing  in
    the light of the need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-
    19 and on the  basis  that  the  appeal  could  be  fairly  and  justly
    determine in this way.  The hearing  proceeded  via  remote  Skype  for
    Business with no apparent technical issues at the time.

 3. At the hearing, the Respondent was represented but no  one  had  joined
    the Skype invite on behalf of the Appellant when the meeting was opened
    at 10am, at the listed start time of 10:30am or shortly thereafter when
    I  commenced  the  hearing;  or  at  anytime  in   between.    In   the
    circumstances of the case where the Respondent had already indicated no
    further submissions would be made, I asked Mr Melvin if the appeal  was
    opposed given the findings from the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the Appellant met the requirements for a grant  of  entry
    clearance under paragraph  301  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  there
    appeared to be no countervailing public interest  matters  to  mitigate
    against allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 4. Mr Melvin indicated the Respondent's agreement that the  appeal  should
    be allowed on the basis of the findings made that the Appellant met the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and in the absence of  any  other
    public interest factors which would adversely affect the  Appellant  in
    the proportionality balancing exercise.

 5. On this basis, I indicated that the appeal would be  allowed  on  human
    rights  grounds  with  a  written  decision  to   follow.    In   these
    circumstances, I did not request that any further inquiries  were  made
    of the Appellant or her representatives as to their attendance  at  the
    hearing as no submissions were required on her behalf.

 6. After the conclusion of the oral hearing,  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    contacted the Upper Tribunal, stating that they were still  held  in  a
    lobby for the Skype hearing and  asked  about  the  current  situation.
    There had been no indication of this at the  time  of  the  hearing  to
    myself, my clerk or Mr Melvin.  On the basis that the appeal was to  be
    allowed in favour of the Appellant, I  did  not  consider  any  further
    action was required in relation to the hearing other than  asking  that
    the Appellant's  solicitors  be  updated  as  to  the  above  with  the
    indication that this written decision would follow.

Findings and reasons

 1. There is no longer any dispute in this appeal that the Appellant  meets
    the requirements of paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules for a  grant
    of entry clearance and in  those  circumstances,  there  is  no  public
    interest in refusing her application for  entry  clearance.   No  other
    matters which could be adverse to the Appellant in the  proportionality
    balancing exercise were raised or relied upon by the Respondent  and  I
    find that there are none.   As  a  result,  I  find  that  there  is  a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right to respect for
    family life contrary to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights and her appeal is therefore allowed on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

As in the decision promulgated on 30 June 2020, the making of  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  a  material  error  of
law.  As such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and remade as follows.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed    G  Jackson                            Date          24th  November
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

Annex A: Decision on Error of Law

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the  Philippines  born  on  28th  January
    2001. She applied for entry clearance to come to the UK as the child of
    a person with limited leave to remain in the UK on 26th September  2018
    when she was 17 years old. The application for  entry  clearance  as  a
    dependent child was refused on 24th December 2018.  Her appeal  against
    that decision was dismissed  on  human  rights  grounds  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge NM Paul in  a  determination  promulgated  on  the  16th
    October 2019.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    10th February 2020 on all grounds on the basis that it is arguable that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding that  the  appellant  did  not
    succeed under paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules and in  proceeding
    in an arguably unfair way in relying on an issue  (that  the  appellant
    was now 18 years old) which was not raised in the decision letter or at
    the hearing  without  giving  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  make
    submissions.

 3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19
    and with regard to the overriding object set out in the Upper  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules to decide matters fairly  and  justly  directions  were
    sent out to the parties by email on 7th   April  2020  seeking  written
    submissions on the assertion  of  an  error  of  law  with  a  view  to
    determining that issue on the papers, and giving an opportunity for any
    party who felt that a hearing was necessary in the interests of justice
    to make submissions on that issue too. An email was received  from  the
    appellant's solicitors dated  8th  April  2020  in  response  to  these
    directions stating that they wished to rely on the grounds  of  appeal,
    but nothing has been received from the respondent.

 4. The matter came before me to determine whether it is in  the  interests
    of justice to decide this  matter  without  a  hearing  and  if  so  to
    determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law. I find that
    it is appropriate to determine whether there is an error of law on  the
    papers given  that  neither  party  has  put  forward  any  submissions
    objecting to proceeding in this way.

    Submissions - Error of Law

 5. In the grounds of appeal it is argued in summary  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in finding that the  appellant  did  not  qualify
    under paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules on the basis that she  had
    now become 18 years old, and thus is an adult, even though at the  time
    of application she had been a minor. This was said  to  be  a  material
    error in light of the findings that the sponsor had sole responsibility
    for the appellant, and so  can  fulfil  all  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rule at paragraph 301, and given that paragraph 27  of  the
    Immigration Rules states that an entry clearance application under this
    provision will be considered with reference to the age at the  date  of
    application where an applicant  is  under  18  years  at  the  date  of
    application but is 18 years at the date of  decision.  Further,  it  is
    argued,  the reliance on the appellant being  18  years  old  made  the
    hearing procedurally unfair as the sponsor was not given an opportunity
    to address the Tribunal on this matter  which  was  not  at  any  stage
    raised by the respondent and  was  not  raised  by  the  judge  at  the
    hearing. In addition, the First-tier Tribunal has  also  erred,  it  is
    argued, as it has not been recognised that  the  case  law  holds  that
    there is no hard cut off when a child passes  from  being  a  minor  to
    becoming an 18 year old adult.

 6. There is no Rule 24 notice and no submissions are put  forward  by  the
    respondent in relation to the issue of error of law in response to  the
    directions.

    Conclusions - Error of Law

 7. The First-tier Tribunal concluded on the evidence that the sponsor, the
    appellant's mother, has sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant,  see
    particularly paragraphs 15 and 16 of the decision. However, the  First-
    tier Tribunal decides that this is not relevant as the appellant is  no
    longer a child as she has now turned 18 years old, and decides that the
    appellant cannot succeed in her appeal without reference  to  the  fact
    that she was entitled to succeed in her entry clearance application.

 8. I find that this was a clear error of law as the proper approach lawful
    approach should have been  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules at paragraph 301  as  she  was  a
    person seeking limited leave to enter with a view to settlement as  the
    child of apparent given limited to leave to enter or remain with a view
    to settlement  and her parent (who has limited leave  with  a  view  to
    settlement) has sole responsibility for her. This is  because  becoming
    18 years old after making the application is not a  bar  to  fulfilling
    the requirements of the Rules due to operation of paragraph 27  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent did not  put  any  other  matter  in
    issue in the appellant not being able to meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules at paragraph 301 except that of sole  responsibility.
    It was also, I find, procedurally unfair, not to have raised this issue
    with the appellant so that submissions could have been made to  address
    the concern of the Judge.

 9. As this is a human rights' appeal the fact that the appellant satisfies
    the Immigration  Rules  for  entry  is  not  the  end  of  the  appeal.
    Consideration  must  be  given  as  to  whether  the   refusal   is   a
    proportionate interference with her right to respect  for  family  life
    with her mother. But the fact that she qualifies for entry  to  the  UK
    under the Immigration Rules means that there is no public  interest  in
    her not being allowed to enter to weigh against her  right  to  respect
    for her family life relationship with  her mother, which  is  found  by
    the First-tier Tribunal in the decision to be a  "very  close  maternal
    bond"  and  a  "close  family  relationship".  The  decision  is   also
    irrational, and therefore errs in law, when, in the final paragraph  20
    of the decision, it holds  that  there  is  no  interference  with  the
    appellant's family life by denying her entry to  the  UK.  Clearly  not
    being able to live with her mother is an interference  with  her  close
    family relationship.

10. I find that the above errors are material one, as not appreciating  the
    lack of  public  interest  in  denying  the  appellant  entry,  as  the
    Immigration Rules are the respondent's statement  of  what  is  in  the
    public interest in immigration matters  and  the  appellant  meets  the
    Immigration  Rules,  means  that  the  proportionality  exercise  under
    Article 8 ECHR is not properly conducted.

11. I preserve the finding that the sponsor has sole responsibility for the
    appellant and thus that she fulfils the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules under paragraph 301, and the finding that she has a close  family
    relationship with her mother. The remaking of the appeal will therefore
    consist of submissions on the  proportionality  of  refusing  to  grant
    entry clearance under Article 8 ECHR.




    Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the
         appeal but preserve the findings as set out at paragraph 11  above.



      3. I adjourn the remaking of the appeal.



Directions - Remaking

1.   Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and  the  UTIAC  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of the view that
    the forthcoming hearing in this appeal might properly be held remotely,
    by Skype for Business, on a date to be fixed within the period June  to
    September 2020 or by way of written submissions.

2.   No later than 14 days after these directions  are  sent  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal (the date of sending is on the  covering  letter  or  covering
    email):

    (a)  the parties shall file and serve by email  any  objection  to  the
         hearing being a remote hearing at all/by  the  proposed  means;  in
         either case giving reasons; and

    (b)  without prejudice to the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  any  such
         objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

         (i)  Skype contact details and a contact telephone number  for  any
         person who wishes to  attend  the  hearing  remotely,  which  might
         include the advocates, the original  appellant  or  an  instructing
         solicitor; and

         (ii) dates to avoid in the period specified.

3.   If there is an objection to a remote hearing, the Upper  Tribunal  will
    consider the submissions, including any that instead the matter can  be
    resolved by written submissions, and will make any  further  directions
    considered necessary.

4.   If there is no objection to a remote hearing, the following  directions
    supersede any previous case management directions and shall apply.

    i.   The parties shall have regard to the Presidential  Guidance  Note:
    No 1 2020: Arrangements During the  Covid-19  Pandemic  when  complying
    with these directions.

    ii.  The parties shall file with the Upper Tribunal and serve  on  each
    other (a) an electronic skeleton  argument  and  (b)  any  rule  15(2A)
    notice to be relied upon within 28 days of  the  date  this  notice  is
    sent.

    iii. The appellant shall be responsible for compiling  and  serving  an
    agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both parties can rely  on
    at the hearing. The bundle should be compiled and served in  accordance
    with the Presidential Guidance Note [23-26] at least 7 days before  the
    hearing.

5.   The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these  directions,  giving
    reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.

6.   Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may  be
    sent by, or attached to, an  email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
    reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the  subject
    line. Attachments must not exceed 15 MB. This address is not  generally
    available for the filing of documents.

7.   Service on the Secretary  of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
    original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by  use
    of any address apparent from the service of these directions.


Signed   Fiona Lindsley    10th June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


