
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/01068/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 January 2019                             |On 8 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MOUAYED MANMOUN BASHIR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Bayoumi, instructed by Qualified Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Povey) allowing the appeal of the respondent (hereafter
    "the claimant") against a decision of the Secretary of State dismissing
    his human rights claim under Art 8 following a decision to  deport  the
    claimant taken on 5 January 2017 on the basis of his criminality.

 2. In allowing the claimant's appeal, Judge Povey found  that  the  public
    interest did not require his deportation because he fell with Exception
    1 in s.117C(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the
    "NIA Act 2002").  Section 117C(3) states that:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies".

 3. Exception 2, set out in s.117C(5), is  not  relevant  to  this  appeal.
    Section 117C(4) sets out Exception 1 in the following terms:

         "Exception 1 applies where -

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported".

 4. The claimant, who is a Sudanese national, was born on  7  August  1991.
    He came to the UK, with entry clearance, on 13 April 2001 when he was 9
    years, 8 months  and  6  days  old.   At  the  date  of  Judge  Povey's
    determination, namely 27 April 2018,  the  claimant  was  26  years,  8
    months and 20 days old.

 5. In  his  determination,  Judge  Povey  accepted  that  Exception  1  in
    s.117C(4) applied.  His reasons are at paras 23-24 as follows:

         "23. Exception 1 (section 1117C(4) (sic) of the NIA  Act  2002  and
             reflected in Paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules)  is,  in
             my judgment, met by  the  Appellant.   He  has  been  lawfully
             resident in the UK (save for a period of three months in 2005)
             since the age of nine.  He is now 26.   In  my  judgment,  his
             criminal convictions do not undermine his social and  cultural
             integration into UK society, a society he  has  grown  up  in,
             been educated in, worked in and spent his whole adult life  to
             date in.  He works, cares for his mother and volunteers in the
             community.  His recent criminal behaviour was, in part, caused
             by his own drug addiction,  an  addiction  which  he  has  now
             ended.  It is that length of time in the UK, the lack  of  any
             background in or  knowledge  of  Sudan  (as  confirmed  by  Dr
             Bekalo), the lack  of  a  common  language  and  his  cultural
             integration into UK society that constitute  very  significant
             obstacles to his integration into Sudan.

         24.  For that reason, the public  interest  does  not  require  the
             Appellant's deportation.  That  weighs  very  heavily  in  his
             favour.  His  2016  convictions  were  for  serious  offences.
             However, as evidenced by the various criminal justice reports,
             the roots of his  behaviour  lay  in  his  addiction  and  the
             financial cost of maintaining his drug  habit.   The  risk  of
             further related offending has been significantly  lessened  by
             the Appellant's drug use rehabilitation whilst in prison.   As
             no other basis for his deportation was  advanced,  I  conclude
             that the Respondent's decision to deport the  Appellant  is  a
             disproportionate interference when weighed against his private
             life in the UK".

 6.  The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  against  Judge  Povey's  decision
    challenging each of his findings under the three limbs in s.117C(4)(a)-
    (c).

 7. In summary, Mr Howells (adopting the grounds of appeal) submitted  that
    the judge had miscalculated the claimant's period of "lawful residence"
    in the UK and that he had not spent "most of [his] life" in the UK.  Mr
    Howells relied upon a chronology which he produced at the hearing.   He
    submitted that, at the date of Judge Povey's decision, the claimant was
    26 years, 8 months and 20 days old.  In order to meet  the  requirement
    in s.117C(4)(a) he had to have been lawfully resident in the UK for  at
    least thirteen years, four months and ten days.  On  a  calculation  of
    his lawful residence in the UK, he had only been lawfully resident  for
    thirteen years,  three  months  and  fourteen  days.   The  judge  had,
    therefore, been wrong to find that the  claimant  had  spent  "most  of
    [his] life" (i.e. more than half his life) lawfully in the UK.

 8.  In  addition,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  in  concluding  that  the
    requirement  in  s.117C(4)(b)  that  the  claimant  was  "socially  and
    culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom",  the  judge  had  failed
    properly to take into account his five convictions  for  nine  offences
    between 2010 and 2016 which  were  the  antithesis,  he  submitted,  of
    "integration" into the UK.

 9. Finally, Mr Howells submitted that in finding that there would be "very
    significant obstacles" to the claimant's  integration  into  Sudan,  so
    that s.117C(4)(c) applied, the judge had failed to give  clear  reasons
    and properly taken into account that the claimant had previously  lived
    there, visited Sudan to attend his grandfather's funeral  when  he  was
    17, and had an uncle there with  whom  he  was  in  contact.   He  also
    submitted that the judge failed to take into account that, in accepting
    that the claimant did not speak Arabic, he claimed to be the  carer  of
    his mother in the UK and that she had given her evidence at the hearing
    in Arabic.  Mr Howells accepted, however, that there  was  no  evidence
    before the judge as to why  she  chose  to  give  evidence  through  an
    interpreter.  Mr Howells  readily  acknowledged  that  the  expert,  Dr
    Bekalo, had stated in his  expert  report  that  the  claimant  "barely
    speaks and understands Arabic".  He did not pursue this point with  any
    force, as a consequence.

10. It is plain that Judge Povey allowed the claimant's appeal on the basis
    that the claimant fell within Exception 1 in s.117C(4) of the  NIA  Act
    2002.  In para 23, he made the  relevant  factual  findings  under  the
    three limbs of Exception 1.  At para 24 he  stated  that:  "[f]or  that
    reason,  the  public  interest  does  not   require   the   appellant's
    deportation".

11. Ms Bayoumi, who represented  the  claimant,  accepted  the  chronology,
    setting out the claimant's immigration status over time, prepared by Mr
    Howells, was accurate.  It is clear that the claimant entered the UK on
    13 April 2001 with valid entry clearance and, following its  subsequent
    extension and unsuccessful appeal, that leave (continued by s.3C of the
    Immigration Act 1971) ended on 6 April 2004.  That is a period  of  two
    years, ten months and 23 days.  The claimant thereafter  did  not  have
    leave to remain until he was granted indefinite leave to  remain  on  6
    December 2007.  That leave continued until Judge Povey's decision on 27
    April 2018 (which it was accepted before me was  the  correct  date  to
    determine the period of the claimant's 'lawful residence').  That is  a
    further period of ten years, four months and 21 days.   That  makes  in
    total a period of 'lawful residence' of thirteen  years,  three  months
    and fourteen days.  For completeness, I should add that it was accepted
    before me that, in the light of the Upper Tribunal's decision in Tirabi
    (Deportation: "lawfully resident: s.5(1)) [2018]  UKUT  199  (IAC),  in
    calculating  the  claimant's  period  of   'lawful   residence'   under
    s.117C(4)(a) the invalidation provisions of s.5(1) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971 were to be ignored even though a deportation order was made on
    5 January 2017.

12. The phrase "most of C's life" in s.117C(4)(a) means that the  claimant,
    in order to fall within its terms, must establish that he has  been  in
    "lawful residence" for "more than half" of his  life  (see  SSHD  v  SC
    (Jamaica)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2112).    As   Mr   Howells'   chronology
    demonstrates, the claimant could not establish that.  His total  period
    of lawful residence was only thirteen years, three months and  fourteen
    days which fell short of at least half of his age at the  date  of  the
    judge's decision, namely 26 years, 8 months and 20  days.   It  is  not
    clear why Judge Povey accepted that he had been  lawfully  resident  in
    the UK for the entirety of his residence,  apart  from  a  three  month
    period in 2005.  The true  position,  now  accepted  by  both  parties'
    representatives, demonstrates otherwise.

13. For that reason alone, the judge erred in law in  concluding  that  the
    claimant met the requirements of Exception 1 in s.117C(4) and,  as  the
    judge stated in para 24 of his  determination,  therefore  "the  public
    interest does not require the appellant's deportation".

14. At least initially, Ms Bayoumi sought to persuade  me  that  the  judge
    had, nevertheless, properly considered the only basis  upon  which  the
    claimant's appeal could succeed, namely that he met the requirement  in
    s.117C(6) that: "the public interest requires deportation unless  there
    are very compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2".

15. Section 117C(6) is, in fact,  the  sole  basis  upon  which  a  foreign
    criminal can succeed if  they  have  been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of "at least four years".   That  is  not  the  claimant's
    circumstances.  However, in NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  662,
    the Court of Appeal accepted that, in the case of a "foreign  criminal"
    who had not been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  "at  least
    four years" but who could not succeed in establishing Exception 1 or 2,
    nevertheless, they could succeed if they established  that  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2" (see [24]-[27]).   Despite  Ms  Bayoumi's  spirited
    attempt to persuade me otherwise, it is clear that Judge Povey  allowed
    the claimant's appeal solely on the basis  that  Exception  1  applied.
    That is plain from a reading of his determination.  Section 117C(6)  is
    nowhere mentioned in the determination and is explicitly  not  included
    in para 11 where he sets out 117C(1)-(4).  Further, his  reasoning  and
    conclusion in paras [23]-[24] is solely concerned with Exception 1.

16. Both representatives accept that if my conclusion was that Judge  Povey
    had wrongly found that the requirement in  s.117C(4)(a)  was  met,  the
    proper disposal of the appeal was to set aside the judge's decision and
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  rehearing.   Both
    representatives acknowledged that none of the judge's  findings  should
    stand including those in respect of s.117C(4)(b) and (c)  and  that  it
    was not necessary for  me  to  reach  any  conclusion  on  Mr  Howells'
    submissions on limbs two and three of s.117C(4).

17. In the light of that, I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in
    law in allowing the claimant's appeal on the basis that Exception 1  in
    s.117C(4) of the NIA Act 2002 applied.

18. The First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot, as a consequence, stand  and
    I set it aside.

19. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Povey.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             16 January 2019












