
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01521/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2019                        |On 17 January 2020            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                            MR ABDULLAH AHMEDZAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Crown & Mehria
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  On 2nd November 2018, he
      made an application for indefinite leave to enter the UK for
      settlement as the child of a parent settled in the United Kingdom.
      His application was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a
      decision dated 4th January 2019.  The decision was maintained
      following review by an Entry Clearance Manager on 4th April 2019. The
      appellant's appeal against the decision was dismissed for reasons set
      out in a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Plowright promulgated
      on 3rd August 2019.


The decision of FtT Judge Plowright


   2. The respondent was not represented at the hearing of the appeal, but
      at paragraph [9] of the decision, the judge identified the issues that
      arose in the appeal following a consideration of the reasons given by
      the respondent for refusing the application. The appellant's father
      gave evidence with the assistance of an interpreter.  The judge's
      findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [12] to [25] of the
      decision.


   3. The Judge addressed each of the issues in turn. The judge found, at
      [12], the appellant meets the requirement of paragraph A39 of the
      immigration rules.  He found, at [13], the appellant and his father
      are related as claimed and, at [14], that the appellant was born on
      2nd December 2000 and was 17 years old at the date of the application.
      The judge found, at [15], the appellant can and will be accommodated
      adequately by his father and at [16], that he will be maintained
      adequately by his father without recourse to public funds.  The judge
      went on to consider whether the requirements set out in paragraph
      297(i)(e) or (f) of the immigration rules can be met by the applicant.


   4. The Judge referred to the evidence of the appellant's father at
      paragraph [19] of the decision.  At paragraphs [21] to [23] of his
      decision, the judge stated:


             "21. In my view, there is insufficient evidence to show that
             the appellant's father now has sole responsibility for the
             appellant. There is no witness statement from the appellant
             himself or from the family friend, Ali Shah, who was said to
             be looking after the appellant. There is no witness statement
             from the appellant's mother. However, I note that in the
             covering letter, of the 4th December 2018 at pp. 23 - 26 of
             the appellant's bundle it is said that the appellant's mother
             is no longer on amicable terms with the appellant's mother
             (sic) which may explain why there is no witness statement from
             the appellant's mother.

             22.  I also note that other than the appellant's father's
             assertion that he has been making all the important decisions
             regarding his son's welfare and upbringing since December
             2017, there was no evidence of what these decisions were other
             than the appellant's father's assertion that he let the
             appellant stay with a family friend, Ali Shah and was
             responsible for paying for his son's medication. I accept that
             the appellant is suffering with mild depression as per the
             letter of Dr Naveed but the fact that the appellant is
             suffering with mild depression does not assist me with the
             issue as to who has continued control and direction over the
             appellant's life. I accept that the appellant has been visited
             by his father but I have not been provided with any evidence
             of the communication between the appellant and his father,
             other than a bare assertion in the covering letter dated 4th
             October 2018 that the appellant's father has been in frequent
             contact with the appellant primarily by phone and by other
             modern forms of communication.

             23.  On the evidence available to me, I am not satisfied that
             the appellant has shown that his father has sole
             responsibility for him. Moreover, other than the fact that the
             appellant suffers from mild depression, I have not been
             provided with any evidence which would suggest that there are
             serious and compelling reasons that would make the exclusion
             of the appellant from the UK undesirable."

   5. The Judge found that the appellant cannot meet the requirements for
      indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent
      present and settled in the United Kingdom set out in paragraph 297 of
      the immigration rules. The judge concluded at [25] that he has not
      been provided with any further evidence which would suggest that the
      refusal of the appellant's entry into the UK is a disproportionate
      interference with his family life. The appeal was therefore dismissed.


The appeal before me


   6. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal. First, the decision is
      vitiated by procedural unfairness. The appellant claims the judge
      referred, at [20], to the evidence of Dr Naveed who confirmed that the
      appellant presented with " stuttering/stammering; depressive ideation
      is and was showing difficulties in reading, spelling problem, avoiding
      activities involving reading, difficulty remembering." and in light of
      those difficulties, it would have been impossible to draft a
      meaningful witness statement that would have assisted the judge in any
      way. The appellant accepts there was no witness statement provided
      from Mr Ali Shah, but that was solely because of the difficult
      relationship he was having with the appellant's father, because of the
      appellant's behaviour towards the people around him. It is said that
      the judge was provided with all the relevant information and the judge
      dismissed the appeal without proper scrutiny. Second, the judge does
      not make any credibility findings regarding the evidence of the
      appellant's father. It is said that there is no proper assessment of
      the evidence of the appellants father by the Judge. Third, the judge
      has not properly considered the Article 8 claim and has erroneously
      relied on the reasons why the application failed under the rules, to
      dismiss the Article 8 claim.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Neville
      on 7th November 2019.  The matter comes before me to determine whether
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Plowright should be set
      aside as erroneous in law, and if it is set aside, to remake the
      decision.


   8. Ms Heybroek submits the judge erred in his approach to the absence of
      a witness statement from the appellant himself, in light of the
      medical evidence provided in support of the appeal, referred to at
      paragraph [20] of the decision. Furthermore, she submits, the judge
      failed to make adequate findings or give adequate reasons in respect
      of the evidence given by the appellant's father. It is said the
      appellant's status in Pakistan, as an Afghan National who sought
      asylum with his parents, has not been addressed at all in the
      decision.  In paragraph [22] of his witness statement the appellant's
      father had said the appellant does not have any legal paperwork or
      permission to live in Pakistan as an Afghan refugee, and he is worried
      that the appellant will be apprehended by the Pakistani authorities
      and deported back to Afghanistan, where he would be at risk.  That
      evidence was not considered by the judge.  Ms Heybroek submits that in
      considering the medical evidence, the judge simply refers to the 'mild
      depression' and did not consider the medical evidence that the
      appellant has trouble reading and writing and is suffering from social
      anxiety.  She submits, the judge confounded the mental health problems
      with learning difficulties.  Ms Heybroek submits the judge has not
      made an adverse credibility finding in relation to the evidence of the
      appellant's father but has rejected that evidence on the basis that
      there is no evidence in support.


   9. In reply, Ms Fijiwala submits the decision of the FtT judge is not
      tainted by a material error of law.  She submits that on the evidence,
      it was open to the judge to find that the appellant's father does not
      have sole responsibility for his upbringing, or that there are no
      serious and compelling family or other considerations which make
      exclusion of the appellant undesirable.  She submits the judge was
      clearly aware of and referred to the very limited medical evidence
      that was before the Tribunal.  She referred me to the letter from Dr
      Naveed that is to be found at page 172 of the appellant's bundle. The
      letter is properly referred to and addressed in paragraph [20] of the
      decision.  The letter offers no explanation as to why a statement
      could not and had not been made by the appellant in support of his
      appeal.   The appellant has been represented throughout and having
      difficulty with reading and spelling, would not prevent a statement
      being provided.  Ms Fijiwala submits the judge considered the witness
      statement of the appellant's father, and although the judge does not
      refer to the appellant's status in Pakistan, it is clear that he has
      been able to continue living in Pakistan without his father for a
      number of years, and has remained in Pakistan since the breakdown of
      his relationship with his mother.  The appellant has also plainly been
      able to receive treatment in Pakistan.  Ms Fijiwala submits it was
      open to the Judge to conclude there are no serious and compelling
      family or other circumstances which make exclusion of the appellant
      undesirable, and it must follow from the findings made that the
      refusal of the application does not amount to a disproportionate
      interference with the appellant's family life, as found by the Judge
      at paragraph [25] of the decision.


Discussion

  10. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant was that the
      respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act
      1998.  The appellant's ability to satisfy the immigration rules is
      therefore not the question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is
      capable of being a weighty, though not determinative factor, when
      deciding whether the refusal of the application for leave to remain is
      proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.

  11. I reject the claim that the judge erred in his approach as to the
      absence of a witness statement from the appellant himself, in light of
      the medical evidence provided in support of the appeal.  The letter
      from Dr Naveed that was relied upon by the appellant is referred to at
      paragraph [20] of the decision.  I have read the letter for myself.
      Dr Naveed does nothing more than confirm the appellant has presented
      with stuttering/stammering, depressive ideations, signs of having
      difficulty in reading, spelling, and memorising and that the appellant
      appears to avoid activities involving reading.  Dr Naveed states the
      appellant has been advised to consult for a detailed psychological
      assessment and for confirmation of dyslexia or any other learning
      psychological disorder.  There was no evidence of any further
      diagnosis, consultation or any formal psychological assessment.  As Ms
      Fijiwala submits, there is nothing within that letter from Dr Naveed
      that even begins to support the claim that the appellant was unable to
      make a statement.  Having difficulty with reading and spelling, would
      not prevent a statement being provided.  The First-tier Tribunal is
      often provided with statements made by those that are unable to read
      or write the English language.  The appellant's father had stated in
      his witness statement, at paragraph [5], that the appellant had not
      been interviewed and he believes that any concerns that the
      immigration officer had, could have been addressed by an interview
      with him.  If the concerns could have been addressed in an interview
      with the appellant, there is no reason why the appellant could not
      have made a statement addressing the matters referred to in the
      respondent's decision, if necessary, with the assistance of his
      representatives and an interpreter.  Furthermore, the appellant
      accepts no witness statement was provided by Mr Ali Shah.  The
      explanation set out in the grounds of appeal that that was solely
      because of the difficult relationship he was having with the
      appellant's father, because of the appellant's behaviour towards the
      people around him was not before the Tribunal.  In any event, the
      appellant's behaviour towards the people around him, and the impact
      that behaviour has had upon his ability to assist the appellant's
      father would have been precisely why at least some evidence from Mr
      Shah would have assisted the Tribunal.  The judge was right to note
      the absence of the evidence.


  12. In any event, upon a careful reading of the decision, it is in my
      judgement clear that although the judge refers to the absence of a
      witness statement from the appellant, he does so, in the context of
      there being no evidence before the Tribunal to establish that the
      appellant's father now has sole responsibility for the appellant.  The
      judge noted, at [21], that there is no witness statement from the
      appellant himself or from the family friend who is said to be looking
      after the appellant.  The judge noted, at [22], that other than the
      appellant's father's bare assertion that he has been making all the
      important decisions regarding his son's welfare and upbringing since
      December 2017, there was no evidence of what those decisions were,
      other than the assertion that he let the appellant stay with the
      family friend and was responsible for paying for his son's medication.
       It was not unreasonable for the judge to have expected there to be at
      least some evidence, whether from the appellant, his father, or the
      family friend, and preferably a combination of evidence from all
      three, regarding the arrangements that are in place for the care of
      the appellant, to establish that the appellant's father has sole
      responsibility for his upbringing, or that there are some other
      serious and compelling family or other considerations which make
      exclusion of the appellant from the UK undesirable.  The evidence that
      was central to the matters the judge was required to consider, was
      simply not before the Tribunal and reading the decision as a whole, it
      was neither irrational nor unreasonable for the judge to conclude that
      the appellant has not shown that his father has sole responsibility
      for him.  It was in the end, the general paucity of evidence overall
      that lead the judge to that conclusion.


  13. I accept the judge does not refer to the evidence of the appellant's
      father set out in paragraph [22] of his witness statement, but a judge
      is not required to address every part of the evidence. The decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal is to be read fairly and as a whole and it can
      be seen from the decision read fairly and as a whole, the real
      disagreement is with the Tribunal's assessment of the evidence.
      Carefully read, the evidence of the appellant's father is that in his
      view, it is not in the best interests of his son to be living in
      Pakistan in the way that he has been living.  It is said the appellant
      does not have any legal paperwork or permission to live in Pakistan as
      an Afghan refugee and the appellant's father is worried that he will
      be apprehended by the Pakistani authorities and deported back to
      Afghanistan where there is a serious risk that he will be killed.  The
      appellant's father confirms that his wife and son fled Afghanistan
      soon after he had left (the appellant's father fled Afghanistan in
      2001) and they have lived in Pakistan ever since.  There is no
      evidence at all that the Pakistani authorities have at any point since
      2001 sought to remove the appellant and his mother to Afghanistan.  An
      appellate Tribunal should be very slow to conclude that that First-
      tier Tribunal overlooked some factor, simply because the factor is not
      explicitly referred to in the decision concerned.  Here, the judge has
      properly given a decision and explained why he has reached his
      decision.  The appellant seeks to burrow out industriously evidence
      that is not expressly referred to, as a basis for saying the judge's
      decision is legally flawed because it did not deal with a particular
      aspect of the evidence, more fully.


  14. The appellant's father would understandably now prefer the appellant
      to live with him in the UK but on the evidence it was open to the
      judge to conclude that there are no serious and compelling reasons
      that would make the exclusion of the appellant from the UK
      undesirable. The failure to refer to the fact that the appellant does
      not have any legal paperwork or permission to live in Pakistan, a
      country where he has been able to live since 2001 is immaterial.


  15. The appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph 297 of  the
      immigration rules.  Whilst I accept that the appellant might prefer to
      continue his relationship with his father in the  UK,  that  does  not
      equate to a right to do so in law.  The issue in this  appeal,  as  is
      often the case, is whether the interference with the  family  life  is
      proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  The
      appellant cannot satisfy the relevant  immigration  rule.  That  is  a
      factor  that   weighs   heavily   against   the   appellant   in   the
      proportionality assessment. No other matters were relied upon  by  the
      appellant in support of his appeal.  Having carefully  considered  the
      evidence, it was in my judgement open to the judge  to  conclude  that
      the refusal of entry clearance for settlement does  not  amount  to  a
      disproportionate interference with the appellants right  to  enjoyment
      of family life and to dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds, for the
      reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal judge.


  16. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


 Decision:


  17. The appeal is dismissed, and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Plowright shall stand


Signed                                  Date          15th January 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

 I have dismissed the appeal and there can, in the circumstances, be no fee
award.




Signed                                  Date          15th January 2020



 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
