
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01008/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 May 2019                       |On 5 June 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 Martina [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Forbes (McKenzie friend)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 5  November  1970.   She
    arrived in the UK on 15 April 2009 as a visitor with six months'  leave
    to enter.  She was accompanied by  her  husband  but  states  that  the
    relationship subsequently broke  down  after  she  discovered  she  was
    pregnant.  Her husband denied that the child was his  and  returned  to
    Nigeria.  The Appellant chose to remain in the UK.  She gave birth to a
    daughter on 5  October  2009  and  has  been  an  overstayer  since  18
    September 2009.  On 6 January 2017 the Appellant applied for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of her human rights.  This application was  refused
    in a decision dated 17 August 2017 with reference to  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision and her appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  E
    M M Smith for hearing on 24 May 2018 in Birmingham.

 2. In a Decision dated and promulgated on 5 June 2018, the judge dismissed
    the  appeal  finding  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect   the
    Appellant's daughter to leave the UK with the Appellant.   Notably  the
    Appellant was unrepresented at her appeal, although she was assisted by
    a McKenzie friend, Mr Forbes.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis that:-

      1) the judge had  erred  in  failing  to  identify  the  child's  best
         interests as a primary consideration as opposed to a factor;

      2) in his understanding of the appropriate weight to be given  to  the
         seven year rule;

      3) in  supporting  his  findings  with  authorities  which  were  only
         tangential to the case rather than those that focus on the  child's
         best interests (see MT and ET [2018]  UKUT  88  and  MA  (Pakistan)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 705); and

      4) in failing to give any weight to his findings of fact which were in
         favour of the Appellant.

    This latter ground was made with regard to the assessment of whether or
    not there  will  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    integration in Nigeria.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer in
    a decision dated 16 July 2018 on the following basis:-

         "3.  The grounds contend that the  Judge  failed  to  identify  the
             child's best interests as a primary consideration, as  opposed
             to a factor.  It is contended that the actual  requirement  is
             that they be 'given priority'.

         4.   It is also contended that relevant authorities relevant to the
             seven  year  rule,  were  not  referred  to  and   considered,
             including MA (Pakistan) at 48 to as reaffirmed in  MT  and  ET
             [2018] UKUT 88.  The focus was on the adverse history  of  the
             Appellant.

         5.   It is arguable that the Judge did not  consider  the  relevant
             authorities.  MT and ET was referred to and  produced  in  the
             Appellant's bundle at  pages  48  to  53.   Whilst  I  do  not
             consider it correct that the child's best  interests  must  be
             given priority I grant permission on the remaining grounds  as
             well."

    Hearing

 5. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Forbes again appeared as a
    McKenzie friend for the Appellant.  He sought to rely on  the  judgment
    of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, submitting that a decision  requires  a
    discrete finding on the best interests of the child and the  judge  had
    failed to focus specifically on that area but rather  has  concentrated
    on the failure of the parent to  establish  facts  credibly  enough  in
    respect of the lack of connection with her three children who  remained
    with a friend in Nigeria.  He submitted that the judge found  that  the
    child was culturally integrated into Nigeria through  the  church  here
    but gave no consideration at all of the possible consequences  for  the
    child to have been rejected by the father if returned to Nigeria  given
    there had been no contact for eight years.

 6. In her submissions, Ms Aboni stated that the Respondent had not  served
    a Rule 24 response but the appeal  was  opposed.   She  submitted  that
    whilst the judge accepted that the child had been living in the UK  for
    over seven years and was therefore a qualifying child,  the  judge  had
    given adequate reasons for finding that it would be reasonable for  the
    child to leave the UK.  The judge had adequately considered the child's
    circumstances and found she was familiar with Nigerian culture  through
    her church in the UK, that she had no ill-health and had grown up  with
    her mother in Nigerian culture.  The judge also considered the fact the
    Appellant's childhood had some education, but it was  open  to  him  to
    find that the child would be able to adapt to life in Nigeria supported
    by her mother.  The judge  did  not  find  the  main  Appellant  to  be
    credible in respect of her claims as to  a  lack  of  connections  with
    Nigeria and a lack of contact with her other children who remain there.



 7. Ms Aboni submitted that in the real world context  the  mother  had  no
    basis for staying in the UK.  She was dependent on public funds, and in
    those circumstances it was open to the judge to find it was  reasonable
    for the child to leave the UK with her mother.  She submitted that  the
    judge had considered the public interest and  found  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable for this child to leave the UK  and  that  there  were  no
    material errors in the judge's Decision and Reasons.

 8. In response to a question from the Upper Tribunal Ms Aboni stated  that
    the Presenting Officer,  Mrs  Venables,  had  sought  to  rely  on  the
    decisions in EV (Philippines) [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  and  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).

 9. In reply, Mr Forbes sought to rely on the fourth ground  of  appeal  in
    respect of very significant obstacles to integration.  He  denied  that
    the Appellant had chosen not to return to Nigeria with her  husband  as
    was indicated by [8] of the judge's decision, but  rather  the  husband
    had abandoned her and the judge had accepted that the Appellant was not
    being untruthful despite discrepancies in terms of dates as to what had
    taken place when she came to the UK as a visitor.

10. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and reasons

11. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E M M Smith.  Despite the fact that the key issue in  the  appeal
    was the reasonableness of expecting the Appellant's child to leave  the
    United Kingdom, the judge did not refer to  any  of  the  jurisprudence
    material to this issue, but rather at [28] referred to the judgment  of
    the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 and TZ and PG  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1109.  However, these do not go  to  that  particular  issue.   The
    Appellant was unrepresented, albeit assisted by a McKenzie friend,  but
    as Ms Aboni acknowledged the  Presenting  Officer,  Mrs  Venables,  did
    refer  to  EV  (Philippines)  and  Azimi-Moayed.    No   reference   or
    consideration has been given to the judgments in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 or MT and ET [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC) and I  find  that  it
    was incumbent upon the judge to consider the jurisprudence which was up-
    to-date at that time in determining the key issue  in  the  appeal  and
    that that underlined the safety of his decision.

12. In relation to the best interest considerations,  whilst  at  [22]  the
    judge did direct himself that section 55  of  the  BCIA  2009  must  be
    factored in, however I accept and find that there is  no  reference  to
    the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  child  in  respect  of  the
    assessment of whether it would be reasonable to expect her to leave the
    UK.

13. In relation to the fourth ground of appeal, at [27] the judge  held  as
    follows:-

         "For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(vi) I  cannot  conclude  that
         there are very significant obstacles to the Appellant and her child
         living in Nigeria.  Any private life acquired by this Appellant has
         been acquired whilst she resided in the UK unlawfully and  to  that
         extent  the  public  interest  set  out  in  section  117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies."

14. I find that the judge has failed adequately to engage with  or  provide
    reasons for reaching this conclusion, in particular whilst referring to
    section 117B reference should have also been made  to  section  117B(6)
    which the judge has failed to do.

15. For these reasons I set the decision of Judge Smith aside.

16. I sought submissions from the parties at the hearing as to their  views
    as to how the appeal should be re-determined were I to  find  an  error
    and there were no objections to me re-determining  the  appeal  myself.
    This I proceed to do.

17.  The material facts are not in dispute. The Appellant has resided as  an
    overstayer in the United Kingdom since  18  September  2009.  She  gave
    birth to a daughter in the United Kingdom on 5 October 2009. It was not
    disputed that she is a qualifying child, who is 9 years of age, but has
    never had leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

18.  There is no dispute that the  Appellant  and  her  daughter,  E,  speak
    English: section 117B(2) of the NIAA 2002. E attends a Catholic primary
    school where she appears to  be  thriving.  They  are  not  financially
    independent but are supported pursuant to section 17  of  the  Children
    Act 1989: section 117(3) of the NIAA 2002 and their stay in the  United
    Kingdom has been unlawful since before the birth of E: section  117B(4)
    of the NIAA 2002. The issue is whether it is reasonable to expect E  to
    leave the United Kingdom: section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.

19.  This is an issue which has  been  given  recent  consideration  by  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal in  JG  (s  117B(6)  :  "reasonable  to
    leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) where it was  held  at  [40]-
    [41]:

         "40. Such an assessment would, however, have to take account of the
         immigration history of the person  subject  to  removal;  so  there
         could well be a very real difference between the  outcome  of  that
         exercise, and one conducted under section 117B(6).  But,  the  real
         point is that this submission does not begin to  affect  the  plain
         meaning of subsection (6). If, as we  have  found,  Parliament  has
         decreed a particular outcome by enacting section 117B(6), then that
         is the end of the matter.

         41.   We  accept  that  this  interpretation  may  result   in   an
         underserving individual or family remaining in the United  Kingdom.
         However, the fact that Parliament  has  mandated  such  an  outcome
         merely means that, in such cases, Parliament has decided to be more
         generous than is strictly required by the Human Rights Act 1998. It
         can be regarded as a necessary consequence of the aim of Part 5A of
         imposing greater consistency in decision-making  in  this  area  by
         courts and tribunals. The fact that section 117B(6) has such an aim
         was expressly  recognised  by  Elias  LJ  at  paragraph  44  of  MA
         (Pakistan)."

20.  On the facts of the case, despite the fact that the  children's  mother
    was a long term overstayer and had fraudulently subsequently obtained a
    Schengen visa in order to unlawfully re-enter the United Kingdom  [15]-
    [17] and was "dishonest and unscrupulous" [80] the Upper Tribunal found
    that it was not reasonable to expect he children to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

21.  Subsequently, in AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661, the Court of  Appeal
    per Lord Justice Singh held inter alia as follows at [71]-[75]:

         "... The fundamental point, as it seems to me, is  that  Parliament
         meant what it said when it enacted section 117B(6) and  it  is  the
         duty of courts and tribunals to give effect to  that  provision  on
         its correct statutory interpretation.  Furthermore,  it  should  be
         noted that it was common ground between  the  parties  before  this
         Court that Article 8 must always be  complied  with.  There  is  no
         intention evinced in the amendments to the 2002 Act to  breach  the
         obligations of the UK under the ECHR. Furthermore, one  always  has
         to bear in mind that the strong  obligation  of  interpretation  in
         section 3 of the HRA applies to all legislation, including Part  5A
         of the 2002 Act. Section 3 requires all legislation to be read  and
         given effect, so far as possible, in a way which is compatible with
         the Convention rights, including Article 8.

         72.  I respectfully agree with the interpretation given by  the  UT
         to section 117B(6)(b) in JG ...

         74.  Finally, in that regard, I agree with and  would  endorse  the
         following passage in the judgment of UTJ Plimmer in SR  (Subsisting
         Parental Relationship - s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC),
         a case which was decided before decision of the Supreme Court in KO
         (Nigeria), at para. 51:

             "... It is difficult to see how section 117B(6)(b) can be said
             to be of no application  or  to  pose  a  merely  hypothetical
             question. Section 117B(6) dictates whether or not  the  public
             interest  requires  removal  where  a  person  not  liable  to
             deportation has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relation
             with a qualifying child. The question that must be answered is
             whether it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
             leave the UK. That question as contained in statute, cannot be
             ignored or glossed over. Self-evidently,  section  117B(6)  is
             engaged whether the child will or will not in fact or practice
             leave the UK. It addresses the normative  and  straightforward
             question - should the child be 'expected to leave' the UK?"

         75.  I respectfully agree. It  is  clear,  in  my  view,  that  the
         question which the statute requires to be  addressed  is  a  single
         question: is it reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?  It
         does not consist of two questions, as suggested by the Secretary of
         State. If the answer to the single question is obvious, because  it
         is common ground that the child will not be expected to  leave  the
         UK, that does not mean that the question does not have to be asked;
         it merely means that the answer to the question is: No."

22.  On the facts of the cases, the Court of Appeal dismissed the  Secretary
    of State's appeal in respect of AB, who had direct contact with his son
    three times a week, and dismissed the appeal in respect of AO, who  has
    only indirect contact with his son.

23.  There is no doubt that requiring the  Appellant  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom would also mean that her daughter would be required  to  leave,
    her father having abandoned her mother whilst she was pregnant  in  the
    United Kingdom in 2009. There has been no contact  between  father  and
    child and there was no evidence of any relatives or alternative  carers
    for E in the United Kingdom. E is now more than 9 and a half  years  of
    age and will be eligible to apply for British nationality in  4  months
    time. When the facts are considered through the  prism  of  the  recent
    jurisprudence set out above, I find that it would not be reasonable  to
    expect E to leave the United Kingdom.

24.  I find, following Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  that  the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter have established a private  and  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2009 and that their removal to Nigeria would represent an
    interference with their private life, but not their family life as they
    would be removed together as a  family  unit.  It  is  clear  from  the
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle that E is integrated into her school
    and local Catholic  Church,  as  is  her  mother.  I  have  taken  into
    consideration a handwritten letter from E dated 22 May 2018,  in  which
    she states that she had many friends and her teacher helps her with her
    maths and that she does not want to leave her friends and doesn't  want
    to be separated from her mum or her friends.  Whilst  the  decision  to
    remove them would be in accordance with the law, it would amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with their right to private life  in  the
    United Kingdom in light of my findings above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Smith  contained  material  errors
of law. I set that decision aside and re-make the appeal, which  is  allowed
on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 3 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

