
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01085/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 January 2019               |On 18 January 2019              |
|                                 |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                    [N A]
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Ohanugo, Solicitor (Moorehouse Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. Permission to appeal was granted by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Eshun on 27 November 2018  against  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
         Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal made by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Lucas in a decision and reasons promulgated on 15 June 2018.


      2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, who had entered the  United
         Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student in  2008.   Subsequently  she
         was refused further leave to remain as a spouse.  Her appeal to the
         First-tier Tribunal was dismissed  and  she  became  appeal  rights
         exhausted on 16 September 2014.  On 25 January 2016  the  Appellant
         applied for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds,  which  was
         refused by the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  on  21
         December 2016.  The Appellant has four dependent Nigerian children,
         respectively born on [~] 2002, [~] 2009, [~] 2011 and [~] 2015.


    3.     Judge Lucas noted the previous determination of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal dated 12 June 2014, where the Appellant's appeal had  been
         dismissed.   There  it  had  been  found  that  the  Appellant  had
         continuing ties to Nigeria, having left aged 33.  She had  obtained
         financial  sponsorship  to  study  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
         Appellant's children (apart from the last born) had then been  aged
         between five and three.  Judge Lucas accepted  that  the  Appellant
         had HIV but found that treatment was  available  in  Nigeria.   The
         threshold in N [2005] UKHL  31  was  not  reached.   Three  of  the
         Appellant's  children  were  "qualifying  children"   however   the
         Appellant would remain their sole carer whether they lived  in  the
         United Kingdom or in Nigeria.  Their best interests were to  remain
         with their mother.  There would be disruption  to  their  education
         yet their education could continue in Nigeria, where it was obvious
         that support and family were available.  There were no  exceptional
         circumstances and there was no Article 8  ECHR  disproportionality.
         Hence the appeal was dismissed.


    4.     Permission to appeal was refused by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         PJM Hollingworth on 3 September 2018  but  was  granted  by  Deputy
         Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun because it was considered arguable  that
         the judge had not  correctly  applied  the  provisions  of  section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  MA
         (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  when  considering  whether  it  was
         reasonable for the children to leave the United Kingdom. (It should
         be noted that MA (Pakistan)  has  since  been  disapproved  by  the
         Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.)


    5.     Mr Ohanugo for the Appellant relied on the grounds submitted and
         the grant of permission to appeal.  In summary he argued  that  the
         judge had not directed himself  correctly  and  had  not  mentioned
         section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         (as amended).   There  were  qualifying  children  and  their  best
         interests assessment was inadequate.  The appeal should be  allowed
         and the decision remade in the Appellant's favour.


    6.     Mr Bramble for  the  Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
         material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
         and the judge's findings if brief had all been  available  to  him.
         It was true that there had been no express mention by the judge  of
         section 117B(6) but the judge had stated the applicable  principles
         accurately and had gone on to apply them.   More  importantly,  the
         judge had  in  effect  anticipated  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53
         (decided after permission to appeal had been granted).   The  judge
         had considered, in a "real world" setting,  the  reasonableness  of
         the children going to Nigeria.  The judge had found that they could
         go and it was reasonable for them to do so.  That  had  to  be  the
         correct focus. The appeal should be dismissed.


    7.     Mr Ohanugo reiterated the points he had made earlier by  way  of
         reply.


    8.     The grant of permission to appeal was in the tribunal's view  an
         over generous one.  The  submissions  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant were all fully dealt with and disposed  of  by  the  very
         experienced  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The   judge   correctly
         identified the previous determination as his starting point.  There
         were relevant findings which stood.  In fact, there was very little
         new evidence  for  the  judge  to  consider,  particularly  as  the
         Appellant continued to pursue bad points  which  had  already  been
         conclusively  determined  against  her.   This  goes  some  way  to
         explaining what might otherwise be thought to have been a  somewhat
         sparse determination.


    9.     The judge went on  to  find  that  the  best  interests  of  the
         children were to remain with their mother.  Crucially, contrary  to
         the Appellant's contention,  her  health  needs  could  be  met  in
         Nigeria, so by necessary implication her ability to  care  for  her
         children would not be impaired.  The children's needs would be  met
         in Nigeria, the country of their heritage, culture and nationality,
         where support and family were available, and their education  would
         continue.  By necessary  implication  it  was  reasonable  for  the
         children to return to Nigeria (in the case of the eldest child)  or
         to go there (in the case the United Kingdom born children.)  As  Mr
         Bramble submitted, the judge had in effect anticipated the decision
         in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.


    10.    In the tribunal's judgment the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
         reached  sustainable  findings,  in  the  course  of   a   balanced
         determination, which securely resolved  the  issues.  The  tribunal
         accepts the submissions made by Mr Bramble. The tribunal finds that
         there was no error of law and the onwards appeal must be dismissed.




    DECISION


    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 10 January 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
