
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01736/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 January 2020                             |On 13 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                          mr PRINCE OWUSU FRIMPONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel, instructed by
Goldfields Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Coutts ("the judge"), promulgated on  2  August  2019,  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of his human rights
    claim.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Ghana born on 10 March 1972,  came  to  the
    United Kingdom in August 2002 as a visitor.  He has been an  overstayer
    for all but a few months of his time in this country.  A  human  rights
    application was seemingly made in June 2017 and  subsequently  refused.
    The latest human rights claim was made on 16 February 2018.

 3. The Respondent's decision  of  9  December  2018  refusing  that  claim
    accepted that the Appellant  has  been  in  this  country  since  2002.
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules  was  considered.   It
    was concluded that the Appellant would not have faced very  significant
    obstacles  to  reintegrating  into  Ghanaian  society.   It  was   also
    concluded that there were no exceptional circumstances in the case.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Before the judge, the Appellant was unrepresented and there was no Home
    Office Presenting Officer.  In his evidence, the Appellant stated  that
    he did not know the whereabouts of his father or two siblings, although
    they did remain in Ghana.  In setting out his findings and reasons, the
    judge concluded that the Appellant  would  not  face  very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration back in Ghana.  At [15] he directed  himself
    that "upheaval and  mere  inconvenience,  even  where  multiplied,  are
    unlikely to satisfy this test".  At  [16]  he  sets  out  a  number  of
    factors in support of his  conclusion  that  there  would  be  no  very
    significant obstacles on return.  These included the time spent by  the
    Appellant  in  Ghana  before  coming  to   the   United   Kingdom,   an
    understanding of Ghanaian culture, and an ability to speak at least one
    of the official languages of that country.  In addition,  reference  is
    made to experiences and skills  acquired  since  being  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  These, it was said, would be of assistance to  the  Appellant
    upon return to his home country.

 5. I set out [17] in full:

         "In terms of support in Ghana, I  found  the  appellant's  evidence
         regarding his family members to be vague and  unconvincing  and  do
         not accept that he has lost contact with his father  and  siblings.
         He can therefore contact them in advance of his  arrival  and  they
         can assist him with his relocation."

 6. Having dealt with the Article 8 claim within the context of the  Rules,
    the judge went on to consider it on a wider basis.  Account is taken of
    the Appellant's "precarious" status in  this  country.   He  was  given
    credit for being able to speak English but the judge was not  satisfied
    that he was in fact being supported by friends and/or his  church,  and
    it was concluded that he was not financially independent.  In  all  the
    circumstances the Article 8 claim was  rejected  and  the  appeal  duly
    dismissed.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The Appellant himself, or perhaps with the help of friends, drafted the
    grounds of appeal.

 8. In granting permission, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  specifically
    limited the scope of that grant, confining it to the  third  ground  of
    appeal only.  This was done in the correct format and consistently with
    the  guidance  set  out  in  Safi  and  others  (permission  to  appeal
    decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC).  There has been no  application  to
    extend the scope of the grant.  Ground 3 referred  to  relates  to  the
    judge's credibility conclusions and  argued  that  no  or  no  adequate
    reasons had been provided for finding aspects of  the  evidence  to  be
    unreliable.



The hearing

 9. At the hearing before me Miss Ofei-Kwatia relied on the  single  ground
    upon which permission had been granted and argued succinctly that there
    simply were no reasons contained within [17] of the  judge's  decision.
    The issue of family support in Ghana was material  to  the  Appellant's
    overall circumstances  and  went  to  the  issue  of  very  significant
    obstacles within the context of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Rules.
    She also indicated that the adverse finding  in  respect  of  financial
    independence was also unreasoned.  The fact that the Appellant had been
    unrepresented before the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  absence  of  a
    Presenting Officer were emphasised.  It was said that the judge  should
    have dealt with all relevant matters with enhanced care.

10. Mr Tufan indicated that even if the  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
    provide adequate reasons and even taking the case at its  highest,  the
    Appellant would not have succeeded on the facts  of  his  case  and  in
    light of the relevant factors set out by the judge in the decision.   I
    was referred to the well-known Court  of  Appeal  authority  of  Kamara
    [2016] 4 WLR 152 and that of Mwesezi [2018] EWCA Civ 1104.

11. In response, Miss Ofei-Kwatia re-emphasised her point that the  absence
    of reasons went to the sustainability of the decision as a whole.



Decision on error of law

12. Having considered all relevant factors with care I conclude that  there
    are no material errors of law in the judge's decision.

13. It is right that in respect of [17], the judge has  failed  to  provide
    particularised reasons for finding evidence relating to family members'
    whereabouts in Ghana "vague and unconvincing".  On the face of it there
    is an error here.  It may also be said that  a  similar  error  can  be
    attached to the conclusion in [25] regarding  the  Appellant's  claimed
    financial support by  friends  and  members  of  his  church  community
    (although in this passage  the  judge  does  refer  to  an  absence  of
    financial details having been provided, which can be read as at least a
    reason for the finding made).

14. For the following reasons, I conclude that the error identified is  not
    material.  The judge directed himself correctly to the  relevant  legal
    framework, the focus of  that  being  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules.  The test of "very significant obstacles" presents a fairly high
    threshold (see Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) and Parveen [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 932). In terms of the meaning of the phrase "integration"  (or  re-
    integration), the Court of Appeal's decision in Kamara at paragraph  14
    provides relevant guidance.  In essence a broad  evaluative  assessment
    has to be undertaken factoring in relevant matters both  objective  and
    subjective.

15. The judge was clearly entitled to take into account all of the  matters
    set out in [16] of his decision.  The Appellant had not  come  to  this
    country until he was 30 years old.  It is quite clear that he was fully
    aware of Ghanaian culture and social mores in addition to being able to
    speak, at the very least, English.  His work experience when  in  Ghana
    and/or  relevant  experiences  gained  whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (unlawfully) were clearly relevant matters  and  the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to conclude that the Appellant  would  be  able  to  find  and
    obtain reasonable employment on return of one sort or another.

16. The existence or otherwise of  family  support  may  potentially  be  a
    relevant factor in cases such as this.  However, even if it were indeed
    the case that the Appellant had lost contact with his  father  and  two
    siblings in Ghana, on the facts of this case, that single factor  could
    not on any rational view have altered  the  outcome  on  the  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) issue, given the high  threshold  to  be  attained.   The
    Appellant was and is a healthy adult who had resided in Ghana  for  the
    large majority of his life.  There was no issue of him losing  cultural
    ties of understanding  of  his  home  country.   There  were  no  other
    particular factors that would  have  prevented  him  in  any  way  from
    considering himself and being considered by  others  as  an  "insider",
    notwithstanding the fact common to most cases such as this  that  there
    would be an initial period of readjustment and no doubt difficulty upon
    return to his home country.

17. In respect of the wider Article 8 assessment, the Appellant's case  was
    even weaker.  In particular because his status in this country has been
    not simply "precarious", but unlawful since the  expiry  of  the  visit
    visa upon which he entered in August 2002.  If an error  was  committed
    by the judge in respect of financial  independence  it  could  have  no
    added effect other than being of neutral  value  in  light  of  section
    117B(2) of the 2002 Act.

18. In all the circumstances of the case and in light of  the  well-settled
    case  law  (including  for  example  Agyarko  [2017]  1  WLR  823,  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim outside the context of the Rules was almost
    bound to fail, and the judge's conclusion that it did so  was  entirely
    sustainable.

19. For these reasons, the judge's decision shall stand and the Appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain any errors  of  law  and
it shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   [pic]             Date: 6 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

