
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01341/2019
                                                               HU/02639/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th August 2019                  |On 3rd September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                        Mohamed [A] (first Appellant)
                       Fathima [A] (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Bedford of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are  the  linked  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup promulgated  on  1st  April  2019  in  which  the
    respective appeals of the Appellants made on human rights grounds  were
    dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  They are husband  and  wife.
    The first Appellant was born on 12th April 1986; the  second  Appellant
    on 26th September 1992.

 3. It is accepted that the appeal of the second Appellant stands or  falls
    with that of her husband, in that it has always been the case that  her
    entry to the UK was as his dependant.

 4. The Appellants have a daughter born in the UK in 2015.  So far as their
    daughter is concerned she is not  strictly  speaking  a  party  to  the
    proceedings but necessarily, her position falls  to  be  considered  as
    linked to those of her parents.  For ease of reference, throughout this
    decision, I shall hereafter  refer  to  the  first  Appellant  as  "the
    Appellant".

 5. For the purposes of this decision, it  is  unnecessary  to  detail  the
    Appellant's previous immigration history  other  than  to  confirm  the
    following:

       . The  Appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  on  17th  September  2007  in
         possession of a valid student visa


       . In October 2010 he made an in time application for leave to  remain
         as a Tier 1 post study migrant granted until  February  2013  ("the
         2010 application")


       . On 1st March 2016, the Appellant made an in  time  application  for
         leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant


       . On 31st October 2017 he  varied  the  application  to  one  seeking
         indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  long
         residence under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.


 6. This application was refused by the Respondent for reasons set out in a
    "reasons for refusal" letter  (RFRL)  dated  10th  January  2019.   The
    Respondent did not dispute  the  fact  of  the  Appellant's  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom for a period of ten  years,  but
    refused the application with particular reference to  paragraph  322(5)
    of the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 322(5) was invoked with  reference
    to matters revealed during the course of an investigation  and  enquiry
    showing that the Appellant's tax returns to HMRC did not correlate with
    the levels of income declared in support of  his  previous  immigration
    application made in October 2010.

First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 7. The Appellant appealed the Respondent's refusal of his  application  to
    the IAC. He claimed that  the  Respondent's  decision  contravened  his
    Article 8 ECHR rights. The appeal came to be considered  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pickup  on  27th  March  2019.   In  a  full  and  well-
    constructed decision, the judge noted at [8] the issue before him:

         "This is one of a number of  cases  in  which  the  respondent  has
         identified a discrepancy between income declared to  HMRC  and  the
         income relied on in an earlier Leave to  Remain  application.   The
         respondent is not able to say whether the HMRC  declaration  was  a
         fraudulent under-declaration to avoid incurring a tax liability  or
         whether in the alternative the income declared in  the  immigration
         application was inflated.  However it is alleged that  one  way  or
         the  other  [the  appellant]  must  have   been   dishonest.    The
         appellants' case is that he was negligent and  not  dishonest,  and
         that the fault lay with his accountant."

 8. The judge then noted at [11] and [12] that there is a young child  aged
    3 years born to the Appellants. He considered the best interests of the
    child as a primary consideration and noted, "it is obvious  that  those
    best interests are to remain with both parents whether in the UK or Sri
    Lanka".

 9. At [15] the judge set out and noted the  large  amount  of  documentary
    evidence before him which included the Appellant's bundle  (183  pages)
    and a copy of a recent JR decision of R (on the application of Khan)  v
    SSHD (Dishonesty, tax return,  paragraph  322(5))  [2018]  UKUT  00384,
    which deals with the HMRC discrepancy issue.

10. Having heard evidence from the Appellant who was the sole witness,  the
    judge made detailed findings  on  the  evidence  before  him  including
    findings relating to the discrepancies which  form  the  basis  of  the
    Respondent's case.  The judge noted in particular  that  the  Appellant
    was interviewed by the Respondent on 1st December 2016 and asked  about
    the income declared in the 2010 application (Tier 1 application).   The
    Respondent noted that his responses were vague and that,  "he  said  he
    didn't have much knowledge of tax matters and his  accountant  couldn't
    make the proper account, so he had done amendments" [21].

11. The judge then over several lengthy paragraphs analysed  the  documents
    submitted by  the  Appellant  and  referred  to  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence. At [29] the judge made a finding that the  Appellant  was  "a
    poor witness in his own cause."  The judge gave  detailed  reasons  why
    the Appellant's credibility was seriously undermined, not least because
    the Appellant claimed for the first time that if removed to  Sri  Lanka
    his and his wife's lives would become difficult and they would face bad
    treatment from their families.  He was asked to explain what  he  meant
    by this and he said that he had married his cousin and even though  his
    family were  convinced  enough  to  support  and  attend  the  marriage
    celebration there are still problems.   The  Appellant  was  challenged
    further on this but resiled from an assertion that his  wife  would  be
    killed, to saying she would only be treated badly in that she would not
    get any help.  Since this was the first time that such a risk had  been
    mentioned, the judge drew the conclusion that the Appellant was someone
    who was prepared to  exaggerate  the  facts  only  for  him  having  to
    backtrack when put on the spot.

12. Taking into account all the evidence before him,  the  judge  made  the
    following clear finding at [37];

         "Taking all the evidence into  account,  I  find  that  either  the
         income declared in his  immigration  application  was  a  dishonest
         exaggeration or the HMRC tax return was an  under-declaration.   It
         is not necessary for the tribunal to decide  between  the  two  and
         indeed it might even be something of  both.   However,  taking  all
         matters into account I am satisfied for the reasons advanced  above
         that there is a  strong  inference  of  dishonesty  that  has  been
         established on cogent and clear grounds, including that detailed in
         the refusal decision, and which  has  not  been  displaced  by  the
         unsatisfactory, incomplete, and ultimately incredible evidence  and
         assertions made by or on behalf of [the appellant].  This is not to
         put the burden on the appellant and I accept and have proceeded  on
         the  basis  that  the  legal  burden  remains  on  the   respondent
         throughout.  Nevertheless, taken as a whole I am satisfied on clear
         and cogent evidence and after taking account of everything urged on
         me by the appellant and Ms Hashmi's written  and  oral  submissions
         that there has been  deceit  or  dishonesty  on  the  part  of  the
         appellant and that it was not mere carelessness  or  negligence  as
         has been claimed."

13. The judge having made that finding, then went on to consider as he  was
    obliged to do, the  Appellant's  family  and  private  life  under  the
    Immigration  Rules.   He  came  to  the  conclusion  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor his wife could meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules in relation to private or family life.  The judge noted the  best
    interests of the Appellant's child, considered Article  8  through  the
    prism of the Immigration Rules and then looked at Article 8 outside the
    Rules.  Having taken into account all  the  evidence  before  him,  the
    judge dismissed the appeals.

Onward Appeal

14.  The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  FtT's   decision.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    on a renewed application by the Upper Tribunal.  It is to be noted that
    after the promulgation of the  FtT's  decision,  the  Court  of  Appeal
    handed down the case of Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673  on  16th  April
    2019.

15. The grounds seeking permission are lengthy and took issue over  several
    points. The grant of permission is also lengthy and in  order  to  give
    context  to  the  proceedings  the  relevant  parts  of  the  grant  of
    permission are reproduced here:

         "3.  The  grounds  of  appeal  contend,  in  summary,  as  follows.
             Firstly, that the wrong standard of proof was applied  by  the
             First-tier Tribunal as the burden of proof was said to  be  on
             the appellant when as deception was contended the  burden  was
             on the respondent. Secondly it is argued that the decision was
             not in accordance with Balajigari v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civ  673
             as a discrepancy between declaration of earnings between those
             declared to HMRC and those declared  to  the  Home  Office  on
             raises a justifiable suspicion of dishonesty  and  should  not
             lead to a conclusion of dishonesty. Further it  was  necessary
             for the Secretary of State to be  satisfied  of  this  on  the
             balance of probabilities but bearing in mind the very  serious
             nature  of  the  allegation  and  consequences  of   such   an
             allegation.  Further the process of  consideration  must  look
             not only for reliable evidence of  reprehensible  conduct  but
             must  also  consider  positive  features  of  an   applicant's
             character  and  issues  such  as  the  welfare  of  any  minor
             children.

         4.   There is no arguable error with respect to the burden of proof
             as at paragraph 32 of the  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             clearly sets out that the burden of showing that the appellant
             is undesirable relying on paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration
             Rules is on the respondent, and it is  also  appreciated  that
             the  consequences  of  such  an  allegation  are  serious   at
             paragraph 34 of the decision. It is also clear that the First-
             tier Tribunal did appreciate that the discrepancy was  only  a
             starting point and that there needed to be consideration as to
             whether the explanation displaced any inference of deceit, see
             paragraph 33 of the decision.

         5.    It  is  arguable  however  that  positive  features  of   the
             appellant's character have not been considered when coming  to
             the  conclusion  that  paragraph  322(5)  excludes  the  first
             appellant from qualifying  under  the  Immigration  Rules  for
             indefinite leave to remain, in accordance with paragraph 34 of
             Balajigari, and so permission is granted on this basis."

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contains such error of law that it requires  to
    be set aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

16. Before me Mr Bedford appeared for the Appellants and Mr Avery  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Bedford's  submissions  amounted  to  saying  that  the
    Respondent had not properly observed due process when  considering  the
    Appellant's case.  He referred to Balajigari (paragraphs 33 and 34) and
    relying on those paragraphs said that firstly if the  Respondent  found
    on the evidence available there was a real suspicion of dishonesty, she
    should have provided the Appellant an opportunity to give  an  innocent
    explanation before making her decision.  Secondly even if there  was  a
    definitive finding of dishonesty it could not necessarily be  concluded
    that this  conduct  rendered  a  person's  presence  undesirable  under
    paragraph  322(5)  because  there  needed  to   be   a   second   stage
    consideration of all factors concerning  the  Appellant  in  the  round
    (including positive features of their character).  Mr Bedford submitted
    that the Respondent had failed to carry out this second stage and  this
    rendered the decision flawed and thus it could not stand.

17. Mr Avery responded saying that the judge had properly directed  himself
    on the application of the law as it stood.  Equally the judge  had  set
    out the issues that were before him and invited me to  have  regard  to
    [32] of the decision.  He submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    properly reasoned by reference to all the evidence before him and  were
    findings which were therefore open  to  the  judge.   The  grounds  are
    simply an attempt to reargue the case and amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings.  Consequently there is no error
    in the decision and the decision should stand.

Consideration

18. Having heard from the representatives, I am satisfied that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error requiring  it  to
    be set aside.  Permission in this appeal was granted on the basis  that
    it was arguable that, contrary to paragraph 34 of Balajigari,  positive
    features of the appellant's character  had  not  been  considered  when
    coming to the conclusion  that  paragraph  322(5)  excludes  the  first
    appellant from qualifying under the Immigration  Rules  for  indefinite
    leave to remain. Mr Bedford pursued  this  argument,  saying  that  the
    decision was erroneous because neither the Respondent nor the judge had
    followed the step by step guidance set out  in  Balajigari.  He  stated
    that it could not necessarily be concluded  that,  even  if  dishonesty
    were to  be  established  on  the  part  of  the  Appellant,  it  would
    necessarily be concluded that his presence in the UK  was  undesirable.
    Matters needed to be looked at in the round, taking  into  account  any
    positive aspects of the Appellant's character.

19. Mr Bedford added a further strand to his argument to the  effect  that,
    if the Respondent had suspected dishonesty, then the  Appellant  should
    have been given the opportunity to provide an innocent explanation.  He
    had not been given that opportunity.

20. I disagree with Mr Bedford's analysis.  A fair reading of the  decision
    shows that the judge has carefully picked his way through the  evidence
    to ensure that the Appellant has had a full and fair hearing  and  thus
    the opportunity to put forward evidence that would show  his  character
    in a positive light and to provide  explanations  for  his  actions  in
    relation to his tax/immigration affairs.  I can find no examples within
    the evidence of positive features of significance  in  the  Appellant's
    character of which the FtTJ has failed  to  take  account.   Indeed  in
    contrast, it does not help the Appellant's case that the FtTJ commented
    on a preparedness on his part to exaggerate the facts only to  have  to
    backtrack when put on the spot, thus tending to undermine  his  overall
    credibility [29].

21. It is clear from a reading of [36] that the FtTJ spent a great deal  of
    care and time in setting out the Appellant's explanation  for  the  tax
    discrepancy.  He considered  all  the  explanations  proffered  by  the
    Appellant, including blaming his accountant, being busy with a wedding,
    and having little knowledge of tax matters.  The judge did  not  accept
    those explanations.  He also noted that the net  income  from  business
    profits over comparable accounting  and  tax  periods  not  only  never
    matched but was vastly under-declared.   Moreover  it  took  some  four
    years for a correction to be made in relation to the underpaid tax, and
    the timing of the correction virtually coincided  with  preparation  to
    make a further Leave to Remain application.  The FtTJ  found  that  the
    Appellant's proffered explanations were  not  plausible.   This  was  a
    finding that he was entitled to make on the evidence before him.

22. The FtTJ set out at [34] that, although the standard of  proof  is  the
    balance of probability, a finding that a person has been deceitful  and
    dishonest in relation to his tax affairs with the consequence  that  he
    is denied settlement in this country is a  very  serious  finding  with
    serious consequences. With this in mind the judge went on to conduct an
    Article 8 balancing exercise.

23. The judge made several findings in the round in conducting the  Article
    8 exercise.  He reminded himself that the Appellant had no extant leave
    and that his leave in the UK had always been on a temporary basis.   He
    took the Appellant's health condition into account but balanced against
    that the fact that no evidence had been put forward to  show  that  the
    Appellant could not access medical treatment in Sri Lanka [40].

24. The judge was clearly aware that the Appellant had now been in  the  UK
    for ten years and would have developed a private life, but against that
    he found that the Appellant was either dishonest in either his dealings
    with the tax Authorities of this  country  or  alternatively  had  been
    deceitful in his dealings with the SSHD by overinflating his income  in
    order to gain further leave.

25. The judge went on to look at Article 8  outside  the  Rules  but  found
    nothing was put forward of an exceptional nature  which  would  prevent
    the Appellants from continuing to enjoy their family life  outside  the
    UK. He discounted the claim of threats of family trouble put forward by
    the Appellant as a discredited exaggeration.  He took into account  the
    best interests of the Appellants' 3-year-old child who had been born in
    the UK but found that her best interests would be to  remain  with  her
    parents [42].

26. In short I find that the judge has considered with care  and  in  great
    detail all the evidence that  was  placed  before  him.   He  has  made
    findings which were based on the evidence and which were open to him to
    make.  His conclusions that the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain is not  a  disproportionate
    interference with their  right  to  family/private  life.   It  follows
    therefore that these appeals are dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 1st April 2019 stands.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
promulgated on 1st April 2019  discloses  no  error  of  law.  The  decision
therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made. I was not asked to make one.

Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     30 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     30 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
