
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: HU/01040/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                   | Decision signed: 10.11.2015         |
|On 26.10.2015                        | sent out: on 13.11.2015             |


                                   Before:

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                                Tunde KAZEEM
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
The appellant in person
Mr K Norton for the respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Jane  Nightingale),  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  13
    August, to  a human rights appeal against deportation by a  citizen  of
    Nigeria, born 16 June 1983.

 2. Notice of hearing was given on 6 October, to the appellant and his then
    solicitors,  Rest  Harrow  LLP.  Directions  already  sent  out  on  30
    September had contained this:

         "The parties shall prepare for the forthcoming hearing on the basis
         that it will be confined to whether the determination of the First-
         tier Tribunal should be set aside  for  legal  error  and,  if  so,
         whether the decision in the appeal can be re-made without having to
         hear oral evidence; in which eventuality the Tribunal is likely  to
         proceed immediately with a view to re-making the decision."

 3. While some of the legal jargon in that notice might not  have  been  as
    clear  as  one  would  have  wished,  the  appellant's  solicitors  had
    discussed its implications with him before  the  hearing,  and  it  was
    clear that he understood them.  He  told  me,  as  the  solicitors  had
    confirmed in a letter of 23 October, enclosing a handwritten note  from
    him, that he had chosen to represent himself before me, as he had  been
    advised that a fresh hearing of the evidence was unlikely. This  in  my
    view was a realistic assessment of the  situation  by  the  solicitors,
    since, as will become clear, the result of this appeal will depend very
    much more on secondary evaluation of the facts than on primary findings
    on credibility or other points. I did my best to explain things to  the
    appellant as it went along.

 4. History  The appellant had first come to this country with  his  father
    in 1996, when he was 13. He stayed on here with his mother; but it  was
    not till 2007, by which time he was 24, that any attempt  was  made  to
    regularize his situation, by way of an application for leave for him to
    remain as the 'unmarried partner' of a British citizen. That leave  was
    granted, following a successful appeal in 2008, and lasted  till  2011:
    before it ran out, the appellant applied for further leave to remain on
    a human rights basis, but that application was rejected,  for  lack  of
    the necessary fee, and was not renewed.  Meanwhile  the  appellant  had
    already started to display symptoms of  what  was  described  as  drug-
    induced psychosis, resulting in two stays in hospital  between  2004  -
    08; but in that year his prognosis was said to be good.

 5. However the appellant had already begun to offend against the  criminal
    law: in July 2007 he was disqualified from driving for 18  months,  for
    failing to provide a specimen of breath; but in September that year  he
    was before a magistrates' court again for driving whilst  disqualified,
    which, not too surprisingly in the circumstances, resulted in his being
    sent to prison for four months. Another three months' sentence for  the
    same offence followed in May 2008.

 6. Meanwhile the appellant's personal life had been eventful, since he had
    begotten two children with different women: a  daughter,  now  12,  and
    referred to by the judge as L, with a woman who in the interests of her
    daughter's anonymity I shall refer to simply  by  her  Christian  name,
    Samantha; and a son K, now 8, with another woman called Christine.

 7. It was the appellant's relationship with Christine which had led to his
    recent, and more serious pattern of offending.  In  2010  he  had  been
    sentenced to a community order, with a restraining order protecting her
    till 2012. However in 2011 he was back before  the  magistrates'  court
    for breach of that order, for  which  a  further  community  order  was
    imposed, and the restraining order continued. Later that  year  he  was
    dealt with for further breaches, this  time  of  the  community  order,
    rather than the restraining order. In May 2013 he was sentenced  to  20
    weeks' imprisonment for harassing Christine; but in July that  year  he
    was back in court for the same thing, and this time received a sentence
    of 26 weeks, the most the magistrates could give for a single offence.

 8. The next thing that happened on this front was  on  6  September  2014,
    when the appellant went round to the flat where Christine  and  K  were
    living, and began knocking, first on the door,  and  then  on  all  the
    windows, including K's bedroom window, upsetting him. This went on  for
    about half an hour, during which the appellant seemed  to  be  laughing
    all the time. The police were called, and he was arrested.

 9. The appellant's explanation in the Crown Court for  his  behaviour  was
    that he was having trouble getting to see K;  but,  as  the  sentencing
    judge pointed out, he had solicitors dealing with that problem, and was
    well aware that was the way to handle it. This time the appellant again
    pled guilty before the magistrates; but they committed him for sentence
    to the Crown Court. The judge noted what  was  described  in  the  pre-
    sentence report as the 'medium risk' of the  appellant's  re-offending;
    but he said he was particularly concerned about the risk he posed, "...
    because there is a pattern which appears to be escalating"; he went  on
    to note with concern the risk the appellant posed to K's  psychological
    well-being. The judge took the starting-point for  what  the  appellant
    had done as 15 months' imprisonment; but, in view of his early plea, he
    reduced that to  ten  months.  The  judge  made  no  reference  to  any
    psychological incapacity or lack of responsibility on  the  appellant's
    part.

10. That sentence did not of course make the appellant liable to  automatic
    deportation; but on 15 November 2014 the Home Office decided to  deport
    him, as a person whose persistent offending made his removal  conducive
    to the public good. On 12 January 2015 a deportation order  was  served
    on the appellant, and on the 15th he was transferred to  a  psychiatric
    hospital "due to a relapse in his mental health". He is now however  in
    immigration detention, and there was no suggestion before the judge  or
    me that he was unfit to give evidence, or to be removed, if it came  to
    that. The appellant impressed  me  as  entirely  lucid  and  reasonable
    during the hearing. In April the deportation  order  was  revoked,  and
    further representations invited, the rejection  of  which  led  to  the
    decision under appeal.

11. Law      The judge  helpfully  set  out  the  Immigration  Rules  which
    applied to this case, as well as some which did not.  I  shall  do  the
    same, so far as necessary.

         '398.       Where a person claims that their deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and ...

                 c) the deportation of the person from the UK  is  conducive
                    to the public good and in the public  interest  because,
                    in the view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending
                    has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a  persistent
                    offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

                 a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who
                    is in the UK, and

                     i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                    ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously  for  at
                        least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                        the immigration decision; and in either case

                        (a)      it would be unduly harsh for the child  to
                             live in the country to which the person  is  to
                             be deported; and

                        (b)      it would be unduly harsh for the child  to
                             remain in the UK without the person who  is  to
                             be deported

         399A.       This paragraph applies where paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

                 a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most
                    of his life ...'

12. Quite rightly, there was no challenge, before the judge or me,  to  the
    Secretary  of  State's  view  that  the  appellant  was  a  'persistent
    offender' under paragraph 398 (c). It follows  that  the  Secretary  of
    State, and the judge had first to consider whether  paragraphs  399  or
    399A applied to him. It is clear that paragraph 399A does not, because,
    though he may have been in this country for  most  of  his  life,  only
    three years (2008 - 11: see History) were with leave. So one  turns  to
    399: the Secretary of State and the judge accepted that  the  appellant
    had a 'genuine and subsisting relationship' with L, who  is  a  British
    citizen, and for whom it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  have  to  go  to
    Nigeria. The next question is whether it would be unduly harsh for  her
    to remain here without the appellant.

13. This was the first point on which the judge's decision  was  challenged
    by the Home Office. Without going into the details  of  their  somewhat
    prolix grounds, I  drew  the  appellant's  attention  to  this  readily
    understood point. At paragraph 65 the judge made this finding:

         "I am satisfied on balance,  albeit  only  just,  that  there  will
         likely be an adverse impact on "L" if she can not [sic]  renew  her
         regular face-to-face contact with her father."

    However at her concluding paragraph 75 the judge went on to say this:

         "Taking the evidence before me in the round, I am satisfied on  the
         balance of probabilities that the effect on the child "L"  of  this
         appellant's  removal   would   be   unduly   harsh   in   all   the
         circumstances."

14. I could not see anything between these two passages which had  led  the
    judge from being "only just" satisfied on the point she  considered  at
    65, to the strong finding with which she ended at 75. There had been  a
    good deal of intervening  discussion  of  the  appellant's  own  mental
    state; but I could not see anything to justify this progression  on  L;
    nor, when I  put  it  to  him  with  suitable  explanation,  could  the
    appellant. It must follow that the judge's decision was wrong  in  law,
    at least to  the  extent  that  she  failed  properly  to  explain  her
    conclusion on the point on which she allowed the appeal.

15. Fresh decision  It followed that I needed to  re-decide  the  case  for
    myself: as I explained to the appellant,  I  was  entirely  content  to
    adopt the judge's primary findings of fact, including her conclusion at
    65, and her recital of the evidence given  before  her.  The  appellant
    relied on two main points before me: first there was the likely  effect
    of his removal on L, which was the basis on which the judge allowed his
    appeal; and second the consequences of it for him.

16. Effect on L     L's mother Samantha did not come to the hearing  before
    the judge: the appellant said she had no-one to help her look  after  L
    or her two other children, though she did manage to hold down  a  part-
    time job. Nor did she appear before me: the appellant said she  was  on
    holiday with the children (it was half-term for  many).  So,  like  the
    judge, I have to rely on the letter Samantha sent on 26 April, to 'whom
    it may concern'.

17. Samantha said she and the appellant had parted soon after L was born in
    2003:

         "... although me and [the appellant's] relationship came to an  end
         we have a great connection for our daughter  also  [the  appellant]
         has a great bond with his daughter he has regular contact with  her
         every fortnight from when she was little and this has been  an  on-
         going thing despite him being in and out of hospital and prison  he
         has always been a part of her life he has also financially help  us
         both.

         I believe [the appellant] being deported to his home  country  will
         put a huge impact on L and I because I will  not  have  that  extra
         support of money and it was also will affect L.

         For the last few months L has been suffering from depression due to
         a lot of new changes such as being bullied at school and not  being
         able to see her dad I believe its best that she doesn't see him  in
         a deportation centre as it's not for children especially when  they
         are suffering themselves L has been referred by her GP to  a  child
         psychologist we are still waiting for some counselling sessions  to
         help her with what she is going through.

         I also believe if [the appellant] was deported  back  to  his  home
         country this will break her and their relationship for good which I
         don't want to happen."

18. Since there is no evidence before me from any  child  psychologist,  or
    even from L's GP or her school,  the  only  other  evidence  about  the
    appellant's relationship with L  is  his  own,  and  his  mother's  and
    sister's before the judge. The appellant told her he used to see L, and
    K too before he was sent to prison for breaking the  restraining  order
    (presumably in 2013), every other week-end from Friday to Sunday.  They
    stayed with him, though sometimes he took them to his mother's: he used
    to take them to the park too, and play football and spend time  in  the
    garden with them. However the appellant's mother  told  the  judge  the
    children had used to stay with her, and then she would call him and  he
    would come and take them  out.  She  couldn't  explain  the  difference
    between her evidence and his. The appellant's sister too said  she  had
    used to see the children at her mother's: the last  time  had  been  in
    perhaps 2012.

19. The appellant himself said that before he started his present  time  in
    custody he had used to see L every fourth night; since then he spoke to
    her every fourth night. He thought it would break L's heart and his  if
    he were sent back to Nigeria. As for the conduct for which he had  been
    sent to prison, he had been prescribed medication which had  eventually
    improved his state of mind, since when he hadn't repeated it.

20. The judge did not make any detailed findings about the level of contact
    between the appellant and L:  though  she  did  express  understandable
    concerns (at paragraph 63) about the lack of any evidence going to  L's
    welfare. I am not going to depart from her conclusion that there was  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  them;  but  to  reach  a
    decision on whether separating them by sending the  appellant  back  to
    Nigeria would be unduly harsh for L, I need to  make  my  own  findings
    about their level of contact in the past.

21. I accept the evidence that L (and  K)  had  come  to  stay  with  their
    father's side of the family until  2013  at  latest.  In  view  of  the
    appellant's mother and sister's evidence, I do  not  accept  that  they
    used to stay with him all week-end, though I do accept that he used  to
    take them out from his mother's. On the basis  of  Samantha's  evidence
    (see 17) I accept that L at least used to go and stay there every other
    week-end. I am prepared to accept that he has had  some  phone  contact
    with L from prison  and  detention;  but  without  any  phone  records,
    usually available from places of detention where calls need to be  made
    through the centre's system, I am not prepared to accept  that  it  has
    been as regular as every fourth night, as the appellant maintained.

22. Besides the lack of evidence  from  independent  sources  such  as  L's
    school, GP or a child psychologist, there is, and was before the  judge
    nothing from her either. In the case of a  younger  child,  that  would
    have been no surprise; but a 12-year old who was very much  devoted  to
    her father might perhaps have sent him the occasional card,  given  her
    mother's attitude to their continuing relationship; or have added a few
    words of her own to  what  Samantha  said.  Samantha  acknowledged  the
    financial support she had had from the appellant for L, though  he  can
    have been in no position to provide any since 2013.

23. The appellant was  till  shortly  before  the  hearing  represented  by
    solicitors (who wrote in on 30 October to say  they  were  representing
    him once again), and counsel appeared for him before the  judge.  There
    is however no recent independent evidence of any contact  he  may  have
    had with L, or of the likely effect  on  her  of  only  being  able  to
    continue it remotely, as in fact has been the case  for  at  least  the
    last year, since his present time in custody began.

24. As already noted, the appellant cannot qualify for consideration  under
    paragraph 399A, since, though he may have been here  for  most  of  his
    life, only three years of his stay were lawful. Paragraph 399A  (a)  is
    in a sense the other side of the ratio in Maslov v. Austria  -  1638/03
    [2008] ECHR 546: see paragraph 75

         "... for a settled migrant who has lawfully spent all or the  major
         part of his or her childhood and youth in  the  host  country  very
         serious reasons are required to justify expulsion."

25. This appellant does not come within  that  category.  Unless  he  comes
    within paragraph 399 (a), because the effect of his removal on  L  will
    be unduly harsh, then (see paragraph 398)

         "... the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by
         other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

26. As to the effect on L, Mr Norton referred me to the recent decision  in
    KMO (section 117 - unduly harsh) [2015]  UKUT  543  (IAC),  disagreeing
    with an earlier one in MAB (para 399; "unduly harsh") [2015]  UKUT  435
    (IAC). Since KMO  is more in favour of the appellant, I need say little
    more than that I prefer it. The effect  of  KMO   is  set  out  in  the
    judicial head-note as follows:

         "... the word  "unduly"  in  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  requires
         consideration of whether, in the light of the  seriousness  of  the
         offences committed by the foreign criminal and the public  interest
         considerations that come  into  play,  the  impact  on  the  child,
         children or partner of  the  foreign  criminal  being  deported  is
         inordinately or excessively harsh."

27. This is hardly surprising, and clearly right, though no doubt it had to
    be said in  'reported'  form  because  of  MAB.  Turning  back  to  the
    seriousness of this appellant's offences, while those set out at  5  do
    show that, as someone who drove whilst  disqualified  on  two  separate
    occasions, one of them very soon after  he  had  been  dealt  with  for
    failing to provide a specimen, he was to that extent already in 2007  -
    08 'a persistent offender who shows  a  particular  disregard  for  the
    law', those of really significant concern are dealt with at 7 - 9.

28. The sentencing  judge  went  through  the  appellant's  history,  which
    resulted in his having to deal with him for "... what appears to  be  a
    fifth breach of a court imposed order", and took "a very serious  view"
    of his offending. Put shortly, the appellant seems to have persistently
    harassed Christine in her own home from 2010 till 2014, since when  his
    remand in custody, followed by the sentence of  imprisonment,  and  his
    present immigration detention made that no longer possible. Whether  or
    not he meant her any serious harm, she must have been frightened, for K
    as well as herself, as the sentencing judge pointed out. If anyone ever
    was 'a persistent offender who shows a  particular  disregard  for  the
    law', it was this appellant during that time.

29. The appellant's explanation is that he was having difficulty in  seeing
    K; but of course his own behaviour must have made whatever arrangements
    there were, or whatever he  was  trying  to  achieve,  very  much  more
    difficult over the time in question. As the  sentencing  judge  pointed
    out, he had solicitors acting for him on that problem,  and  must  have
    known very well he should take it up through them. If  it  had  been  a
    question of one isolated occasion, when his wish to see K had  got  the
    better of his judgment, then it might have been  different;  but  these
    were five separate occasions over four years. If the appellant's  state
    of mind was to blame, then he  had  been  prescribed  medication  which
    later  dealt  with  it;  but  I  do  not  think  he  can   escape   the
    responsibility for his own actions in that way, since  the  remedy  was
    literally in his own hands.

30. That is the background against which  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
    removal on L has to be considered. Looking at the evidence  about  her,
    she used to see him regularly at his mother's at week-ends  till  2013;
    but she has not seen him since he was remanded in custody in 2014. That
    was her mother's decision; and it is not  my  business  to  approve  or
    disapprove of it. Since then, I  accept  that  L  has  had  some  phone
    contact with her father, though not as much as he says.

31. As I pointed out at 22, there is not only no evidence from  independent
    sources about the likely effect of the appellant's removal  on  L,  but
    nothing about him from her either. Naturally his mother and sister have
    supported him, and gave evidence in person before the judge to  do  so.
    However, L's mother Samantha was best placed to deal with the effect on
    her: while her position may have made it hard  for  her  to  appear  in
    person, either before the judge or me, to do so, the lack of  any  oral
    evidence from her on either occasion leaves me to rely on what she said
    in her letter (see 17).

32. Samantha says the appellant's removal would have "a huge impact" on  L,
    and break her and his relationship for good. She does not deal, as  she
    might have been asked to in oral evidence, with the  current  part,  if
    any, that the appellant plays in L's life; or with how  L  would  cope,
    not just with his absence, unseen in detention in this country, but far
    away in Nigeria. There is no mention of any family  visits  they  might
    make there, or of what IT skills L (like most  young  people  nowadays)
    might have to help her keep in touch with her father there.

33. In the end, I am left with general assertions about the effect that the
    appellant's removal would have on L. I have no doubt it would have some
    effect, even though she does not see him as things have stood  for  the
    past year or more. However, girls of 12 are at a period of rapid change
    in their lives, when their mothers and school-friends may be  the  most
    important people for them. This is not of course to run down  the  part
    played by fathers of pre-teen girls, but simply to set it  in  context.
    If this appellant were innocent of any crime, then I should be sorry to
    see him parted from L, perhaps till  she  was  grown-up,  and  able  to
    travel to see him on her own. However, in the context of this  case  as
    it is, I could not consider that  consequence  of  his  own  activities
    unduly harsh, either for him or for her.

34. Given the way that the appellant's case has been presented, both before
    the judge and before me, it does not seem to me  that  this  conclusion
    leaves much room for 'very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
    those described in paragraphs 399  and  399A'.  The  appellant  himself
    referred to the length of time he has been in this  country,  19  years
    out of his 32 by the date of the decision under appeal. That  does  not
    give him any independent claim to leave to remain under the Rules; nor,
    without any leave for more than three years out of that time,  does  it
    bring him within the principle in Maslov. It does not seem to  me  that
    his long residence can amount to  'very  compelling  circumstances'  in
    that sense. It follows that the decision is re-made by  dismissing  his
    appeal.

Home Office appeal

Decision re-made: appellant's appeal dismissed


                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
