
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01118/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th December 2016                         |On 23rd December 2016         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         reshmaben JAYESHKUMAR patel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Seeboruth of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. For the avoidance of confusion with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  will
    hereinafter refer to Mrs Patel as the Appellant and  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department as the Respondent.

 2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for leave to  remain
    on the basis of her private and family life on 10th June 2015.  She was
    required to leave the United Kingdom.  The appeal was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Aziz ("the Judge") following a hearing on 14th June
    2016.

 3. She is a citizen of India who was  born  on  1st  December  1975.   Her
    husband Mr Jayash Kumar Patel is an Indian national who has no leave to
    be in the United Kingdom.  Their children, Akash (born on  26th  August
    1994) and Harshkumar (born on 20th March 1997) were both adults at  the
    date of decision and by that date had both been given leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom, in the case of Akash until 14th March  2017  and
    in the case of Harshkumar until 23rd January 2018.  That  evidence  was
    before the Judge when he made his decision.

The Grant of Permission

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  granted  permission  to  appeal  (28th
    October 2016).  She said it is arguable that the Judge may  have  erred
    in the proportionality assessment in that the  Tribunal  did  not  take
    into account the poor immigration history  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband in the consideration of the  reasonableness  of  requiring  the
    children to leave the United Kingdom  (see  MA  (Pakistan)  and  Others
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.)

The Respondent's Position

 5. The Appellant had overstayed significantly and the Judge only  comments
    on the  positive  aspects  of  the  appeal.   The  Appellant  had  been
    untruthful to the Entry Clearance Officer and lied regarding  how  long
    she intended to come here.  Reliance was placed on MA.  In essence,  if
    Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to dictate the outcome
    of the leave application, it would have said so.  The concept of  "best
    interests" is after all a well-established one.  Even where the child's
    best interests are to stay, it may still be not unreasonable to require
    the child to leave [47].  There is nothing intrinsically  illogical  in
    the notion that whilst the child's best interests are for him or her to
    stay, it is not unreasonable to expect him or  her  to  go  [54].   The
    conduct of the parent is relevant to their own  situation  which  bears
    upon the wider public interest and  does  not  amount  to  blaming  the
    children even if they may be prejudiced as a result  [88].   The  court
    can have regard to the wider  public  interest,  including  immigration
    history of the applicant and his parents [101].  These are not  British
    children.

Appellant's Position

 6.  No  reply  notice  was  filed.   It  was  submitted  orally  that  the
    determination was comprehensive and the appropriate factors were  taken
    into account.  Both children had been granted  leave  to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom and in those circumstances it is not reasonable  to  ask
    them now to leave.  They are both doing well  here  in  their  studies.
    The Judge did not misdirect himself on the law and  took  into  account
    all relevant factors.

Judge's Determination

 7. It was found in the determination that [50]:

      i) The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with her spouse and two
         children on 5th June 2003.  They entered the country on visit visas
         and overstayed.

     ii) The family have continuously resided in this  country  since  their
         arrival.

    iii) In February 2012 the Appellant, her husband and her  children  made
         an  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  that   the
         Appellant's two sons had  met  the  long  residence  rule  for  the
         children by having lived in the United Kingdom continuously for  in
         excess of seven years.  At the date of  application,  the  children
         had been in the United Kingdom continuously for nearly nine  years.



     iv) When the Respondent eventually considered the application  the  two
         sons were granted limited leave to remain.

      v) Neither of the Appellant's sons has formed an independent  life  or
         independent  family  unit.   The  Appellant's  youngest  son  still
         resides with his  parents  and  attends  his  local  college.   The
         Appellant's oldest son is away  at  university  during  term  time.
         However, he returns to the family home during his vacation periods.
          Both children continue to be financially and emotionally dependent
         upon their parents even though they had both turned 18 by the  date
         of hearing.

    [52] Both children have been in the education system since the ages  of
    6 and 9 respectively.  The oldest child  is  now  at  university.   The
    youngest child is at college.  Both are at important  stages  in  their
    education.  Throughout this period of their lives they have been shaped
    by United Kingdom culture, values, pastimes, living standards, language
    and the prevailing education  system.   Critical  milestones  in  their
    educational development are now looming.  The children have  made  good
    academic progress, that they have a circle of friends and  they  engage
    in extra curricular activities.  Their integration  in  United  Kingdom
    society and culture is complete.  Their connections with their  country
    of origin are minimal, extending barely beyond the facts that they  are
    persons of Indian nationality and were born in that country  and  spent
    the first few years of their life there.

    [53]: The children's best interests under private life would be  served
    by remaining in the United Kingdom.  The four dominant factors are:

      a) their length of residence in the United Kingdom,

      b) their full integration in the United Kingdom society,

      c) their ages, and

      d) their minimal ties with their country of origin.

    [54]: Both children have, viz a viz their parents, the bonds  of  love,
    affection, respect and dependency which one would expect of  any  child
    in a stable, settled family.  Their best interests would be best served
    by continuing to live in the United Kingdom, with their parents.

    [56] Regarding whether it would be reasonable to expect them  to  leave
    the United Kingdom (EX.1(a)):

    i) the Appellant and her husband have for the most part been unlawfully
       present since their arrival in this country;

    (ii) they have established private lives in the United Kingdom, but  in
         circumstances where their stay  was  precarious  because  they  had
         limited or no leave;

    (iii)    prior to their arrival both  the  Appellant  and  her  husband
         spent the majority of their lives in India;

    (iv) they are the parents of two children who have  lived  continuously
         in the United Kingdom for nine years at the date of application and
         who were both under 18 at the date of application.

    [58] Removal would be hugely disruptive for  the  children  especially.
    It would decimate the friendships, relationships  and  activities  that
    form the core of their private lives.  It  would  also  obstruct  their
    education which is at critical stages.   For  both  children  it  would
    involve their transfer to a society whose culture,  values,  norms  and
    language are largely alien to them.  Although their  parents  are  both
    Indians, the children's exposure to Indian culture is limited.  On  the
    other hand, it  can  be  argued  that  given  the  children's  existing
    educational achievements, intellectual ability and support of a  stable
    family unit, they could, with time, adapt to life in India.   There  is
    no suggestion that their health would be detrimentally affected.

    [60] Ultimately, the factors to which he gave determinative weight  are
    the length of the children's residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  their
    deep emotion to British life; the critical stage in  their  educational
    development; their minimal connections with their  country  of  origin;
    and the likelihood that they would both make a useful  contribution  to
    United Kingdom society.  In all the circumstances, he did not find that
    it would be reasonable to expect  the  children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

Discussion

 8. MA explains that if Parliament had wanted the child's best interests to
    dictate the outcome of the leave application  it  would  have  said  so
    [47].  The court can have regard to the wider public interest including
    the immigration history [101].

 9. am satisfied that, contrary to that which  has  been  asserted  by  the
    Respondent, the Judge was fully aware that the parents have  been  here
    unlawfully and  that  they  had  misled  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    regarding the length of time they were coming here and  had  overstayed
    their visas.  That is because the Judge specifically referred to it  in
    paragraph [56].  He did not exclude that from  his  consideration.   He
    simply did not need to repeat it.  It is correct that the child's  best
    interests do not determine the outcome of the  application.  The  Judge
    however was fully aware of all the relevant factors and made a decision
    open to him on the evidence which he set out in detail.

10. I am not therefore satisfied that there was a material error of law.

Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

12. I do not set aside the decision.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 23rd December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer

