
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01336/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 June 2019                      |On 26 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     T Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Sher, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  1  January  1990.  He
    appealed the decision of the respondent on 4 January 2019 to refuse his
    application for leave to remain in the UK on human rights grounds.  His
    appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N Lodge  ("the
    FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 11 April 2019.

 2. Permission to  appeal  to  this  tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mark Davies in the following terms:

         "...


         2. Its [sic] arguable that the Judge did not address himself to the
         factors identified by Lord Bingham in the case of Razgar. He should
         have asked himself the questions raised by  his  Lordship  in  that
         case. It is not evident from the decision that he did so.


         3. The grounds and the decision do disclose an  arguable  error  of
         law."


The Hearing

 3. Mr Sher, for the appellant, submitted, in summary, that  the  FTTJ  had
    given little consideration to the Article 8 issue  of  proportionality:
    the FTTJ ought to have adopted a structured approach,  as  required  by
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. Had that been done, the  legal  principles,  set
    out in the Article 8 jurisprudence, could have been  identified.  There
    was, for example, no reference to consideration of the  rights  of  the
    family pursuant to Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 38.   There  was,  he
    submitted, insufficient analysis especially as regards  the  impact  of
    the appellant's removal on  the  rest  of  the  family;  his  wife  had
    healthcare concerns, as documented.

 4. There was, Mr Sher submitted, no discussion as to whether the financial
    criteria in the Immigration Rules were met; there ought to  have  been,
    one way or the other.  He submitted that, pursuant to Chikwamba v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 40, where the only issue was the financial criteria,  there
    was little sense in expecting the appellant to  return  to  seek  entry
    clearance when that application  would  be  granted  anyway.   Mr  Sher
    submitted that the only other issue of relevance  was  the  appellant's
    lack of immigration status. He referred to R (Agyarko)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    UKSC 11 at [51] to  submit  that,  where  the  applicant  was  residing
    unlawfully, if he were otherwise certain to be granted leave  to  enter
    from outside the  UK,  there  "might  be  no  public  interest  in  his
    removal".  This had not been discussed in the FTTJ's decision. Mr  Sher
    submitted that, at the time of hearing, the appellant's wife  had  been
    employed as a teaching assistant; there  was  also,  before  the  FTTJ,
    evidence of savings. These  were  matters  which  ought  to  have  been
    considered "one way or the other".

 5. Mr Sher accepted there was some reference in the decision to the impact
    upon the rest of the family but this was  insufficient,  especially  if
    the appellant's wife were to accompany him to Pakistan.   This  was  an
    extended family: the appellant's wife's mother was  the  primary  carer
    for the  appellant's  sister-in-law  who  was  severely  disabled.  The
    appellant and his wife helped with  day-to-day  care.  The  appellant's
    wife was the secondary carer.  If the appellant's wife had to accompany
    the appellant to Pakistan, a greater burden  would  be  placed  on  the
    appellant's mother-in-law who had her own  health  issues.  These  were
    matters  which  had  not  been  given  sufficient  "consideration   and
    investigation".

 6. As regards the issue of Section EX.1 in Appendix FM, and whether  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK,
    Mr Sher submitted the appellant's wife was British and had  resided  in
    the UK for many years. She would not be able  to  overcome  easily  the
    adjustment to life in Pakistan. She had a private and  family  life  in
    the UK, her immediate family was here (her mother,  siblings)  and  she
    was in employment here. Greater anxious scrutiny should have been given
    to  these  factors  in  deciding  whether  there  were   insurmountable
    obstacles.

 7. For the respondent, Mr Tarlow relied on the respondent's Rule 24  reply
    to the effect that the challenge was a mere disagreement with valid and
    reasoned findings.  The FTTJ had correctly  considered  the  appeal  by
    identifying whether the appellant met the Immigration Rules and finding
    he had established a genuine and subsisting relationship. The FTTJ then
    considered  whether  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles   to   that
    relationship continuing in Pakistan, as required by  EX.1(b).  Detailed
    reasons were given for the FTTJ's rational conclusion  that  this  test
    was not met.  The FTTJ took  into  account  all  relevant  factors  and
    arguments raised.  The FTTJ then went on to consider the appeal outside
    the  Rules,  namely  whether  there  were   exceptional   circumstances
    rendering  removal  disproportionate.  This  approach  was  correct  in
    precarious family life cases, having been approved in Agyarko. The FTTJ
    had made proper reference to s117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act").  It  was  submitted  that  explicit
    reference to the step by step approach in Razgar was  unnecessary  and,
    in any event, immaterial.

Discussion

 8. The FTTJ has set out the evidence before  him.   He  indicated  to  the
    appellant, at the hearing, that he would find  the  appellant  and  his
    wife were in a genuine relationship pursuant to E-LTR.1.7. He  repeated
    that in his decision,  giving  his  reasons  for  that  finding.   That
    decision is not under challenge by the respondent  albeit  I  note  the
    appellant and sponsor engaged in an Islamic  marriage  ceremony  before
    the appellant's decree absolute had been issued: the marriage  ceremony
    was on 20 May 2017 whereas the decree absolute was issued on 5  January
    2018.

 9. Before the FTTJ, the appellant's counsel identified that the only issue
    in dispute under the Immigration Rules was whether  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated he met the requirements of Section EX.1(b).  Section  EX.1
    of Appendix FM applies if...

         "(a)     ... [not applicable] ...  or


         (b)      the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
         with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled
         in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
         protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life
         with that partner continuing outside the UK.


         EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
         life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
         partner."


10. The definition at EX.2 is important. It refers  to  difficulties  which
    would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in  continuing  their
    family life outside the UK and which would,  inter  alia,  entail  very
    serious hardship for them.  There is no reference in this definition to
    the impact on others. Thus the challenge on the  basis  that  the  FTTJ
    failed to take into account, when considering EX.1(b),  the  impact  on
    others of the  appellant  and  his  wife  relocating  to  Pakistan,  is
    unsustainable.

11. As regards EX.1(b), the FTTJ considers the  appellant's  wife's  health
    issues at [29]. He notes her health problems "have  not  precluded  her
    from working, apparently full time. She is a teaching assistant and has
    been since July 2018... Although it is said in her  solicitors'  letter
    ... that she passionately wants to become a teacher I have a number  of
    letters indicating that she has been offered a place to  study  law  at
    universities within commuting distance of her home address."  Thus  the
    FTTJ has taken into account the appellant's  wife's  medical  condition
    and future plans.  He addresses the claim that  medical  treatment  may
    not be available in Pakistan for the appellant's wife's  conditions  by
    stating he has "not  been  presented  with  any  reliable  evidence  to
    suggest that is the  case.  I  appreciate  that  medical  treatment  in
    Pakistan is not free but again it has not been suggested to me that the
    sponsor will not  be  able  to  find  the  money  to  pay  for  medical
    treatment. The appellant is well qualified and I  cannot  see  that  he
    would not be in a position  to  obtain  decent  employment  which  will
    enable  his  wife  to  continue  to  have  treatment  for  her  medical
    problems."

12. The FTTJ notes the appellant lived in Pakistan up to the age of  twenty
    and has family there. He found the appellant has not lost his  cultural
    and linguistic ties to Pakistan. He found  the  appellant  to  be  well
    educated and,  with  his  qualifications,  would  have  little  problem
    finding employment.  He noted the appellant's wife, the sponsor, was of
    Pakistan extraction. He took into account her evidence that  she  would
    not be able to adapt to Pakistan, the culture of  which  was  alien  to
    her.  The FTTJ was unable to find that would be the case because it had
    not been suggested to him that she did not speak the language;  in  any
    event, even if that were the case, she would have the  support  of  her
    husband and his family to integrate.  There is no submission before  me
    that that finding is based  on  a  misinterpretation  of  the  evidence
    before the FTTJ.

13. The FTTJ refers at [42] to there being no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    "family life continuing in Pakistan". It can be inferred, since he then
    goes on to find that the appellant does not meet EX.1(b), that the FTTJ
    is referring here to the appellant's family life with  his  wife  since
    that is the limit of Section EX.1(b), and not to a  wider  family  life
    within the extended family.  That finding is sustainable and  based  on
    the evidence before the FTTJ.  It is unassailable.

14. I turn to the FTTJ's  findings  outside  the  Rules,  pursuant  to  the
    Article 8 jurisprudence.

15. In assessing the decision I have taken account of the guidance  of  the
    Court of Appeal. Burnett LJ  in  EA  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  10  at
    paragraph 27 made the following observations:

         "Decisions of tribunals should  not  become  formulaic  and  rarely
         benefit from copious citation of authority. Arguments  that  reduce
         to the proposition that the F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a
         series of cases in the Court of Appeal  or  elsewhere  will  rarely
         prosper. Similarly, as Lord Hoffmann said in Piglowska v  Piglowski
         [1999] 1 WLR 1360, 1372, "reasons should be read on the  assumption
         that, unless he has demonstrated the contrary, the judge  knew  how
         he should perform his functions and which matters  he  should  take
         into account". He added that an "appellate court should resist  the
         temptation to subvert the principle that they should not substitute
         their own discretion for that of the  judge  by  a  narrow  textual
         analysis which enables them to claim that he misdirected  himself".
         Moreover, some  principles  are  so  firmly  embedded  in  judicial
         thinking that they do not need to be recited. For example, it would
         be surprising to see in every civil judgment  a  paragraph  dealing
         with the burden and standard of proof; or  in  every  running  down
         action a treatise, however short, on the law  of  negligence.  That
         said, the reader of any judicial decision must  be  reassured  from
         its content that the court or  tribunal  has  applied  the  correct
         legal test to any question it is deciding."

16. The FTTJ did not make an explicit finding as  to  whether  family  life
    existed  between  the  appellant,  his  wife  and  her  mother   and/or
    sibling/s.  However, irrespective of the absence of such a finding, the
    FTTJ considered the evidence of inter-relationships within the  family,
    particularly in the care of the appellant's disabled  sister-in-law  at
    [31] - [37]. Having set out the evidence on the issue he identifies its
    deficiencies: there was no medical evidence to support the  appellant's
    claim that his sister-in-law "would be impacted by his and his wife not
    being part of her life"; the care plan spoke of all the family  helping
    to look after the appellant's  sister-in-law  at  home,  that  she  was
    living with her mother, two elder  sisters  and  younger  brother;  and
    there was no up to date evidence than a report by Kirklees Council (the
    family's former home area) dated 17 January 20917.  The FTTJ noted  the
    family could  not  all  be  living  together  because  three  different
    addresses had been provided in the recent past; he  found  it  unlikely
    the entire family had moved from one address to anther with a  severely
    disabled child over the last  two  years.   He  noted  the  family  all
    appeared to be living in a rented property of which the  appellant  and
    his wife were the tenancy holders.

17. The FTTJ concluded that, irrespective of the position over the previous
    two years, he was unable to accept that  the  appellant's  absence  and
    that of his wife would lead  to  a  significant  deterioration  in  the
    appellant's sister-in-law's condition.  This is a finding of fact which
    is sustainable on the evidence, given the  deficiencies  the  FTTJ  had
    identified.   The FTTJ also noted that he had not  been  provided  with
    medical evidence to corroborate the claim that the appellant's  mother-
    in-law suffered from high blood pressure, arthritis and  migraines  and
    "often feels unwell".  He noted, in any event,  "it  is  not  suggested
    that she cannot continue to be the primary carer for her daughter...".

18. These are findings which are consistent  with  and  supportive  of  the
    FTTJ's findings at [43] to the effect that there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances in this case.

19. While the FTTJ does not make reference to the guidance  in  Razgar,  by
    inference he  applies  it  in  that  he  has  addressed  the  issue  of
    proportionality on the basis of the appellant's claim, irrespective  of
    whether it was grounded in the evidence, that he had a family life with
    his  wife,  his  mother-in-law  and  his  disabled  sister-in-law.   He
    identified the public interest by reference to s117B  and  the  factors
    therein.  The FTTJ erred in one respect in that he found "the appellant
    has entered into a relationship with his sponsor, married her,  in  the
    full knowledge that his immigration status is precarious  and  that  he
    has no leave to remain".  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  appellant  and
    sponsor established their relationship  as  a  result  of  an  arranged
    Islamic marriage ceremony on 20 May 2017. This was the  first  occasion
    the appellant and sponsor met.  On  this  date  the  appellant  was  an
    overstayer, his leave to remain having already been curtailed to expire
    on 26 August 2013.  Thus it was incorrect for the FTTJ to describe  the
    appellant's immigration status as precarious albeit  he  was  right  to
    find the appellant had no leave to  remain  when  the  appellant's  and
    sponsor's family life was established.  It follows  that,  pursuant  to
    s117B(4), little weight was to  be  given  to  that  family  life.   As
    regards the other public interest factors in s117B, the FTTJ noted  the
    appellant spoke English.   It was submitted that the FTTJ had failed to
    make a finding as to whether the appellant met the  financial  criteria
    in the Immigration Rules but  it  is  implicit  from  the  respondent's
    failure to refer to this in the reasons for refusal that  he  fulfilled
    those criteria. Indeed the FTTJ found the appellant was "not likely  to
    be a burden on the state as I am sure he will obtain employment  should
    his immigration status alter". This is consistent with the respondent's
    lack of challenge on that issue.  In any event as the  FTTJ  states  at
    [43], the appellant's  ability  to  speak  English  and  his  financial
    independence were neutral factors.  This accords with the  guidance  of
    the Supreme Court in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 at [57]  that  sub-
    sections 117B(2) and (3) "propel a conclusion that, where those factors
    exist, there is a public interest in favour of the claims".

20. Finally, the FTTJ had regard to the maintenance of immigration control,
    which is in the public interest pursuant to s117B(1) and  to  which  he
    was required to have regard by the terms of s117A(2).

21. Taking the decision in the round, it clear that the FTTJ had considered
    the appellant's Article 8 claim  outside  the  Rules  at  its  highest,
    namely on the basis that the appellant had a family life with his wife,
    his mother-in-law, and his disabled sister-in-law.  He  had  previously
    found, on sustainable grounds, that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    criteria in the Immigration Rules for the grant of leave to  remain  on
    the basis of his family life.   He  nonetheless  considered  the  claim
    outside the Rules, albeit he did  not  find  the  appellant's  and  his
    family's circumstances to be exceptional on the  evidence  before  him.
    Having done so, he found on sustainable  grounds  that  the  degree  of
    interference with the appellant's, his wife's, his mother-in-law's  and
    his sister-in-law's protected rights was not such as  to  outweigh  the
    public interest  in  the  maintenance  of  immigration  control.   That
    conclusion is based on the evidence before the FTTJ and is sustainable.
    It contains no material error of law. As was said by  Keene  LJ  in  IA
    (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA  Civ
    323:

         "... in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as
         material unless the decision-maker must have reached the same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is material if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "


22. In the present case the FTTJ identified various flaws in  the  evidence
    before him.  This is a case where the parties to the marriage  did  not
    meet until the day they participated in the Islamic marriage  ceremony.
    While the FTTJ found they had a genuine and subsisting marriage, little
    weight could be given to it because  of  the  terms  of  s117B(2).  The
    ability of the appellant to speak English and  his  lack  of  financial
    dependence on the state, including his ability to find employment,  are
    neutral factors.  The FTTJ was entitled to give significant  weight  to
    the  public  interest  in  this  case  given  both  the  very   limited
    independent evidence of the appellant and his wife taking a significant
    role in the care of his wife's disabled sister and the lack of  medical
    evidence of the inability of the appellant's mother-in-law to  continue
    to care for her disabled daughter if the appellant and his wife were to
    relocate  to  Pakistan  together.   The  FTTJ  did  not  refer  to   it
    specifically but he would have been entitled to take into  account  the
    appellant's very poor immigration history:  his  leave  to  remain  was
    curtailed in August 2013; he made two applications  for  EEA  residence
    cards which were refused in 2013 and 2014; he was served with notice of
    liability to removal as an overstayer on  11  April  2016  and  it  was
    against that background that he  and  the  sponsor  had  their  Islamic
    marriage ceremony about year later at a time  when  the  appellant  was
    still lawfully married to someone  else.   This  history  suggests  the
    appellant was attempting to circumvent the Immigration Rules  in  order
    to remain in this country irrespective of the quality of  his  marriage
    to the sponsor.

23. In the reasons  for  refusal,  the  respondent  had  averred  that  the
    appellant could return to Pakistan, accompanied by his wife, to make an
    application for entry clearance; alternatively his wife could remain in
    the UK while he did so.  The grounds of  appeal  to  the  FTT  make  no
    reference to this reason for refusal  and  the  short  summary  of  the
    appellant's counsel's submissions before the FTTJ do not  refer  to  it
    either.  Nonetheless, the grounds of appeal to this tribunal  refer  to
    the FTTJ having failed to make a finding on this issue  and  that  this
    failure was a material error of law. The FTTJ did  not  refer  to  this
    issue. It was submitted for the appellant,  before  me,  that,  in  the
    light of the guidance in Chikwamba, it was an unlawful interference for
    the appellant  to  be  expected  to  return  to  Pakistan  to  make  an
    application for  entry  clearance,  particularly  as  he  met  all  the
    criteria in the Rules apart from the immigration eligibility  criteria.



24. There is relevant  guidance  in  R  (on  the  application  of  Chen)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department) (Appendix FM - Chikwamba  -
    temporary separation - proportionality) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00189  (IAC)
    which is summarised in the headnote as follows:

         "(i)     Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question
         whether it would be disproportionate to  expect  an  individual  to
         return to his home country to make an entry  clearance  application
         to re-join family members in the U.K. There may be cases  in  which
         there are no insurmountable obstacles to family life being  enjoyed
         outside the U.K.  but  where  temporary  separation  to  enable  an
         individual to make  an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
         disproportionate. In all cases, it will be for  the  individual  to
         place before the Secretary of State evidence  that  such  temporary
         separation will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.
         It will not be enough to rely solely upon the  case-law  concerning
         Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.


         (ii)     Lord Brown was not  laying  down  a  legal  test  when  he
         suggested in  Chikwamba  that  requiring  a  claimant  to  make  an
         application for entry clearance would only  "comparatively  rarely"
         be proportionate in a case involving children (per Burnett J, as he
         then was, in R (Kotecha and Das v SSHD [2011] EWHC 2070 (Admin)).


         (iii)    In an application for leave on the basis of an  Article  8
         claim, the Secretary of State is not obliged to consider whether an
         application for entry clearance (if one were to be  made)  will  be
         successful. Accordingly, her silence on this issue  does  not  mean
         that it is accepted that the requirements for entry clearance to be
         granted are satisfied.


         (iv)     In cases where the Immigration Rules (the  "IRs")  do  not
         fully address an Article 8 claim so that it is necessary  (pursuant
         to R (Nagre)) to consider the claim outside the IRs, a  failure  by
         the decision maker to consider Article 8 outside the IRs will  only
         render the decision unlawful if the claimant  in  fact  shows  that
         there has been (or, in a permission application, arguably has been)
         a substantive breach of his or her rights under Article 8."


25. In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 (a  deport/foreign  criminal
    case) Lord Reed said that "... where a person was residing  in  the  UK
    unlawfully at the time when the relationship was formed, but would have
    been permitted to reside here lawfully if an application were made from
    outside the UK, the latter point should be  taken  into  account.  That
    example illustrates how the distinction between  settled  migrants  and
    aliens residing  in  the  host  country  unlawfully  may  be,  in  some
    situations, of limited practical importance when  translated  into  the
    context of UK immigration law (see, for example, Chikwamba v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40; [2008]  1  WLR  1420".
    In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 10 Lord Reed said again that  if  an  applicant,
    even if residing in the UK unlawfully,  was  otherwise  certain  to  be
    granted leave to enter, at least  if  an  application  were  made  from
    outside the UK, then there might be no public interest in  his  or  her
    removal and that point was illustrated by Chikwamba.  According to  the
    guidance in R (on the application of Kaur) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  1423
    the Chikwamba principle requires a  fact-specific  assessment  in  each
    case, would only apply in a very clear case and  even  then  would  not
    necessarily result in a grant of leave to remain.

26. Neither the appellant nor his wife, or indeed  any  of  the  witnesses,
    identified in their  witness  statements  the  impact  of  a  temporary
    separation the appellant seeks entry clearance from Pakistan.  There is
    brief reference to the appellant's oral  evidence  at  [10]  that  "his
    absence would have an effect on the family and especially his sister in
    law who had learning difficulties. At the present time he cared for her
    and spent all his time wither when she  was  at  home".   In  her  oral
    evidence the appellant's wife referred only to the impact of her moving
    to  Pakistan.  Other  witnesses  only  identified  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's return to Pakistan with or without his wife, rather than  a
    temporary separation.  Thus the appellant adduced no evidence as to the
    impact of a temporary separation, contrary to the guidance in Chen.

27. The FTTJ made findings of fact as  regards  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant and his wife and their roles as  carers  and  helpers  within
    that family, particular as regards the appellant's disabled  sister-in-
    law. He found that the appellant's mother-in-law could continue  to  be
    the primary carer for her disabled daughter.  I was not directed to any
    evidence which the FTTJ had failed to consider  in  connection  with  a
    temporary separation to enable the appellant to seek  entry  clearance.
    While it is right that the FTTJ failed to make a  specific  finding  on
    this issue, had he done so, he  would  have  found  the  appellant  had
    adduced insufficient evidence to  demonstrate  a  temporary  separation
    would interfere disproportionately with the  protected  rights  of  the
    family members whether cumulatively or individually. Thus  the  failure
    of the FTTJ to make a finding on this issue is not a material error  of
    law. The outcome of the appeal would have been no different had he done
    so.

Decision

28. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error of law.

29. I do not set aside the decision of the FTTJ.  This appeal against  that
    decision is dismissed.

30. Given my references to the health  and  disability  of  various  family
    members, the appellant is entitled to anonymity in these proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated:  24 June 2019



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated:  24 June 2019

