
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/01106/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On December 5, 2016                |On December 9, 2016           |
|                                   |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MRS MUKHTARAN BEGUM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bloomer, Counsel, instructed by Prestige
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and she was born  on  January
       1, 1944. On January  31,  2010  the  appellant  entered  the  United
       Kingdom as a family visitor. That visa expired on May 9, 2010 and on
       May 4, 2010 she made an application for indefinite leave to  remain.
       This was refused by the respondent on July 15,  2010.  She  appealed
       that decision and in a decision promulgated  on  September  7,  2010
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Crawford  refused  her  appeal.  An
       unsuccessful appeal was made to the Upper  Tribunal.  On  April  20,
       2015 she made an application for  humanitarian  protection  but  the
       respondent refused this on June 15,  2015.  The  appellant  appealed
       under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
       2002 on June 25, 2015.

    2. The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on December 14, 2015 and in a
       decision  promulgated  on  February  26,  2016  she  dismissed   the
       appellant's appeal under article 8 ECHR and the Immigration Rules.

    3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on  March  11,  2016  against
       that decision.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Pedro on August 2, 2016 and the matter came before me on  the  above
       date.

    5. The appellant and her family were in attendance.

    6. No order for anonymity is made.

SUBMISSIONS

    7. Mr Bloomer relied on the grounds of appeal that had been drafted  by
       different counsel.  In short, he submitted  paragraph  [29]  of  the
       Judge's decision was both inadequate  and  inconsistent.  The  Judge
       found the appellant had protected family life with her daughter  and
       grandchild within article 8(1) ECHR but then  went  onto  find  this
       dependency did not go beyond the normal emotional ties.  There  also
       seemed to be an acknowledgement that the appellant needed  care  but
       the Judge failed to identify what sources of care were available.

    8. Miss Peterson adopted her colleague's Rule 24 statement dated August
       9, 2016. However, she accepted that the Judge's finding at paragraph
       [29] were not adequate but submitted that it would not amount  to  a
       material error in light of the evidence, or lack of it, filed.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

    9. This was only ever an article 8  claim  before  the  Judge  and  the
       Judge's assessment of that claim is dealt with in a brief  paragraph
       (paragraph [29]).

   10. Miss Peterson acknowledged there were  inconsistencies  within  that
       paragraph and  an  overall  balancing  act  had  not  been  properly
       undertaken. Whilst she sought to suggest that such deficiencies  may
       not amount to a material error I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  an
       error.

   11. I therefore set aside the decision under article  8  ECHR  and  have
       proceeded, with the agreement of both representatives to remake it.

   12. This appeal is not the appellant's first appeal to come  before  the
       Tribunal. Unless there is evidence to depart from  earlier  findings
       those findings must stand.

   13. Two particular findings are relevant in this appeal:

        a. Judge Crawford rejected her claim that the appellant's sons  had
           disowned her and he found that she  had  contrived  a  situation
           where it appeared she had no support in Pakistan.


        b. The medical evidence did not demonstrate the appellant  had  any
           treatable illness or that she needed medication.

   14. The  appellant's  bundle  contained  little  medical  evidence  that
       assisted  either  myself  of  the  original  Judge.  Medical  record
       referred to her suffering with a chest infection and the letter from
       the doctor's surgery indicated that she had been referred for an  e-
       ray with a follow up appointment on May  22  2015.  The  letter  was
       dated April 15, 2015. No further medical had been placed before  the
       original Judge when she heard the appeal in December last  year  and
       twelve months later no further evidence  had  been  adduced  to  the
       Upper Tribunal. The information in the  current  documents  did  not
       shift the finding by Judge Crawford.

   15. The Judge had statements and oral evidence from both  the  appellant
       and her daughter. Judge Crawford found that her sons abroad had  nor
       disowned her  and  consequently  there  was  ongoing  support  still
       available.

   16. The appellant placed reliance on her relationship  to  her  daughter
       and grandchild but  the  fact  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
       Immigration Rules for dependants provides some insight into how  the
       appellant's needs could be met in Pakistan.

   17. The appellant relies on  relationships  with  adults  but  for  such
       relationships to engage article  8  ECHR  they  must  demonstrate  a
       dependency over and above normal emotional ties. The  appellant  had
       clearly survived for many years in Pakistan and had only  come  here
       for a visit in 2010. That changed with her original application  for
       indefinite leave to remain but that claim was rejected both  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

   18. The Judge in this current appeal heard oral evidence  and  concluded
       that family members could continue to provide any support  she  felt
       was necessary. Her health was not such that she required  additional
       assistance over and above what any lady of her age may need.

   19. The appellant's original counsel (Mr Holt)  accepted  there  was  no
       claim under the Immigration Rules and  for  article  8  ECHR  to  be
       engaged there must be compelling or exceptional circumstances.

   20. I have considered her circumstances and whilst  family  members  are
       happy to support her the fact remains  these  circumstances  do  not
       demonstrate ties and support beyond the normal emotional  ties  that
       would exist in adults.

   21. Whilst I therefore accept  the  appellant  enjoys  living  with  her
       family, in the absence of additional evidence, this is  insufficient
       to engage article 8 ECHR. An  assessment  of  proportionality  under
       article 8 ECHR is only required if article 8 is engaged but as I  am
       satisfied that article 8 is not engaged, on the current evidence,  I
       dismiss her appeal under article 8 ECHR.

DECISION

   22. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside  the  decision
       in so far as article 8 ECHR is concerned.

   23. I have remade that decision and I dismiss the appeal under article 8
       ECHR.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award because I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
