
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/01149/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |          Decision & Reasons          |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th April 2018                      |          On 3rd May 2018             |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                               MR JASIM UDDIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hasan, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Zahed dismissing his appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
    to refuse the Appellant's application for leave to remain as the spouse
    of a British national.  The decision of Judge Zahed was promulgated  on
    24th July 2017.  The Appellant was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth.   The  grounds  upon   which
    permission was granted may be summarised as follows:

         "1.  It is arguable that the Judge has set  out  an  insufficiently
             extensive analysis in relation  to  the  question  of  whether
             there would be a breach of Article  8  in  respect  of  family
             life.  The Judge has embarked upon a proportionality  exercise
             having taken into account Section 117.

         2.   It is arguable  that  the  Judge  should  have  made  specific
             findings of fact on the basis of the ambit  of  the  available
             evidence given at the  hearing  in  assessing  the  degree  of
             weight to be given to the factors  present.   It  is  arguable
             that the Judge was able to proceed to consider  whether  there
             would be a breach of Article 8 given the findings made by  the
             Judge in relation to the issues raised by the Respondent.   At
             paragraph 16 the Judge  refers  to  the  human  rights  appeal
             having  considered  the  suitability  requirements  under  the
             Rules.  At paragraph 18 the Judge referred to Agyarko.

         3.   It is arguable that having embarked upon  the  proportionality
             exercise the  Judge  attached  undue  initial  weight  to  the
             precariousness of family life in the context of the importance
             of maintaining effective immigration controls.  It is arguable
             that the Judge  attached  undue  weight  to  criteria  in  the
             Immigration Rules in relation to insurmountable  obstacles  in
             contra distinction to factors in favour of the Appellant.   It
             is arguable the Judge has  not  made  sufficient  findings  in
             relation to the evidence given at the hearing in  the  context
             of factors in favour of the Appellant  and  the  circumstances
             appertaining to the Appellant's wife".

 2. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response from the Respondent  as  one
    was not produced for the  purposes  of  this  appeal.   The  Respondent
    indicated however that the appeal was still resisted.


Error of Law

 3. At the close of submissions I indicated I found an error  of  law  such
    that the decision should be  set  aside,  but  that  my  reasons  would
    follow.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 4. There were several issues live in  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, the first being the Appellant's  suitability  under  S-
    LTR.1.6. concerning his taking an  ETS  (Educational  Testing  Service)
    exam and obtaining a TOEIC certificate.  That matter was considered  by
    the First-tier Judge at paragraph  9  through  to  15  of  the  judge's
    decision and has not been challenged by either  party  in  the  present
    appeal.  Thereafter, in the few remaining short paragraphs at paragraph
    16 to 17 of the judge's decision  the  judge  sets  out  the  facts  in
    relation to the marriage between the  Appellant  and  his  spouse,  Mrs
    Farzana Amin.  However, in paragraphs 18 and 19 there are  no  findings
    in relation to whether the marriage is genuine and subsisting which  is
    the second  issue  which  was  live  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Although it seems implicit from the judge's going  on  to  conclude  in
    paragraph 20 that the Appellant's spouse is perfectly entitled to apply
    for the Appellant to join her in the UK from Bangladesh,  there  is  no
    specific finding and no specific reasons as to why the  marriage  would
    be genuine and subsisting - although I note that the Respondent has not
    taken issue with the unreasoned and implicit fact that the marriage has
    been accepted by the First-tier  Tribunal.   That  is  not  a  material
    error.

 5. However, the judge reached an unannounced conclusion in paragraph 19 of
    the decision in simply stating (in the fourth sentence) that there  are
    no insurmountable obstacles or any exceptional circumstances as to  why
    the Appellant and his spouse  cannot  continue  their  family  life  in
    Bangladesh.  In so finding, the judge did not give any  reasons  as  to
    why that finding followed.  There is  only  one  relevant  sentence  in
    paragraph 19 which precedes the above finding  which  states  that  the
    Appellant's immigration status was always  precarious  as  he  had  not
    sought entry for settlement.  However,  pursuant  to  the  decision  of
    Agyarko  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  before  the  Supreme   Court,
    precariousness will diminish over time and it does not follow that  the
    lack of insurmountable obstacles in and of itself would never lead to a
    decision  being  disproportionate.   On  the  face  of  this  decision,
    equally,  there  is  no  ostensible  evidence  of   a   proportionality
    assessment other than the conclusion that  "exceptional  circumstances"
    have not been shown, notwithstanding that there is no  reasoning  which
    underlies that conclusion.

 6. Mr Avery accepted in light of my observations, as recited  above,  that
    the appeal  did  contain  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  respect
    summarised.

 7. I indicated therefore at the conclusion of the appeal that as no  party
    had challenged paragraphs 1  through  to  17  of  the  decision,  those
    paragraphs would remain intact; however I would set aside paragraphs 18
    to 20 of the decision, those paragraphs being infected by legal error.

 8. The consequence of  my  findings  is  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision regarding suitability, concerning paragraph S-LTR.1.6., remain
    intact, but the remainder of the decision  in  respect  of  the  issues
    concerning  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant   and   his   spouse's
    relationship, insurmountable obstacles  and  exceptional  circumstances
    (the jurisprudential vernacular for  a  proportionality  assessment  in
    light of Agyarko) are hereby set aside and these issues will require re-
    making by the First-tier Tribunal de novo upon remittal.


Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

10. The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  errors  on
    points of law and is set aside to the limited extent indicated above in
    respect of paragraphs 18 to 20 alone of the decision.

11. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a differently constituted bench in relation to the remaining issues  of
    (a) the genuineness of the relationship between the appellant  and  his
    spouse,  the  existence  or  not  of  insurmountable  obstacles  (under
    paragraph EX.1) and, if insurmountable obstacles are  not  shown  under
    the rules, an assessment of 'exceptional circumstances' in the form  of
    a  proportionality  assessment  and  fair  balance  of  the   competing
    interests.



12. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 02 May 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini


