
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01329/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2017                                 |On 7 June 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Patrice Jarrett
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan, instructed by Walsh Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I gave a decision as regards error of law in this appeal on  6  January
    2017.  My decision was as follows:

         1.   The  appellant,  Patrice  Lorraine  Jarrett,  was  born  on  2
         February 1988 and is a female citizen of Jamaica.  She entered  the
         United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in  2002  and   overstayed.    She
         subsequently  attempted  to  regularise  her  status.    On   three
         occasions between 2009-2013 her applications to  the  Secretary  of
         State had been rejected without a right  of  appeal.   She  applied
         again on 13 May 2015 and her application was refused by a  decision
         dated 12 June 2015.   The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at Section 82(1)(b) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) on the grounds that her  human  rights
         claim had been refused by the Secretary of State.   The  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge Alis), in a decision promulgated on 4  March  2016,
         dismissed the appeal.  The Appellant now appeals, with  permission,
         to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   A preliminary issue arose at the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing  at
         Liverpool on 30 November 2016.  Mr O'Ryan,  who  appeared  for  the
         appellant, sought to amend the grounds of  appeal.   At  first,  he
         wished to "amplify" a point made in the existing grounds of  appeal
         at 6.3-6.4.  At [29], Judge Alis had written:

             "The appellant and her husband live off  his  benefits.   They
             are therefore a burden on  the  state.   The  appellant's  own
             evidence is that she would  be  required  to  look  after  her
             husband on a full-time basis so she would be unable  to  work.
             There was no evidence that the  appellant's  husband  received
             any of the benefits set out in Section E-LTRP3.3  of  Appendix
             FM.  Section 117B(iv) makes clear that little weight shall  be
             given to her private life or  to  her  relationship  with  her
             husband because they were formed when she was  in  the  United
             Kingdom unlawfully, in this case both the  appellant  and  her
             husband knew that  she  was  here  illegally.   Little  weight
             should also be given to a private life established by a person
             at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious."

         3.   The appellant asserts that the judge misunderstood the  facts.
         There had been evidence that the appellant's husband  received  PIP
         (Personal Independence Payment).  Further,  the  appellant  asserts
         that the Employment  Support  Allowance  (ESA)  which  the  sponsor
         receives  is   contribution-based   and   not   income-based   (see
         appellant's bundle at [59]).  Mr O'Ryan submitted that only income-
         based ESA is treated as a public fund for the purposes of paragraph
         6 of HC 395 (as amended).  In his  skeleton  argument,  he  submits
         that "the judge's failure to appreciate that any  reliance  of  the
         appellant on income from  her  husband's  ESA  did  not  amount  to
         reliance on public funds arguably adversely affected his assessment
         of the proportionality of the impugned decision."

         4.   The proposed amendment of the grounds  of  appeal  is,  as  Mr
         O'Ryan accurately describes it, in part an "amplification"  of  the
         existing grounds and in part relies upon material which was in  the
         bundle  of  documents  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  the
         circumstances and without any strong objection from Mr McVeety  for
         the Secretary of State, I granted permission to amend  the  grounds
         of appeal.  The grounds of appeal are, therefore, as  contained  in
         the documents submitted to the Upper Tribunal with the  application
         for permission to appeal and as  stated  in  Mr  O'Ryan's  skeleton
         argument for the Upper Tribunal hearing (13 November 2016).

         5.   Mr O'Ryan submitted that the appellant is, on the  basis  that
         the new grounds of appeal, "closer to  satisfying  the  Immigration
         Rules".  This is because she had proved that  she  was  financially
         independent (see Section 117(2) of the 2002 Act 9as amended)).  The
         appellant  would  have  satisfied  the  financial  requirements  of
         Appendix FM but, because she had overstayed for more than 28  days,
         she could not satisfy the provisions in total.  Mr O'Ryan submitted
         that, having wrongly found against the appellant for  her  lack  of
         financial independence and her burdening of the  state's  finances,
         the judge had found that her removal would not be  disproportionate
         for the purposes of his Article 8 ECHR analysis; it  could  not  be
         said that the same conclusion will have been reached on an accurate
         assessment of the evidence.

         6.   Judge Alis observed that the appellant could only  succeed  on
         human  rights  grounds  (Article  8  ECHR)  at  [9].   However,  he
         correctly had regard to the ability of the appellant to comply with
         the provisions of the Immigration Rules in commencing his Article 8
         analysis.  He recorded that  the  appellant's  husband,  a  British
         citizen, suffers from arthritis, high  cholesterol,  and  was  also
         partially blind  [10].   The  couple  had  married  in  2011.   The
         appellant's husband has only lived in the United Kingdom and claims
         to be unable to live in Jamaica.  At [26],  the  judge  noted  that
         there was no evidence that "very  significant  obstacles"  such  as
         would prevent the appellant from succeeding under paragraph  276ADE
         of the Immigration Rules had been identified.  With that  in  mind,
         the judge went on to make the observations which  I  have  recorded
         above in respect of the likely burden of  the  appellant  upon  the
         public finances.

         7.   Mr McVeety, for the respondent, submitted  that,  if  it  were
         true that the appellant was  not,  for  the  reasons  given  by  Mr
         O'Ryan, not a burden  on  public  finances  then  this  could  only
         operate as a neutral factor in the Article 8 assessment  and  could
         give her no positive benefit in the analysis.

         8.   I agree with Mr McVeety for the reasons he gave that any error
         on the part of the judge would not add weight  to  the  appellant's
         side of the scales  in  the  Article  8  proportionality  exercise.
         However, the point is that,  whilst  he  should  have  treated  the
         question of financial independence as a neutral factor, Judge  Alis
         has  found  incorrectly  that  it  had  negative  effect   in   the
         assessment.   To  that  extent,  this  faulty  analysis  may   have
         contributed to an adverse outcome for the appellant when it  should
         not have had any effect at all.  In the circumstances, I find  that
         Judge Alis's analysis is vitiated by his failure properly to assess
         the  evidence  concerning  the  financial  circumstances   of   the
         appellant and her husband.  However,  since  it  is  impossible  to
         strip out this incorrect part of the analysis from the remainder of
         the assessment, I find I have no alternative but to set  aside  the
         First-tier Tribunal decision. As  regards  remaking  the  decision,
         whist I accept that circumstances may have moved on (I  understand,
         for  example,  that  the  appellant's  husband's  sight  may   have
         deteriorated), there was no need for  a  new  and  extensive  fact-
         finding exercise. The decision can be re-made in the Upper Tribunal
         before me following receipt of updated evidence from the appellant.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  4
         March 2016 is set aside.  The findings of  fact  shall  not  stand.
         The Upper Tribunal will remake the  decision  following  a  resumed
         hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane.

         No anonymity direction is made.

 2. I heard evidence at the resumed hearing from  the  appellant  and  also
    from a witness, Ms Jowery.  This is an appeal which  proceeds  only  in
    respect of Article 8 ECHR.  The standard  of  proof  in  an  Article  8
    appeal is the balance of probabilities.

 3. The appellant adopted her written statements as her  evidence-in-chief.
    Cross-examined by Mr Harrison, the appellant confirmed that she arrived
    in 2002 as a visitor and had overstayed.   After  her  marriage  to  Mr
    Johns she had attempted to regularise her status  but  had  again  been
    refused leave.  The appellant confirmed that her own  health  was  good
    but that her husband's health was poor.  The appellant  confirmed  that
    she had never worked in the United Kingdom and that since she had  been
    living with  her  husband,  he  had  supported  her  financially.   Her
    relationship with Mr Johns had commenced in 2006 and, since  2012,  his
    eyesight had been extremely poor.  She did, however,  confirm  that  Mr
    Johns can care for himself and make meals etc. if required to do so  in
    her  absence.   However,  Mr  Johns'  mental  health  has  started   to
    deteriorate and he has been losing his memory.  The appellant  confirms
    that her son lives in Jamaica and that she  has  other  family  members
    there.  However, her son is unable to find work at the present time.

 4. Re-examined by Mr O'Ryan, the appellant said that her family in Jamaica
    took the view that, since the appellant had been living in  the  United
    Kingdom, it was now her duty to look after them rather than vice versa.



 5. Ms Jowery, the Mr John's sister, adopted her written statement  as  her
    evidence-in-chief.   She  works  as  a  physiotherapist  administrative
    assistant for the NHS.  She works 30 hours per week.  She said that she
    would not have time to look after Mr Johns.  Ms Jowery  said  that  she
    had her own family to look after and could not look after her  brother.
    Cross-examined by Mr Harrison, Ms Jowery said that her own daughter  is
    aged 34 years and lives in France.  She said that she had not spoken to
    her daughter or her husband about any help, short term or longer  term,
    which they might be able to provide to Mr Johns in the United  Kingdom.
    She did, however, say that when she had "an hour here or there" she was
    able to help Mr Johns and relieve the appellant from his care.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7. Article 8 ECHR provides as follows:

         1. Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
         life, his home and his correspondence.

         2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.

 8. Further, Section 117 of the 2002 Act (as amended) provides as follows:




         (1)This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

         (a)breaches a person's right to respect for private and family life
         under Article 8, and

         (b)as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998.

         (2)In considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

         (a)in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B, and

         (b)in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the
         considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)In subsection (2), "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117BArticle 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)Little weight should be given to-

         (a)a private life, or

         (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.

         (6)In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)the person has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

         ...

         117DInterpretation of this Part

         (1)In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

         (a)is a British citizen, or

         (b)has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven
         years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

         (a)is a British citizen, or

         (b)who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of  the
         Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

         (2)In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a)who is not a British citizen,

         (b)who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

         (c)who-

         (i)has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at  least  12
         months,

         (ii)has been convicted of an offence that has caused serious  harm,
         or

         (iii)is a persistent offender.

         (3)For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a person  subject  to  an
         order under-

         (a)section  5  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Insanity)  Act   1964
         (insanity etc),

         (b)section  57  of  the  Criminal  Procedure  (Scotland)  Act  1995
         (insanity etc), or

         (c)Article 50A of the Mental Health (Northern Ireland)  Order  1986
         (insanity etc),

         has not been convicted of an offence.

         (4)In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

         (a)do not include a person who has received  a  suspended  sentence
         (unless a court subsequently orders that the sentence or  any  part
         of it (of whatever length) is to take effect);

         (b)do not include a person who has been sentenced to  a  period  of
         imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by  virtue  of  being
         sentenced to consecutive sentences amounting in aggregate  to  that
         length of time;

         (c)include a person who is sentenced to detention,  or  ordered  or
         directed to be detained, in an  institution  other  than  a  prison
         (including, in particular, a hospital or an institution  for  young
         offenders) for that length of time; and

         (d)include a person who is sentenced to imprisonment or  detention,
         or ordered or directed to be detained, for an indeterminate period,
         provided that it may last for at least that length of time.

         (5)If any question arises for the  purposes  of  this  Part  as  to
         whether a person is  a  British  citizen,  it  is  for  the  person
         asserting that fact to prove it.

 9. The parties agree that this is a case which turns  on  proportionality.
    The parties accept that the appellant and Mr Johns are  in  a  marriage
    which  is  genuine  and  subsisting.   Mr  O'Ryan  submitted  that  the
    appellant's case should be considered on the basis that she is  capable
    of meeting the provisions of the Immigration Rules  (Appendix  FM)  but
    does not qualify under the Rules, at least  in  part  because  she  had
    overstayed for more than 28 days.  As regards the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal which has been set aside, I do accept that the  appellant
    is not a  burden  on  the  public  purse  and  that  she  is  supported
    financially out of the benefits which Mr Johns legitimately receives in
    respect of his medical conditions.  However, for reasons which  I  will
    set out below, I do not find that there are any obstacles of a  serious
    nature which would make it unreasonable for this couple  to  return  to
    live together in Jamaica or, indeed, for the  appellant  to  return  to
    Jamaica on her own and make an application out  of  country  for  entry
    clearance.

10. As I have noted in the error of law decision, Mr Johns has a number  of
    medical complaints; he has arthritis, high cholesterol and is partially
    blind.  I have no medical evidence to show that he  is  also  suffering
    from dementia as  the  appellant  implied  during  her  oral  evidence.
    Whilst I am aware that Mr Johns receives ongoing medical treatment  for
    his problems in the United Kingdom, I have not received any evidence to
    show that treatment could not be  made  available  to  him  in  Jamaica
    should he go to live there.  I accept that Mr Johns has  family  living
    in the United Kingdom, including Ms Jowery who gave evidence.  However,
    the relationship between Mr Johns and his United  Kingdom  family  does
    not seem particularly close; I  did  not  find  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and Ms Jowery is especially close and Mrs  Jowery
    was at pains  to  say  that  she  was  unwilling  or  unable  to  offer
    substantive care to her brother.

11. The appellant has an extremely poor immigration history.   She  entered
    the United Kingdom as a visitor and simply overstayed.  Having  married
    Mr Johns, she now purports to remain living here because  of  what  she
    claims are the problems that they would face as a couple upon return to
    Jamaica.  I have to say that the  medical  conditions  which  Mr  Johns
    suffers, although distressing to him, are not of  a  kind  which  would
    render his living in Jamaica unreasonable.  He would have the care  and
    attention of the appellant which he receives on a daily basis  here  in
    the United Kingdom.  The financial position of the  couple  in  Jamaica
    has not been explored in any detail but it  remains  the  duty  of  the
    appellant to adduce evidence, if that is what she wished to do, to show
    that the couple's financial position would be untenable. She has chosen
    not to do so. The appellant has an unemployed son living in Jamaica and
    other family members and I see no reason why they should not be able to
    provide at least emotional support and possibly  accommodation  to  the
    couple upon their return to Jamaica.  As regards the public interest, I
    consider this to be particularly strong in the case  of  an  individual
    such as the appellant who has chosen  to  flout  immigration  laws  and
    procedures over a number of years.  She has entered a relationship with
    Mr Johns at a time when she was fully aware that her immigration status
    was precarious.

12. Even if I am wrong and it would be unreasonable to expect Mr Johns  and
    the appellant to return together to live permanently in  Jamaica,  then
    the secondary option of the appellant returning to make an  application
    for entry clearance out of country remains  viable.   I  have  accepted
    that Mr Johns has care needs but I cannot see why these  could  not  be
    met in the short term either by family members (I was not  particularly
    impressed by Ms Jowery's claimed inability to assist) or by medical and
    social services in the United Kingdom.  There is simply no evidence  to
    suggest that Mr Johns' physical or mental condition  would  deteriorate
    sharply or permanently if he were to be separated  from  the  appellant
    for the period of time it would need her to make her  application.   Mr
    O'Ryan relied on the case of Chen [2015] UKUT  00189  (IAC).   In  that
    case, the Tribunal found that there "may be cases in which there are no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  UK
    where  temporary  separation  to  enable  an  individual  to  make   an
    application for entry clearance may be disproportionate".   I  fail  to
    see how that principle may logically be applied in  the  case  such  as
    that before this Tribunal.  The finding  that  the  couple  may  return
    permanently to live in Jamaica together and that it would be reasonable
    for them to do so is frankly, the end of  the  matter.   Only  if  that
    proposed  arrangement  were  considered  not   reasonable   would   the
    alternative option (if it may be described as such)  of  the  appellant
    returning to apply for entry clearance needs to be considered.  For the
    avoidance of any doubt, I find that both options are available to  this
    couple.  They may live together in Jamaica permanently whilst it  would
    not be unreasonable (having regards to the principles of  Chikwamba  or
    otherwise) for the appellant to return and make an application.

13. In the circumstances, I dismiss the appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

I have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal against the decision  of
the respondent dated 12 June 2015 is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 2 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 2 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

