
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01477/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2018                              |On 17 April 2018             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                 KALIL AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Timson, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has appealed against a  decision
      of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maxwell  dated  16   November   2017,
      dismissing his appeal on human rights grounds.

Background

   2. The appellant entered the UK in  2011  as  a  student  and  overstayed
      beyond the expiry of his visa in 2012.   He  was  encountered  by  the
      immigration authorities in December 2005 and issued with  notice  that
      he is an overstayer and should leave the UK.  He  met  his  spouse  in
      2016 and they began living together shortly after this.   On  4  April
      2017 they got married and reside together with his spouse's son from a
      previous relationship, M, born in August 2014 and a British citizen.


   3. On 10 January 2017 the respondent refused the appellant's human rights
      claim, and he appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
      Tribunal made the following findings of fact:  (i)  the  appellant  is
      married  and  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage;  (ii)  M  has
      established a parental relationship with the  appellant.   The  First-
      tier Tribunal did not consider or address M's best interests and found
      that section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002 did not apply because there would be no expectation of  M,  as  a
      British citizen child, being expected to leave the UK.

   4. In a decision dated 8 January 2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibb
      granted permission to appeal observing that all the grounds of  appeal
      are arguable.

Hearing


   5. At the beginning of the hearing Mr McVeety conceded that the  decision
      contains the errors of law identified in the grounds  of  appeal,  and
      that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


   6. Mr Timpson briefly submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  factual
      findings were sufficient for the appeal to be  allowed  by  me  rather
      than remitted.  When I indicated that my  provisional  view  that  the
      factual findings entirely omitted any reference to or consideration of
      M's best interests and the reasonableness analysis is  flawed  and  in
      any event inadequate, Mr Timson changed his  position  to  support  Mr
      McVeety's approach that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal.  I indicated that I would provide a short  decision  to
      reflect the agreement that has been reached.


Error of law discussion

   7. I entirely agree with the observations of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Gibb when granting permission to appeal.  In  particular,  the  First-
      tier Tribunal erred in law in:





   1) failing to direct itself to and apply MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA
      Civ 705;






   2) completely failing to assess M's best interests.





   8. In MA (Pakistan) the court also held that section 117B(6) was a  self-
      contained provision in the sense that where the  conditions  specified
      in the subsection are satisfied, the public interest will not  justify
      removal. The wider public interests considerations can only come  into
      play via the concept of  reasonableness  in  section  117B(6)  itself.
      The First-tier Tribunal has failed to acknowledge  these  matters  and
      has misdirected itself.


   9. The First-tier Tribunal appears to have alighted on the word  "expect"
      in section 117B(6)(b) to suggest that if there is  no  expectation  of
      the child leaving the UK then that provision does not bite.   However,
      this is not a permissible reading of the section.  To 'hive  off'  the
      phrase "to expect" from s.117B(6)(b) is to corrupt the meaning of that
      sub-section. It deprives it of what  I  consider  to  be  the  obvious
      intention of requiring an objective assessment of  the  reasonableness
      of a child leaving the UK. It  is  either  reasonable  or  it  is  not
      reasonable to expect a child to leave. There is a wrong  and  a  right
      answer. If the proposition relied upon by the First-tier  Tribunal  is
      taken to its logical conclusion, it would mean that in  a  case  where
      there is a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child
      where someone is not liable to deportation,  the  Secretary  of  State
      could simply bypass the import of s.117B(6) by stating that  she  does
      not expect a qualifying child to leave.


  10. These are fundamental errors, which the parties agree, go to the heart
      of the reasons for dismissing the  appeal.   Although  the  First-tier
      Tribunal has made  some  findings  of  fact,  the  appellant  has  not
      benefitted from an assessment of his best interests  by  reference  to
      the available evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, and it  is  for
      this reason that I have decided to remit the matter.

Disposal

  11. I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
      Practice Statement, the nature and  extent  of  the  factual  findings
      required in remaking the decision, and  the  absence  of  any  factual
      assessment of M's  best  interests  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.  Having taken all the relevant  circumstances  into  account
      including the parties' agreement that the matter  should  be  remitted
      and  the  overriding  objective,  I  have  decided  that  this  is  an
      appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.


  12. When making its decision, the First-tier Tribunal will of course  bear
      in mind that the relevant policy on  the  approach  to  reasonableness
      where there is a parental relationship with a  British  child  is  now
      contained in updated guidance dated February 2018.  It follows that MA
      (Pakistan) must be read in light of any relevant changes to the policy
      guidance.   In addition, when assessing reasonableness, the First-tier
      Tribunal will need to consider M's  best  interests,  the  nature  and
      strength of the parental relationship as well as the appellant's  very
      poor immigration history albeit with the benefit of the guidance in MT
      and ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT
      00088(IAC)



Decision

  13. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      14. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 April 2018

