
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01501/2015
     HU/01497/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 November 2017                       |On 01 December 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES

                                   Between

                                     s r
                                     j r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      entry clearance officer new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel instructed by Gurkha
International Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are adult citizens of Nepal who are the  children  of  a
    retired member of the Brigade of Gurkhas. His wife, their mother,  died
    in 2005, and he has since remarried. His remarriage has resulted  in  a
    younger sibling for the Appellants.

 2. In June 2011 the Appellants' father was granted entry clearance for the
    purposes of settlement with  his  wife  and  their  infant  child,  the
    Appellants'  youngest  sibling.   The  Appellants  applied  for   entry
    clearance as his dependent adult children in 2015  on  the  basis  that
    were it not for their inability to do so under the  Immigration  Rules,
    they would have applied for entry clearance, along with  their  father,
    and immediate family members,  rather  earlier.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refused their applications on 18 May 2015,  but  their  appeals
    against those decisions only  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Miles sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  3  January  2017.  That  delay  is
    unexplained.  The Judge  dismissed  the  appeals  by  way  of  decision
    promulgated on 10 January 2017. The  Appellants  duly  applied  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for permission to appeal, and that was  granted  to
    them by a decision of First-tier Tribunal Ford on 25 July 2017. So  the
    matter comes before us.  This is the decision of us both.

 3. The hearing before us today commenced with Mr Jarvis, on behalf of  the
    ECO, very properly making a number of concessions in  relation  to  the
    content of Judge Miles' decision and his approach to the evidence  that
    was before him as disclosed within that decision.  Put bluntly,  it  is
    conceded before us that he made a number of material errors of  law  in
    his approach to the evidence. First, there was before him evidence that
    documented the transmission of money from the UK to  Nepal,  which  was
    said to record remittances from the sponsor  to  the  Appellants.  That
    evidence was relied upon as corroboration of the claim by  the  sponsor
    that the Appellants were entirely financially dependent upon  him,  and
    not simply economically dependent upon him in part  by  virtue  of  his
    grant of permission to them to live in the family home in Nepal, and to
    farm by way of subsistence farming the land he owned in Nepal.   It  is
    conceded before us that as a human rights appeal the  Judge  failed  to
    adopt the correct approach to that evidence,  apparently  declining  to
    give it any weight, simply because the majority (although not  in  fact
    all) of those documents were dated after the ECO's decision of  18  May
    2015. That approach was wrong even on the Judge's own analysis  of  the
    law, since not all of the documents were dated as he  assumed.  However
    the entire approach was in our  judgement  wrong,  since  this  was  an
    Article 8 appeal concerning the  Article  8  rights  of  not  only  the
    Appellants in Nepal, but also the members  of  their  immediate  family
    living in the UK; the position needed to be assessed as at the date  of
    the hearing. On one view of this appeal we could stop there and  simply
    dispose of the appeal  by  way  of  setting  aside  the  decision,  and
    remittal of the appeal for rehearing. However there are other  problems
    with the decision of Judge Miles which in the circumstances it would be
    only right and proper for us to engage with for the  benefit  of  those
    who may come to this appeal in the future.

 4. When the Judge's decision was promulgated on 10 January 2017, he  would
    not have had the benefit of the guidance of the Court of Appeal  to  be
    found within Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320  because
    that decision was only promulgated on 28 April 2017.  He would  however
    had had the benefit of earlier relevant jurisprudence,  not  least  the
    decision in Ghising & Others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:  weight)
    [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) and Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA Civ 8.  We regret
    to note therefore that there is no reference  within  the  decision  of
    Judge Miles to any of the relevant jurisprudence.  It  is  not  at  all
    clear from his brief decision that he bore the  correct  principles  in
    mind when approaching the evidence.

 5. Moreover, within a very brief decision, the only findings of fact  that
    can be identified are  those  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  text  of
    paragraph 15. We regret to have to record therefore that  the  decision
    simply fails to offer the analysis of the evidence that  was  required,
    in order to analyse whether or not the Appellants had established  that
    they did indeed enjoy a "family life" for the  purposes  of  Article  8
    with their father, their stepmother and their youngest sibling in  June
    2011, or indeed at any later date.  It should be clear by now that  the
    approach to that question is not answered by a simple  focus  upon  the
    movement of money from the UK to Nepal, or by the financial support, if
    any, offered to  an  adult  child  by  the  sponsoring  retired  Gurkha
    soldier.  Equally, it should be obvious by now that the  focus  of  the
    decision maker needs to be upon the strength and nature of the  various
    relationships as at both the  date  of  departure  from  Nepal  of  the
    sponsoring soldier, and, at the date of the hearing.  If "family  life"
    is established at that date of departure, then an analysis is needed as
    to what has happened since, in order to consider whether that state  of
    affairs  has  remained  the  same,  has  eroded  with  time,  or,   has
    strengthened - not simply as a result of the  effluxion  of  time,  but
    recognising and evaluating the various changes  in  circumstances  that
    can occur with any person with the passage of time.

 6. In the circumstances the decision discloses a  material  error  of  law
    that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision  must
    in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  We  have  in  these
    circumstances considered whether or not to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  or  whether  to  proceed  to
    remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where it would appear
    that the relevant evidence has not  properly  been  considered  by  the
    First Tier Tribunal, the effect of  that  error  of  law  has  been  to
    deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for her case  to  be  properly
    considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice
    Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the  judicial
    fact finding exercise is such that having  regard  to  the  over-riding
    objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the
    First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement  of  25
    September 2012. Having reached that conclusion, with the  agreement  of
    the parties we make the following directions;

     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing de novo at  the  Hatton  Cross  hearing
        centre. The appeal is not to  be  listed  before  Judge  Miles.  No
        findings of fact are preserved.

    ii) A Nepalese interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.

   iii) There is presently anticipated to be the sponsor as a witness,  and
        the time estimate is as a result, 2 hours.

 7. Having said that, we consider it sensible to record that Mr Jarvis very
    properly and fairly offered to consider further on behalf of  the  ECO,
    the evidence currently available, if there were to be provided to him a
    short statement from the sponsor confirming  that  there  had  been  no
    change in the circumstances of the Appellants. It is  anticipated  that
    this evaluation of the evidence can take  place  within  a  very  short
    time, and well before the re-listing of this remitted hearing. We leave
    it to the parties to make the necessary  arrangements  to  ensure  that
    this can take place as soon as possible to avoid further delay. In  the
    event that what is planned does not occur for whatever reason, then the
    matter will be re-heard as directed above. We would hope that given the
    delay since this application  was  submitted  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer in April 2015 steps can be taken to expedite the listing of any
    necessary hearing of the remitted appeal.

Notice of decision
 8. The decision promulgated on 10 January 2017 did involve the  making  of
    an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Dated 30 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

