
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01236/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|On 17 November 2016                  |On 21 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SAMAN KAMRAN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Sharma, of Mathew Cohen Associates Ltd.,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan,  born  11th  March  1970.  She
    entered the UK on 14 February 2014 with leave as  a  "tier  1  partner"
    until 14th January 2016.

 3. By application dated 5th May 2015 the appellant sought further leave as
    the spouse of a person present and settled in the UK.

 4.  In  a  decision  dated  22  June  2015  the  respondent  refused  that
    application.  There was and remains  one  issue  only.   The  appellant
    submitted a certificate in respect of the English language  requirement
    from City and Guilds which did not appear  in  the  immigration  rules,
    appendix O, and which had not previously been accepted on a  successful
    application for leave to remain as a partner.

 5. In her grounds of appeal to  the  FtT,  the  appellant  said  that  the
    qualification and test provider did appear in the  approved  list,  and
    that the qualification was in any event at a higher  level,  and  would
    have met the more stringent requirements  "for  a  partner  visa  under
    appendix FM".

 6. The City and Guilds certificate on which the appellant first relied was
    awarded on 15 March 2015.  She  obtained  a  further  certificate  from
    Trinity College London on 8 September 2015. Her solicitors sent a  copy
    to the respondent on 1 October 2015 (the appeal  hearing  on  26  April
    2016 having already  been  fixed)  asking  if  the  decision  might  be
    withdrawn.

 7.  The  case  proceeded  to  hearing  before  First-tier  tribunal  Judge
    Mozolowski on 26 April 2016. In her decision,  promulgated  on  1  June
    2016, the judge found at paragraph 15 that the  first  certificate  did
    not meet the requirements of the rules. She said that under section  85
    (4) of the 2002 act she was entitled to admit further  evidence.  There
    was no challenge to the second certificate by the  respondent,  "except
    to say that the second test certificate should not be considered. There
    was no challenge that the second certificate would  fail  to  meet  the
    requirements of appendix O of the rules". The judge found that she  was
    entitled to consider the second certificate, found  that  it  did  meet
    those requirements, and allowed the appeal.

 8. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the UT.  The grounds  set
    out appendix O and its requirements in  respect  of  certificates  from
    Trinity College London, which  are  to  be  verified  "using  a  unique
    reference number which should be stated in the application  form".  The
    grounds say that the appendix  required  the  test  certificate  to  be
    submitted  with  the  application,  and  the  reference  number  to  be
    provided. While post-decision evidence could  be  taken  into  account,
    that evidence "must be viewed through the lens of any  requirements  of
    the rules".

 9. On 4 October 2016 FtT Judge Ford granted permission, observing that  it
    was "unfortunate that the presenting officer  did  not  object  to  the
    certificate on the basis now stated", but it was  arguable  that  there
    had been a material error of law.

10. Mr Matthews submitted that the grounds disclosed that  the  absence  of
    the required certificate with  the  original  application  form  was  a
    defect which could not be cured by later obtaining a  certificate.  (He
    confirmed, in response to my enquiry, that on all information currently
    available there appeared to be nothing to prevent a further  successful
    application  being  made,  as  the  appellant  now  has  the   required
    certificate.)

11. Mr Sharma submitted that the judge was entitled to take account of  the
    second certificate under section 85 (4), and that it had been  provided
    to the respondent 7 months  before  the  appeal  hearing.  The  present
    objection had not been taken at the hearing, and the respondent  should
    not be empowered to take  the  point  now.  In  any  event,  the  first
    certificate met the requirements on the list  of  approved  tests.  The
    second certificate met requirements at a higher level.

12. Mr Sharma also sought a "common sense" approach,  saying  that  it  has
    long been obvious that the  appellant's  case  should  succeed  on  its
    merits.

13. The rule 24 response by Mr Sharma takes a fall-back position  based  on
    article 8.  Mr Sharma did not  take  the  point  in  oral  submissions;
    rightly so, as it was bound  to  fail,  given  the  availability  of  a
    further application.

14. Mr Matthews in reply said that  the  list  of  approved  test  did  not
    disclose that the original certificate met necessary requirements,  nor
    that transitional provisions had that effect. The fact that a  language
    qualification might be satisfactory at a higher level  was  irrelevant;
    the question was conformity with the requirements  of  the  application
    made. The admissibility of evidence under section 85 (4) could not cure
    failure to comply with the rules on documents to be  produced  with  an
    application. It was accepted that the points now argued  had  not  been
    advanced at  the  stage  they  should  have  been,  in  the  first-tier
    tribunal, but as  they  disclosed  clear  errors  of  law  they  should
    nevertheless be admitted.

15. I reserved my decision.

16. The approach of  "common  sense"  is  not  one  which  can  readily  be
    integrated with the immigration rules. No doubt  for  good  policy  and
    practical reasons, those rules in many areas are  highly  detailed  and
    prescriptive. Wide-ranging discretion to depart from rules  cannot  co-
    exist with such a scheme, and is not part of the jurisdiction of either
    the FtT or the UT.

17. That said, the appellant's application  failed  on  a  technical  point
    only, and she has shown long ago that the substance of the rules  could
    be met. That might not be enough of an answer if  the  point  had  been
    taken by the SSHD at first instance, but it is a good  reason  for  not
    allowing an argument of legal error to be developed at a late stage  of
    the proceedings.

18. The SSHD's grounds are based on a close reading of the  decision  after
    the event. They are rather coy about the point not having been  put  to
    the judge at the time. The point is not said to be such an obvious  one
    that any judge should have taken it, unprompted, particularly when  the
    respondent was represented, and may be presumed by a judge to have  put
    all points on which she relied.

19. If the ground was not repelled on that basis, I see difficulty for  the
    appellant in finding any other reason.  Mr Sharma was  unable  to  show
    that the first certificate was  all  that  was  required.   The  second
    certificate was not with the  application.   Admissibility  of  further
    evidence, no matter that the appellant always had the required level of
    English,  and  no  matter  that  she  soon  obtained   a   satisfactory
    certificate, cannot prove that the evidence was with  the  application.
    It is that attachment, not the underlying substantive  satisfaction  of
    the rules, which was required.

20. As my decision was reserved, I declined to hear submissions on expenses
    at that stage.  If the appellant seeks to  take  that  matter  further,
    written application should be made, with a copy to the  respondent,  to
    enable her also to make representations.

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

22. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            18 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




