
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01868/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Friday 19 March 2021                    |On Wednesday 31 March 2021      |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                            MR ROKAN UDDIN ARAFAT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellants:     Ms  L  Simak,  Counsel  instructed   by   Chancery
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   G D Davison promulgated on 13 October 2020 ("the Decision"). By the
   Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the
   Respondent's decision dated 23 January 2020, refusing his human rights
   claim based on his private life in the UK.  The claim was made in the
   context of an application for indefinite leave to remain ("ILR") based on
   ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK.


2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh. Given his claim to have
   remained lawfully in the UK for ten years, it is necessary to set out his
   immigration history. He came to the UK as a student on 25 September 2009
   with leave to 30 November 2012.  It is common ground that his leave was
   extended in that category to 22 November 2016.  On 18 November 2016, the
   Appellant applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant.  The
   sponsor in relation to that application did not at the time of
   application have a licence, but an application for a licence was, as I
   understand it, pending.  As part of his Tier 2 application, the Appellant
   was told that he must enrol his biometrics.  He says that he was unable
   to do so on the first occasion as the barcode did not work.  He therefore
   asked for a new barcode.  By the time that this was sorted out, the
   Appellant's intended sponsor had its licence application refused.  The
   Tier 2 application was rejected as invalid on 1 March 2017 for failure to
   enrol biometrics.

3. It is the Appellant's case that, immediately prior to the rejection of
   the Tier 2 application, on 27 February 2017, he made an application to
   remain based on his private life.  The Respondent says that this
   application was made on 1 March 2017.  Either way, the Appellant repeated
   that application on 17 July 2017.  The second was voided because the
   Appellant already had a pending application.  There is no complaint made
   about that action.  As I understand it, the two applications were in any
   event on the same basis, so nothing turns on the voiding of one. On 20
   September 2018, the Respondent refused the application.  She also
   certified the claim under section 94 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
   Act 2002 ("Section 94").  There was no challenge brought to that
   decision.  The effect of that decision, whatever the position in relation
   to the events in 2017, was that the Appellant's leave, statutorily
   extended by section 3C Immigration Act 1971 ("Section 3C") was brought to
   an end on that date at the latest.  The Appellant was given a right of
   appeal exercisable only from outside the UK.

4. On 3 October 2018, therefore just within fourteen days from the
   September 2018 refusal, the Appellant applied for ILR on long residence
   grounds.  On any view, he had not at that time completed ten years'
   continuous leave to remain.  That application was refused on 10 February
   2019 but this time the Appellant was given an in-country right of appeal.
    He appealed the decision, but that appeal was dismissed, and he became
   appeal rights exhausted on 25 October 2019.  On 26 September 2019, the
   Appellant made a further application for ILR based on long residence
   which was refused by the decision under appeal.

5. I will come on to the way in which the above chronology was dealt with
   in the Decision.  I mention now however two points made by Ms Simak in
   her submissions concerning the above chronology and length of lawful
   residence which were in my view thoroughly bad ones and fundamentally
   misunderstand the functioning of statutory leave and appeal rights.

6. First, Ms Simak suggested that had the Respondent understood that the
   rejection of the Tier 2 application and subsequent application prior to
   that rejection meant that the Appellant still had leave until the refusal
   of the February 2017 application (as Ms Everett accepted might be the
   position), she would have been bound to give an in-country right of
   appeal when refusing that application in September 2018.  That might have
   been the position under the previous appeal regime where the right of
   appeal was linked to the immigration decision being made (although
   certification under Section 94 was even then possible).  However, since
   the coming into force of the Immigration Act 2014, the right of appeal is
   linked only to the refusal of the claim itself.  There is no general
   presumption that a right of appeal will be permitted to be exercised in
   country depending on a person's status at the time of making of the
   application.  Whether the right of appeal is exercisable from within or
   only outside the UK depends on the merits of the claim.  Here, the
   Respondent certified that claim as clearly unfounded.  That decision was
   unchallenged.  On any view, therefore, leave to remain was brought to an
   end on 20 September 2018.


7. Second, Ms Simak submitted that the granting of an in-country right of
   appeal when refusing the subsequent claim in February 2019 had the effect
   of statutorily extending the Appellant's leave.  That is in effect a
   submission that a refusal of leave operates to resurrect statutory leave
   which has previously expired.  That cannot be correct.  A person does not
   have to benefit from continuing leave to remain in order to exercise a
   right of appeal.  That a significant number of appellants have no leave
   either because it has expired, or they never had leave reinforces that
   position.

8. Turning back to the Decision, the Judge found that the Appellant had
   leave only until 22 November 2016 ([22]).  He found therefore that the
   Appellant had, at the date of hearing, been in the UK without lawful
   leave for four years.  He considered the relevant evidence in relation to
   the Appellant's private life in the UK and whether there were "very
   significant obstacles" to the Appellant's integration in Bangladesh
   applying paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")
   ("Paragraph 276ADE").  Thereafter, the Judge considered the claim
   balancing the interference with the Appellant's private life against the
   public interest, made a finding that removal would not be
   disproportionate, and dismissed the appeal on that basis.

9. The grounds of appeal in short summary are that the Judge "misdirected
   himself as both the facts and the law" when reaching his findings as to
   length of lawful residence.  The grounds are however quite wide ranging
   in relation to the errors of fact and law said to have been made.  For
   that reason, I deal with the detail when I come to consider the various
   arguments made.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Resident First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Zucker on 25 November 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 2.  It is arguable, as per paragraph 21 of the grounds, that
         the judge erred in the approach to resolving the issue of
         proportionality.  The extent to which the judge arguably erred will
         be determined by the resolution of the other grounds all of which
         may be argued."

11. So it is that the matter comes before me to determine whether the
   Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-
   make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
   so.  The hearing was listed to be heard remotely.  Neither party objected
   to that course.  The hearing was attended by representatives for both
   parties. The start of the hearing was disrupted by technical difficulties
   with Ms Everett's connection.  However, once those were overcome, the
   hearing proceeded with no major technical difficulties.


12. I had before me the Appellant's bundle before Judge Davison, and the
   Respondent's bundle of core documents.  The Appellant's solicitor also
   helpfully submitted a bundle of documents relevant to the arguments made
   to me to which I refer below as [AB/xx].


THE DECISION

13. In order to set the parties' submissions in context, it is necessary to
   set out certain parts of the Decision.  I begin at [13] of the Decision
   where the following is set out as being the Appellant's position in
   relation to the period of lawful leave:


         "For the Appellant, having reviewed the immigration chronology and
         paragraph 39E it was accepted that 276B cannot be met.  The
         Appellant does not have 10 years lawful residence.  However, the
         reasons why he failed to get to 10 years, coupled with the other
         factors in this case, meant that the appeal stood to be allowed
         under either paragraph 276ADE or Article 8 outside the Rules as
         removal would not be proportionate."


   That record of the concession made is repeated at [18] of the Decision
   where the Judge indicated that "the Appellant's representative quite
   correctly accepted that the Appellant had not established 10 years lawful
   residence".  The Judge went on to record that "[o]n any lawful
   construction leave expired on 22 November 2016 and has not been
   extended".  Ms Simak informed me that her submission had not gone that
   far if that is what the Judge intended to convey.


14. Following on from what is there said, the Judge considered the
   Appellant's arguments as follows:


         "19. The argument advanced was, in summary, as follows.  It was not
         the Appellant's fault that the biometrics machine was not working.
         Discretion should therefore be exercised and the application of 1
         March 2017 should be viewed as if it were made in time.  If this
         had happened, upon refusal it would not have been refused with an
         out of country right of appeal.  Then it is possible the Appellant
         would have got to the 10 year mark, in September 2019, with
         continuous leave.  As these factors were outside his control it
         would be disproportionate to hold them against him.
         20.  Aside from this line of submission being based upon several
         contingencies, even if there had been no issue with the biometrics
         bar code it is clear from the Appellant's own witness statement
         that the Tier 2 application was doomed to fail (AB 43 paragraphs 4
         and 5).  When he made the Tier 2 application his employer did not
         hold the necessary licence.  He did not therefore hold the relevant
         COS and the company was never awarded this licence.  The Tier 2
         application would have been refused and even if the Appellant had
         been granted a right of appeal he was 4 years away from reaching 10
         years lawfully in the UK.
         21.  Further, the Appellant had an appeal dismissed on 10 October
         2019, neither party to the proceedings has provided a copy of the
         determination (during the course of the morning I had asked Mr
         Macrae for a copy of the same but none was forthcoming) and there
         is no mention of any previous factual findings in the refusal
         letter.
         22.  I find the Appellant had lawful leave until 22 November 2016
         ie. a little over 7 years since his arrival in the UK.  He has then
         made a succession of out of time applications which have either
         been refused or dismissed.  Although it is to his credit that he
         has repeatedly sought to regularise his status the fact remains
         that he has held no leave/lawful status for approximately 4 years.
         23.  In the Appellant's witness statement AB44 the Appellant states
         he is of good character (paragraph 12), there is no suggestion to
         the contrary.  He has played cricket at a high level and been
         heavily involved with his cricket club (paragraphs 16-17).  He also
         refers to strong, family, social and cultural attachment to the UK
         (paragraphs 12, 18 and 21).  At the hearing he explained that the
         family he has in the UK are cousins and they are like Brothers and
         Sisters to him.  I accept that the Appellant has studied in the UK,
         he has played cricket and over the 10 years he has been here has
         built up a private life.  He has some extended family in the UK
         whom he sees.  But there was nothing in the evidence about those
         relationships that took them beyond normal family relationships.
         He is presently not allowed to work in the UK and so relies upon
         friends and family for support.  I accept that his family will be
         disappointed that he has not been able to make a life for himself
         in the UK and establish a lawful right to remain in the UK.  At the
         hearing he was asked by his representative how his parents would
         react if he was returned home, he replied; 'not happy, spent money
         for education and hoped I did something over here.'  His friend Mr
         Hasan set out the proposed business in IT networking that he and
         the Appellant had hoped to develop.  I again accept this may have
         been a long-term dream for both of them.  But matters have not
         worked out the way the Appellant hoped.
         24.  He claimed that despite his extensive education in the UK he
         would be unable to secure work in Bangladesh as it is a corrupt
         country and a job cannot be secured without political influence or
         payment of bribes.  No evidence was provided to support these
         contentions and I do not accept that the Appellant would be unable
         to find work in the IT sector should he be returned.
         25.  The Appellant is a fit healthy 31 year old Bangladeshi male.
         He studied in the UK for several years obtaining the qualifications
         outlined in paragraph 3 of his witness statement (AB42-43).  He has
         no partner or child in the UK.  I find there would not be any very
         significant obstacles to his reintegration into Bangladeshi
         society.  He has family to return to, parents and two sisters.  The
         family have been remitting money to the Appellant and I find could
         assist him in the short term until he finds employment.
         Considering the definition of integration in Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ
         813.  At paragraph 14 it is explained that there must be a broad
         evaluative judgment.  It must be considered whether an individual
         is enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life in the
         society in the country of return is carried on.  The individual
         must have the capacity to participate in life in that country and
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there and operate on a
         day-to-day basis.  The individual must be able to build up within a
         reasonable time a variety of relationships to give substance to
         their private or family life.  I find the Appellant would be in a
         position to do so.
         26.  For the same reason in considering Article 8 outside the Rules
         there is nothing disproportionate in removing the Appellant.
         Although over the period of 10 years I accept he will have
         established some private life in the UK as set out above his
         removal would be a lawful and proportionate response.  There is
         nothing exceptional about this appeal that would merit a grant of
         leave outside the Rules.
         27.  The factors in section 117B do not assist appellant.  His
         status has always been precarious, he speaks English, but this is a
         neutral factor.  He has been financially self-reliant due to the
         assistance of friends and family.  But this is again a neutral
         factor.  There is no evidence he has been a drain on the public
         purse.  But little weight attaches to his private life in this
         situation and I find on balance that the maintenance of a fair and
         effective immigration control demands his removal."

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

15. The basis of the grant of permission to appeal is that the Judge may
   have erred when dealing with the proportionality balance but that the
   error may have been within the steps taken prior to the assessment when
   looking at the facts and the law.  For that reason, I take those steps in
   order, based on the pleaded case and the oral submissions of the parties'
   representatives.

Length of lawful residence - [6] and [7] of the grounds


16. I accept that there is an error made by the Judge in the finding that
   the Appellant's leave came to an end on 22 November 2016 ([18] of the
   Decision).  I understood Ms Everett to concede that this could not be
   correct.  The Appellant made an application to remain prior to the expiry
   of his leave which would have extended that leave under Section 3C until
   such time as it was determined.


17. It is necessary however to look a little more carefully at what
   happened after 22 November 2016 in order to determine when the
   Appellant's leave came to an end.


18. It is common ground that the Appellant's Tier 2 application was
   rejected as invalid on 1 March 2017 ([AB/64-67]).  In the decision under
   challenge, the Respondent says that the next application made was not
   made until 1 March 2017.  The Appellant says that it was made on 27
   February 2017. The evidence in that regard is at [AB/56-63].  That shows
   that the immigration health surcharge was paid online at 1608 on 27
   February 2017 ([AB/56]).  Since that proof of payment is one of the items
   included with the application (see [AB/63] - item (5)), it follows that
   the application could not itself have been sent until after that time on
   27 February 2017.  The application was sent by recorded delivery.  There
   is no proof of posting in the bundle.

19. If the application was posted after hours on 27 February, it is
   realistic to expect that it would not have reached the Respondent until 1
   March 2017.  The Respondent's chronology shows that it was made on that
   date.  As such, coincidentally, it appears that the making of the
   application crossed with the decision rejecting the application
   previously made as invalid.


20. I accept that if the application was received prior to the issuing of
   the rejection decision, it should have been treated as a variation of the
   previous application.  That is what was requested by the 27 February 2017
   application.  I also accept that an application is deemed by paragraph 34
   of the Immigration Rules currently in place to be made, if made by post,
   according to the date of posting if tracked or postmark if not tracked.
   What I am unable to ascertain from the evidence is whether the date given
   by the Respondent of 1 March 2017 has been reached by applying that rule
   (in other words the application was not posted until then), whether it is
   the case that it could not be treated as a variation because a decision
   had already been taken or whether the two decisions crossed and the rule
   in relation to variation of application was not correctly applied.

21. For the purposes of the hearing, therefore, argument proceeded on the
   basis that the Appellant's leave continued and was statutorily extended
   following the application made on 27 February/ 1 March 2017.  Ms Everett
   did not object to that course.

22. As I have already observed, there can however be no argument that the
   Appellant had completed ten years' continuous lawful residence.  His
   leave, on any view, was brought to an end on 20 September 2018.

23. I will come on in due course to consider whether the Judge's error as
   to when the Appellant's leave came to an end could have had any impact on
   the outcome.

24. Ms Simak submitted that the Appellant's "mindset" in this regard was
   relevant.  She accepted that, following the Court of Appeal's majority
   judgment in Hoque and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 ("Hoque"), the Appellant could not succeed if the
   gap in his lawful leave is "open-ended" rather than "book-ended".  In an
   effort to suggest that the gap in the Appellant's leave was "book-ended",
   she made the argument which I have rejected as an unmeritorious one at
   [7] above.  I have there explained why that argument is misconceived.

25. Ms Simak suggested however that the Appellant was not to know that this
   is how the Respondent would treat his various applications as, in the
   past, the Respondent had dealt with applications made out of time but
   where the overstaying was to be disregarded in a different way from the
   way in which she argued the case in Hoque.  There is no evidence before
   me about how those applications have been dealt with at different times
   by the Respondent.  In any event, in this case, the argument does not
   withstand scrutiny.  As Ms Simak accepted, the line of cases which
   culminated in Hoque, began some time before October 2020.  The decision
   of Sweeney J in R (Juned Ahmed) v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department [2019] UKUT 10 (IAC) was given orally at a hearing on 7 March
   2018 and the Court of Appeal's decision on permission to appeal in R
   (Masum Ahmed) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA
   Civ 1070 was against a refusal of permission to apply for judicial review
   in a challenge against a decision of the Respondent in April 2018.  By
   that time, if not before, the Appellant could have had no expectation
   that the period after his leave came to an end would be disregarded for
   the purposes of calculating ten years' continuous residence.  At that
   time, he fell short of the period by over one year.


26. Further, and in any event, the Judge gave the Appellant credit for
   seeking to regularise his stay ([22] of the Decision).





Events in 2017 relevant to exercise of discretion - [8] to [13] of the
grounds


27. The Appellant says that discretion ought to have been exercised in his
   favour in relation to events occurring in 2017 which led to the rejection
   as invalid of his Tier 2 application.  It is asserted that the Appellant
   was unable to enrol his biometrics due to failure of the barcode.


28. Of course, working on the assumption set out above that the decision of
   1 March 2017 did not in fact bring the Appellant's leave to an end and
   that the Judge erroneously concluded to the contrary, this point has no
   bearing.

29. If the point does have any relevance, however, it does not disclose any
   further legal error made by the Judge for the following reasons.

30. First, the Judge considered this argument at [19] and [20] of the
   Decision.  It is asserted that the Judge's reasoning that the Tier 2
   application was doomed to fail is perverse ([12] of the grounds).
   Perversity is a high threshold.  In circumstances where the sponsor
   relied upon by the Appellant never had a licence to sponsor a worker
   (this is not a revocation of sponsor licence case), that finding was not
   merely open to the Judge but is one which I probably would have reached
   on these facts.


31. Second, in any event, the Appellant's case as to exercise of discretion
   is not made out on the facts.  The documents at [AB/51-55] deal with this
   issue.  The biometric letter was sent on 6 January 2017.  On 25 January
   2017, the Appellant's solicitors informed the Home Office that the
   barcode was not working.  On the following day, the Home Office re-issued
   the letter and informed the solicitors that they had checked the barcode
   and it was scanning correctly.  Although the solicitors subsequently
   emailed the Home Office on 6 February 2017 to say that they had not yet
   received the biometric letter, they took no further action until 27
   February 2017, the day on which they say that they made the next
   application.  The Home Office was therefore entitled to assume that the
   biometric letter had been received but not actioned and therefore to
   reject the Tier 2 application as invalid.  In any event, for the reasons
   I have already indicated, the Judge's response to this point was a
   finding open to him.  The Tier 2 application could not have succeeded in
   any event.  The point is irrelevant in any event if it is assumed that
   the Appellant's leave continued beyond this point.


32. For reasons I have already explained, the Appellant's leave on any view
   came to an end on 20 September 2018.  The point made at [12(2)] of the
   grounds therefore has no merit.  The Appellant had no leave at the time
   of his appeal in October 2019.

The decision of 20 September 2018 - [14] to [19] of the grounds


33. In light of what I say at [6] above, I can deal with this point
   relatively shortly.  Whether or not the Appellant had leave at the time
   of the 20 September 2018 decision is irrelevant to the outcome and in
   particular to the Section 94 certification of the claim.  The Appellant's
   status had nothing to do with the relevant issue which is whether the
   claim was clearly unfounded.  The Respondent concluded that it was.  The
   Appellant did not seek to judicially review that decision.  Ms Simak
   submitted that this failure was not that of the Appellant but of his
   solicitors.  However, I have no way of knowing that.  For all I know, his
   solicitors may have advised him that such a challenge could not
   successfully be pursued.
34. In relation to [15] of the grounds, as I have already pointed out, the
   position taken by the Respondent in Hoque pre-dates that judgment by some
   margin.  It was the position being taken certainly as long ago as
   September 2018 when the Section 94 certification decision was taken.


Paragraph 276ADE - [20] of the grounds


35. Ms Simak suggested that the Judge had erred when considering whether
   there were "very significant obstacles" to integration at [24] and [25]
   of the Decision.  She submitted that the Judge's approach was wrong in
   law.  The way in which the challenge is pleaded is as follows:


         "The assessment of the Appellant's eligibility for leave under
         paragraph 276ADE(vi) [sic] is wholly inadequate absent any proper
         engagement with the Appellant's circumstances and history, and in
         light of the guidance for assessment set out in Secretary of State
         for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, [14] and
         Petition of MC for Judicial Review of the Decision of the Secretary
         of State for Home Department dated 1 September 2014 [2016] CSOH 7,
         which confirm the need to assess the Appellant's private life
         established in the UK against the background of the private and
         family life attachments to their country of origin."


36. At one point in her oral submissions, Ms Simak appeared to suggest that
   the Judge ought to have conducted a balance of the private life which the
   Appellant has in this country against the ties he would have in
   Bangladesh.  As I think I subsequently understood her submission,
   however, it is rather more a question of attributing weight also to the
   Appellant's private life ties in the UK when assessing whether there are
   "very significant obstacles" to integration in Bangladesh.


37. I begin with Paragraph 276ADE(1).  That sets out at sub-paragraphs (i)
   to (v) periods of residence which will, without more, entitle an
   applicant to succeed based on his or her private life (assuming of course
   that the application does not fail for other reasons such as
   suitability).  It cannot be suggested that the Appellant in this case
   falls within any of those periods of residence - his claim to entitlement
   to ILR within the Rules based on lawful residence is confined to
   paragraph 276B of the Rules.

38. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) reads as follows:


         "subject to sub-paragraph (2) is aged 18 years or above, has lived
         continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any
         period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


39. In order to understand Ms Simak's submission, it is necessary to say
   more about the case of MC v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2016] CSOH 7 ("MC"), a decision of the Outer House of the Court of
   Session on which Ms Simak relies.  As I will come to, it cannot sensibly
   be suggested that the Court of Appeal's judgment in Secretary of State
   for the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 ("Kamara") supports
   her submission in relation to Paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi).


40. Ms Simak accepts that, as a decision of the Scottish Courts, the
   judgment in MC is not binding on me.  She submitted that it is persuasive
   and should be followed in support of her submission.  However, she also
   asserted that the respondent in that case (who I accept is also the
   Respondent here) had made a concession which should similarly be made and
   accepted in this appeal.


41. I begin by noting that MC was a judgment in a judicial review of a
   decision of the Secretary of State dated 1 September 2014 (although the
   judgment was not given until 13 January 2016).  The judgment in Kamara
   was not handed down until August 2016. I will come back to that judgment
   later.  The version of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which was in force at the
   date of the application which led to the decision under challenge in MC
   was a previous version.  That version included the words "has no ties
   (including social, cultural or family) with the country...to which he
   would have to go if required to leave the UK."


42. I recognise that the version of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) applied by the
   Respondent in that case is as now (as the Rules are those which apply at
   date of decision not application).   It is not clear to me however
   whether the Court was influenced in its construction of Paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) by the previous wording and the need to consider ties.  The
   applicant in that case would of course have put forward her case based on
   the wording as it was when she made the application.  It is no doubt on
   that basis that the argument put forward on her behalf was (as recorded
   at [4] of the judgment) that "the quality of the ties both in Malawi and
   in the UK were of relevance" (relying on the case of Ogundimu (article 8
   - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC) (("Ogundimu").  The argument as
   there summarised was that the reasons given by the respondent were
   inadequate when considering those ties.  The ties referred to however at
   [5] of the judgment and relied upon by the applicant were those in the
   applicant's home country.   The summary of Ogundimu at [7] of the
   judgment is uncontentious and similarly makes no reference to ties in the
   UK.


43. Having made that submission, the applicant's representative argued as
   recorded at [9] of the judgment that "there had been no proper assessment
   of private life accrued and enjoyed domestically in the United Kingdom".
   That was said to be "an essential part of any proportionality assessment
   that required to be done in a claim under article 8 of ECHR".  That too
   is uncontroversial.  The cases to which reference is made at [9] and [10]
   of the judgment are concerned with the consideration of private life in
   the UK within a wider proportionality assessment.  It is far from clear
   to me that the applicant's representative was making any submission that
   the ties in the UK were relevant to the assessment to be made within
   Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) - his submission appears to be that ties in home
   country and UK were both relevant to the overall private life
   consideration.  I do not disagree.

44. What is said to be a concession made on behalf of the respondent in
   that case has to be read in that context.  Having set out the relevant
   factors, (again those in the home country), as recorded at [12] and [13]
   of the judgment, the respondent's representative "accepted that it was
   also necessary to have regard to the solidity of ties within the host
   country".  As above, that is uncontroversial as part of the overall
   analysis.  That does not however amount to a submission that those ties
   form part of the assessment under Paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi).  Indeed, what
   is there said has to be read in the context of the submission recorded at
   [16] of the judgment that "the new rules were not concerned with whether
   or not there were no ties but whether there were very significant
   obstacles to the petitioner's integration in Malawi.  The absence of ties
   are only one component of potential obstacles." That submission says
   nothing about the relevance of ties in the host country when making that
   assessment.

45. I do not disagree with the proposition at [18] of the judgment that
   what the respondent had to consider and therefore what the Court had to
   review was whether interference with private life caused by removal from
   the UK would breach the applicant's right to respect for private life.
   However, if and insofar as the Court understood the respondent's
   representative to have conceded that ties within the UK were relevant to
   the assessment within Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), I do not understand that
   to have been said, at least not clearly, in the record of the submissions
   made.  The ties in the host country are relevant to the overall
   proportionality balance but not directly to the assessment under
   Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  As I will come to, a conclusion that ties in
   the host country forms part of the assessment under Paragraph 276ADE
   (1)(vi) or, put another way, that all elements of the private life claim
   are to be considered within the rule, is not consistent with other case-
   law and therefore, to the extent that this is what the Court decided, I
   respectfully decline to follow the judgment in MC.

46. I turn then to the case of Kamara.  That judgment is binding on me. The
   test applied by the Court of Appeal is set out in clear terms at [14] of
   the judgment as follows:


         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not appropriate to treat the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on and a
         capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable time
         a variety of human relationships to give substance to the
         individual's private or family life."


47. There is no suggestion that the consideration of the situation to be
   faced in home country includes an assessment of the ties to the host
   country.  In Kamara, the appellant's integration in the UK was dealt with
   separately at [4] of the judgment.  I readily accept that the context of
   the case of Kamara was deportation and section 117C Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") ("Section 117C").
   Section 117C in this regard reflects a broadly equivalent position in the
   Rules.  Read as a whole, Section 117C and the Rules include
   considerations of time spent in the UK, degree of integration here and
   the obstacles to integration in home country.  However, as I come to
   below, Paragraph 276ADE (1) similarly includes consideration of time
   spent in the UK.  It does not however include any similar provision in
   relation to the degree of integration in the UK, perhaps understandably
   given that deportation cases often concern individuals previously settled
   in the UK.


48. It may be that the Scottish Court's analysis in MC was influenced by a
   perceived need to bring all factors of the Article 8 assessment within
   the Rules.   The "new" Article 8 immigration rules were brought into
   force in July 2012.  After that date, and until the Supreme Court
   judgments in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2016] UKSC 60 ("Ali") and Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 ("Agyarko"), it had been understood by the
   lower courts that the Rules in relation to Article 8 ECHR amounted to a
   "complete code".  That view was articulated and dealt with by the Supreme
   Court at [51] to [53] of its judgment in Ali as follows:


         "A complete code?
         51.              In MF (Nigeria) [2014] 1 WLR 544 the Court  of
         Appeal described the new rules set out in para  23  above  as  "a
         complete code" for article 8 claims (para  44).  That  expression
         reflected the view that the concluding words of rule 398 required
         the application of a proportionality test in  accordance  with  the
         Strasbourg jurisprudence,  taking  into  account  all  the article
         8 criteria  and  all  other  factors  which  were   relevant   to
         proportionality (para 39). On that basis, the court commented  that
         the  result  should  be  the  same  whether   the   proportionality
         assessment was carried out within or outside the new  rules it was
         a sterile question whether it was required by the rules or by the
         general law (para 45).
         52.              The idea that the new rules comprise a  complete
         code appears to have been  mistakenly  interpreted  in  some  later
         cases as meaning  that  the Rules and  the Rules alone,  govern
         appellate decision-making. Dicta seemingly to that  effect  can  be
         found, for example, in LC (China) v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1310; [2015] Imm AR 227, para 17, and AJ
         (Angola) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
         Civ 1636, para 39.
         53.              As explained at para 17 above, the Rules are not
         law  (although  they  are  treated  as  law  for  the  purposes  of
         section 86(3)(a) of the 2002 Act), and therefore do not govern the
         determination of appeals, other than appeals brought on the  ground
         that the decision is not in accordance with the Rules: see para 7
         above. The policies adopted by the Secretary of Statae and  given
         effect by the Rules are  nevertheless  a  relevant  and  important
         consideration  for  tribunals  determining   appeals   brought   on
         Convention grounds, because they  reflect  the  assessment  of  the
         general public  interest  made  by  the  responsible  minister  and
         endorsed by Parliament.  In  particular,  tribunals  should  accord
         respect to the Secretary of State's assessment of the strength of
         the  general  public  interest  in  the  deportation   of   foreign
         offenders, and also consider all factors relevant to  the  specific
         case before them, as explained at paras 37-38, 46 and 50 above.  It
         remains for them to judge whether, on the facts as they have  found
         them, and giving due weight to the strength of the public  interest
         in deportation in the case before them, the  factors  brought  into
         account on the other side lead to the conclusion  that  deportation
         would be disproportionate."


49. A similar point is made by the Supreme Court in Agyarko at [48] as
   follows:


         "48.              The Secretary of State's view that the public
         interest in the removal of persons who are in the UK in breach
         of immigration laws is, in all but exceptional circumstances,
         sufficiently compelling to outweigh the individual's interest in
         family life with a partner in the UK, unless there are
         insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK, is challenged in these proceedings as
         being too stringent to be compatible with article 8. It is argued
         that the Secretary of State has treated "insurmountable obstacles"
         as a test applicable to persons in the UK in breach of immigration
         laws, whereas the European court treats it as a relevant factor in
         relation to non-settled migrants. That is true, but it does not
         mean that the Secretary of State's test is incompatible
         with article 8. As has been explained, the Rules are not a summary
         of the European court's case law, but a statement of the Secretary
         of State's policy. That policy is qualified by the scope allowed
         for leave to remain to be granted outside the Rules. If the
         applicant or his or her partner would face very significant
         difficulties in continuing their family life together outside the
         UK, which could not be overcome or would entail very serious
         hardship, then the "insurmountable obstacles" test will be met, and
         leave will be granted under the Rules. If that test is not met, but
         the refusal of the application would result in unjustifiably harsh
         consequences, such that refusal would not be proportionate, then
         leave will be granted outside the Rules on the basis that there are
         "exceptional circumstances". In the absence of either
         "insurmountable obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as
         defined, however, it is not apparent why it should be incompatible
         with article 8 for leave to be refused. The Rules and Instructions
         are therefore compatible with article 8. That is not, of course, to
         say that decisions applying the Rules and Instructions in
         individual cases will necessarily be compatible with article 8 that
         is a question which, if a decision is challenged, must be
         determined independently by the court or tribunal in the light of
         the particular circumstances of each case.


50. The Supreme Court's judgments in Ali and Agyarko were handed down in
   November 2016 and February 2017 respectively.  It is therefore perhaps
   scarcely surprising that the Scottish Court in January 2016 considered
   itself to be applying a "complete code" when reviewing how the
   Respondent's decision in that case had been reached and seeking to
   incorporate all elements of the Article 8 claim within the confines of
   the Rules.  However, that approach is now shown to be incorrect.


51. Turning back then to Paragraph 276ADE itself, the wording of Paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) is clear in its terms.  It is concerned with integration in
   the applicant's home country.  That does not mean that ties and
   integration in the UK are in all cases irrelevant to obstacles to
   integration in an applicant's home country.  Depending on the facts, I
   can see that the question of ties as it then was or obstacles to
   integration as it now is, may include consideration of the position in
   the UK.  For example, if a person has been in the host country for many
   years and has, as a result, forgotten his or her mother tongue and
   adopted English as a main language, that may be relevant to the position
   on integration on return.  Similarly, a person with mental health
   problems may be reliant for day-to-day functioning on a person settled in
   the UK - consideration would then need to be given to whether the impact
   on functioning in the home country on return in the absence of that
   person would be so significant as to amount to a very significant
   obstacle. The country conditions may have changed dramatically in the
   time spent in the UK so that the passage of time is relevant.  In that
   regard, however, it is also worth pointing out that Paragraph
   276ADE(1)(vi) does not stand alone.  The other sub-paragraphs of
   Paragraph 276ADE recognise that time spent in the host country is
   relevant to a person's private life.  Paragraph 276ADE thus provides for
   leave to remain to be granted after specified periods of residence.


52. The question whether there are "very significant obstacles" to
   integration in the host country is, as I remarked to Ms Simak, a
   threshold test albeit one which is based on an evaluative assessment of
   all factors relevant to that integration.  That is the approach taken by
   the Court of Appeal in Kamara.  There is nothing to suggest that the
   position in the home country is to be determined by reference to a
   comparison with the position in the host country.  The judgment in that
   case is of course binding on me.


53. I am here dealing with whether the Decision includes any error of law
   in this regard.  The Judge dealt with the Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) issue
   at [24] and [25] of the Decision.  It is not suggested that the Judge
   made any error there other than not taking into account the Appellant's
   integrative ties in the UK.  For the reasons I have given, the Judge was
   not required to take the UK ties into account when assessing whether the
   Appellant meets the Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) test.  The ground challenging
   the Judge's approach in this regard does not disclose any error of law.

Article 8 ECHR proportionality assessment - paragraphs [21] and [22] of the
grounds


54. The ground of appeal in this regard is pleaded in the following terms:


         "21. For the same reasons, the Appellant's circumstances
         accumulatively would justify in all events the extension of leave
         outside the rules on an exceptional basis, as per the guidance
         provided by the Supreme Court in [Agyarko] where the Court
         identified exceptional circumstances as ones which in which the
         result would have unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
         individual such that the refusal of the application would not be
         proportionate.
         22.  The FTTJ has not referred to the above established authority
         and failed to assess the Applicant's [sic] case through the prism
         of his ties to the UK and the diminished connections to his country
         of origin."


55. I accept that the Judge did not refer expressly to Agyarko.   He had no
   reason to do so.  Agyarko was concerned with impact of removal on family
   life and the test of "insurmountable obstacles" to that family life being
   continued outside the UK.  The Appellant has no partner or child and does
   not rely on the Rules in relation to family life.  Although there is some
   overlap in the way in which the Rules are to be applied (in the sense of
   consideration within the Rules followed by an assessment outside the
   Rules), there was no need to refer to the judgment in Agyarko in order to
   make that point.


56. Instead, the Judge referred at [6] of the Decision to the case of R
   (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2 AC 368 and
   the approach to be taken generally in Article 8 cases when assessing
   whether there is a breach.  He also referred at [7] of the Decision to
   section 117B of the 2002 Act ("Section 117B").  In that context, he noted
   that Section 117B "applies in particular where the Tribunal is required
   to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches
   a person's right to respect for private and family life under Article 8".
    The Judge therefore recognised that his task was to assess whether the
   Respondent's decision breached the Appellant's Article 8 rights when
   considered as a whole. Indeed, the only ground of appeal before the Judge
   is whether the Respondent's decision breaches Article 8 ECHR.


57. The Judge considered the evidence about the Appellant's integrative
   ties to the UK at [22] and [23] of the Decision.  I will return below to
   the error of fact which I have accepted the Judge made at [22] of the
   Decision as to the date when the Appellant's leave ended.  Leaving that
   aside for the moment, however, there is no error made in the analysis of
   the evidence about the ties the Appellant has to the UK.


58. I have already considered and rejected the ground challenging the
   Judge's findings about the potential for the Appellant's integration in
   Bangladesh which are at [24] and [25] of the Decision.

59. Having reached findings which were open to him on the position in the
   UK and on return to Bangladesh, (those being the central issues) the
   Judge, at [26] and [27] of the Decision went on to balance the
   interference with the Appellant's rights against the public interest.


60. It is at this point that I return to the factual error which I have
   accepted that the Judge made at [22] of the Decision.  The Judge accepted
   that the Appellant had seven years lawful residence in the UK but had
   been without leave for four years.  The correct position is either that
   the Appellant had 7  years lawful leave (if March 2017 is taken as the
   end date) or, on the assumption on which the hearing before me proceeded,
   that he had nine years lawful residence (to 20 September 2018) and two
   years without leave.


61. Ms Simak submitted that this made a difference because, as she put it,
   the Appellant was in a more proximate position to qualify for long
   residence.  In my view, that comes perilously close to a submission that
   the Appellant is entitled to succeed based on a "near miss". She said
   though that this was not her position and referred me to the cases of
   Patel, Alam and Anwar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
   UKSC 72 ("Patel") albeit she did not refer me to the judgment or to any
   particular passage in that judgment.


62. The Supreme Court in Patel dealt with this issue at [41] to [57] in the
   speech of Lord Carnwath.  What is said at [56] of the judgment is
   particularly relevant here:
       "Although the context of the rules may be relevant to the
       consideration of proportionality, I agree with Burnton LJ that this
       cannot be equated with a formalised "near-miss" or "sliding scale"
       principle, as argued for by Mr Malik. That approach is unsupported
       by Strasbourg authority, or by a proper reading of Lord Bingham's
       words. Mrs Huang's case for favourable treatment outside the rules
       did not turn on how close she had come to compliance with rule 317,
       but on the application of the family values which underlie that rule
       and are at the heart also of article 8. Conversely, a near-miss
       under the rules cannot provide substance to a human rights case
       which is otherwise lacking in merit."
   In other words, an individual's Article 8 claim does not become better or
   worse for having failed to meet the Rules by a narrow margin.  Whether a
   claim succeeds or fails depends on the substance of the claim.


63. As Ms Everett accepted, there might be cases where the passage of time
   alone could make a difference to outcome.  An example of such a case can
   be seen in the case of Shala v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2003] EWCA Civ 233.  In that case, during a period of delay by the
   Secretary of State in deciding his application, the appellant had entered
   into a relationship with a woman who had two children and who was a
   recognised refugee.  Although the judgment concerned the impact of the
   Secretary of State's delay, as was explained in Strbac v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 848, the relevance of the
   delay in that case lay in the consequences of the delay for the
   appellant's family life (see [25] to [27] of the judgment in Strbac).
   Again, although also in the context of delay rather than passage of time,
   what is said in Strbac is also consistent with what is said at [14] of
   the judgment of the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State
   for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 as follows:
       "It does not, however, follow that delay in the decision-making
       process is necessarily irrelevant to the decision. It may, depending
       on the facts, be relevant in any one of three ways. First, the
       applicant may during the period of any delay develop closer personal
       and social ties and establish deeper roots in the community than he
       could have shown earlier. The longer the period of the delay, the
       likelier this is to be true. To the extent that it is true, the
       applicant's claim under article 8 will necessarily be strengthened.
       It is unnecessary to elaborate this point since the respondent
       accepts it."
64. In this case, as Ms Everett pointed out, the Appellant's status, even
   prior to the ending of his leave, was precarious.  As such, whether his
   status was unlawful or precarious made no difference.  Either way, under
   Section 117B, his private life would be given little weight.  I accept
   that this does not mean that the Appellant's private life is given no
   weight.  I accept also that the weight to be given is a flexible
   consideration.  However, the weight which the Appellant's private life
   fell to be given depended on the strength of that private life and
   therefore the degree of interference with it.  It depended to some
   limited extent on the length of residence, but it did not depend on the
   Appellant's status during that residence unless his status during the
   period was sufficient to meet the Rules (which on any view it was not) or
   if his status was other than precarious (which it was not).  In other
   words, the weight to be given in either event depended on the strength of
   the private life disclosed by the evidence.


65. The Judge took into account both the length of residence and the
   strength of private life formed during that time at [22] and [23] of the
   Decision.  That the Appellant's lawful residence was six months or two
   years longer than the Judge thought to be the position made no difference
   to the strength of the Appellant's private life.  There is nothing to
   suggest that the Appellant's private life became stronger during that
   period.  If anything, it became weaker because he was no longer studying
   in the UK and was not allowed to work (as the Judge observed).


66. For those reasons, the Judge's error in relation to the finding
   concerning the Appellant's lawful leave makes no difference to the
   outcome.  Based on the Judge's assessment of the factors making up the
   Appellant's private life, when those are balanced against the public
   interest as analysed by the Judge, the Appellant's appeal would still
   fail.  For that reason, although there is an error of fact in the Judge's
   decision which, as a misunderstanding as to the effect of the evidence,
   amounts to an error of law, I decline to set aside the Decision.  I
   therefore maintain the Decision.

CONCLUSION

67. For the foregoing reasons, although I accept that there is an error of
   law disclosed by the grounds, I am satisfied that it is not one which
   affects the outcome.  Accordingly, I decline to set aside the Decision.
   I therefore uphold the Decision with the result that the Appellant's
   appeal remains dismissed.



DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge G D Davison promulgated on 13
October 2020 involves the making of an error on a point of law but that
error is not one which affects the outcome.  I therefore uphold the
Decision.


Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  23 March 2021

