
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01338/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 12th December 2018                 |On 15th January 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                  Milad [A]
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Sarker, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh whose appeal was dismissed by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence in a decision promulgated on 2nd October
2018.  The judge found that it was not disproportionate to refuse leave to
the Appellant because there was no evidence that he was actively involved
in his child's ([T]) upbringing.  Grounds of application were lodged which
essentially submitted that the judge had failed to consider much of the
evidence and what he had considered was not done appropriately.  It was
accepted that the Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules but it was
clear that he had an active and continuing role in the child's development
and the judge had not taken into account the evidence of the probation
officer and the terms of the Cafcass report.  In particular, that report
said that the child, [T], was very comfortable with her father and
affectionate towards him and the judge had not taken that into account.
Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson in
a decision dated 25th October 2018.

A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Home Office, stating that the lengthy
Grounds of Appeal were nothing more than a disagreement with the First-tier
Tribunal decision.  The judge had properly addressed the question of
whether the Appellant did play a significant role in the child's life and
concluded that the Appellant did not.

Before me, Mr Sarker relied on his grounds.  The judge had adopted a
fragmented approach to the evidence.  I was asked to set the decision aside
and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.  For the Home Office, Mr Walker
relied on the terms of the Rule 24 notice.  The judge had said there was no
evidence of contact continuing and the decision was reasoned and should be
upheld.

I reserved my decision.

 Conclusions

What is troubling in in this case is what the judge sets out in paragraph
24.  The judge says that the fact that the Appellant is the biological
father is insufficient.  There has to be "more".  Evidence of the "more"
was lacking.  He went on to say that the Appellant could maintain contact
with his 7-year-old child by other means and there was no evidence that the
Appellant was actively involved in [T]'s upbringing (paragraph 30).

The important point in the grounds is that the judge failed to consider the
Cafcass report of 7th July 2016.  This narrates, as said above, that the
child was very comfortable with her father and affectionate towards him.
They enjoyed their time together.  The relationship was likely to be
ongoing and lifelong and the Appellant was keen on building his
relationship with his daughter because he loved her; indeed, he brought
gifts for her, and he did have future plans.  As the grounds say, the
report when taken in the round evidences the parental affection and the
role between the Appellant and his daughter and the fact that in going
forward it would be in his daughter's best interests to continue that
contact.  This is a matter the judge did not consider.

What the Appellant was entitled to in this case was clear and proper
factual findings by the judge on which he could base his Article 8 case.
In essence, it seems to me likely that the Appellant had a stronger
relationship with his daughter than found by the judge.  That being so, the
decision is not safe and while it cannot be said that the Appellant has a
strong case, neither can it be said that it is hopeless and he is entitled
to have his decision based on clear factual findings which unfortunately
are not in existence in this decision.

It therefore seems to me that the Appellant has not had a fair hearing
because the judge did not consider all the documentation which was before
him and which may well have had a significant bearing on the outcome of the
appeal.  Unfortunately, it seems to me that further fact-finding is
necessary and this matter will have to be heard again by the First-tier
Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside in its
entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.  Under
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 the
nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision
to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

There is no need for an anonymity order.


Signed       JG Macdonald                             Date 3rd January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

