
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01166/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 11 March 2021                     |On 25 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AKIKO TANAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Joseph instructed by Vine Orchards LLP,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: Akiko Tanaka (Appellant); Secretary of State (Respondent).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Japan who was born on  27  January  1936.
    The appellant entered the United Kingdom on  7  July  2019  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor valid until 7 January 2020.

 3. On 10 December 2019, the appellant made an application for leave  based
    upon her private and family life in the United Kingdom under Art  8  of
    the ECHR.

 4. On 31 December 2019, the Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for leave and her human rights claim under  Art  8  of  the
    ECHR.



The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge N J Osborne on 10 September 2020.  At that hearing,  the
    appellant, her daughter Mrs Reiko Tanaka  and  her  son-in-law,  Robert
    Heffill gave oral evidence before the  judge.   The  appellant,  as  it
    transpired, could not speak English and  no  Japanese  interpreter  was
    available at  the  hearing.   Despite  objection  from  the  Presenting
    Officer, the judge allowed the appellant's son-in-law, who was in  fact
    a qualified interpreter and spoke fluent Japanese, to interpret at  the
    hearing for the appellant.

 6. In a determination sent on 24 September 2020, Judge Osborne allowed the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8.  The appellant relied  upon  the  Adult
    Dependant Relative ("ADR") rules (Section EC-DR) in Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  Judge  Osborne  concluded  that
    the requirements of those rules were met  with  the  exception  of  the
    appellant not being in Japan and seeking entry clearance.  The rules do
    not allow for  an  in  country  application  (see  Section  EC-DR.1.1).
    However, in the light of his finding in relation to  the  Rules,  Judge
    Osborne  concluded  that  it  was  not  proportionate  to  require  the
    appellant to return  to  Japan  for  the  sole  purpose  of  making  an
    application for entry clearance to the UK and,  as  a  consequence,  he
    allowed the appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds.
    First, there was a procedural irregularity in allowing the  appellant's
    son-in-law to act as her interpreter at the hearing.  Secondly, in  any
    event, in reaching his finding that the appellant (apart from the entry
    clearance requirement) met the requirements of the ADR rules, the judge
    had failed to consider the evidence, set out in the Reasons for Refusal
    Letter, concerning the  availability  of  state  supported  adult  care
    provision and its availability for the appellant  if  she  returned  to
    Japan.

 8. On 7 October 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chohan)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  (the
    "UT") on both grounds.

 9. The appeal was listed at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre with  the  UT
    working remotely on 11 March 2021.  Mrs Petterson, who represented  the
    Secretary of State, and  Mr  Joseph,  who  represented  the  appellant,
    joined the hearing remotely by Skype for Business.



The Submissions

10. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mrs  Petterson  relied  upon  both
    grounds.

11. First, she submitted that it  was  procedurally  unfair  to  allow  the
    appellant's son-in-law to act as an interpreter for the appellant.   He
    was a witness who, himself, gave evidence  before  the  Tribunal.   Mrs
    Petterson submitted that there was no real way of the judge knowing, or
    the Presenting Officer knowing, what had been said or not said  by  the
    appellant in her evidence or whether, in her words, some  "spin"  might
    have been put on it.  She submitted that some of the  evidence  was  in
    dispute, for example the level of care required on a  day-to-day  basis
    by the appellant in Japan and what would be available to her.

12. Secondly, Mrs Petterson submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  take
    into account the evidence in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  concerning
    the potential availability of state supported care for  the  appellant.
    Instead, he had decided that the ADR rules were  met  because,  on  the
    basis of evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant, she  would  not
    be able to financially afford to live in a  private  care  facility  in
    Japan.

13. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Joseph  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    taken account of the Presenting Officer's objection to the  appellant's
    son-in-law acting as an interpreter but had dealt with the  case  in  a
    practical way.  He submitted that the appellant's statement (at pages 1-
    2 of the bundle) was brief and nothing of significance or  in  relation
    to credibility was in dispute.  He submitted that the case  was  really
    about the  background  evidence.   He  submitted  that  the  two  other
    witnesses - the appellant's daughter and  son-in-law  -  gave  evidence
    about the particular level of care needed.   There  was  no  suggestion
    that the evidence of the appellant's daughter was in any  way  tainted.
    He submitted that there might well be a point of principle in this case
    but there was nothing, in fact, unfair about the approach taken by  the
    judge.

14. Secondly, Mr Joseph submitted that the judge had dealt at paras 15  and
    16 in his determination with the availability and cost of private  care
    homes in which  the  appellant  would  have  to  live  on  return.   He
    submitted that the Home Office had not produced any evidence to support
    the assertion in the decision letter  concerning  the  availability  of
    state funded social care.  There was no evidence before the  judge,  Mr
    Joseph submitted, of what care would have to be put  in  place  by  the
    state.  It was not enough, he submitted, for the Home Office  to  state
    in one paragraph that  state  care  was  available  and  to  provide  a
    hyperlink to potential supporting  evidence.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge had been entitled to reach the finding that he had in relation to
    the ADR rules and, as a consequence, to allow the appeal under Art 8 of
    the ECHR.



Discussion

15. In TS (Interpreters) Eritrea [2019] UKUT 352 (IAC) Lane  J  (President,
    UTIAC) said this at [1]:

         "Court and Tribunal-appointed interpreters perform a vital role  in
         our justice  system.   They  provide  the  means  of  communication
         between the  judge  and  the  other  parties  and  participants  in
         proceedings where  a  litigant  or  witness  cannot  satisfactorily
         communicate in the language  of  the  court  or  Tribunal  (usually
         English)".

16. In the usual case, where an appellant  or  other  witness  requires  an
    interpreter in order to give evidence before the First-tier Tribunal or
    UT, the Tribunal (through HMCTS) provides  an  appropriate  interpreter
    qualified to interpret in the required language and  English.   In  TS,
    Lane J noted that (at [41]):

         "There is no reason of which we are aware  to  regard  the  current
         contractual arrangements  for  the  provision  of  interpreters  at
         Tribunal hearings as providing anything other than  an  appropriate
         set of quality controls, designed to  ensure  that  appellants  and
         witnesses who require an interpreter to give their evidence can  do
         so (and be questioned  about  it)  in  a  way  that  satisfies  the
         requirements of justice. ... In short, the present system  provides
         a satisfactory level of  confidence  that,  as  a  general  matter,
         interpreters who are engaged by the Immigration and Asylum Chambers
         to translate at hearings are adequately qualified to undertake that
         task".

17. As those comments make clear, it is the provision of an independent and
    appropriately  qualified  interpreter  by  HMCTS  that   provides   the
    "confidence" that an appellant's or other witness's evidence  is  given
    at a hearing and is  reliable.   That  confidence  is  not  exclusively
    determined  by  the  competence  of  the  interpreter  but  also   that
    interpreter's independence from the parties and, indeed,  the  Tribunal
    itself.

18.  Of  course,  sometimes  questions  arise  as  to   the   accuracy   of
    interpretation  provided  even  by  an  independent  and  appropriately
    qualified interpreter provided by HMCTS.  The case  of  TS  itself  was
    just such a case.  At [41]-[51], the UT set  out  "general  principles"
    when such an issue arises as to how it should be approached both by the
    First-tier Tribunal (if the issue arises at that time) or by the UT  on
    appeal.

19. That, of course, is not the issue in this appeal.  No direct  issue  is
    raised about the actual interpretation provided by the appellant's son-
    in-law.  Indeed, none could be since only  the  appellant's  son-in-law
    and, perhaps, the appellant herself could be aware of  what  was  being
    said and translated when she was giving her evidence.  But that reality
    is at the heart of the Secretary of State's challenge in  this  appeal.
    Mrs Petterson submits that it is unfair to allow an individual, such as
    the appellant's son-in-law,  who  is  himself  a  witness  and  has  an
    interest in the outcome of the appeal, to act as an interpreter.  There
    is, it is essentially being said, a lack of independence.  Without that
    independence, neither the Secretary of State nor the judge  can  assess
    what precisely is  the  appellant's  evidence  and,  when  known,  what
    relevance it should have in the appeal.

20. In this appeal, I agree that the "confidence" in the integrity  of  the
    judicial process provided by  the  twin  pillars  of  independence  and
    appropriate qualification by  an  interpreter  are  not  present.   Mrs
    Petterson founds her argument in the modern  public  law  principle  of
    "procedural unfairness".  Whilst that is a principle which  is  usually
    deployed by an appellant or individual  subject  to  an  administrative
    decision under appeal, the principle is no less applicable to the other
    party to the proceedings, here the Secretary of State.

21. In R (Pathan) v  SSHD  [2020]  UKSC  41,  Lord  Briggs  identified  the
    essential content of 'procedural unfairness' at [157]:

         ""Procedural  unfairness"  is  a  modern  title for  a  form   of
         unlawfulness which used to  be  called  "breach  of  the  rules  of
         natural justice".  That  phrase  collected  together  a  number  of
         traditional  doctrines,  the  most  important  of  which  were  the
         requirement that a decision should be  unaffected  by  bias  ("nemo
         judex in causa sua") and the principle espoused by the  Latin  tag
         "audi alteram partem" or, literally  translated,  "hear  the  other
         side". The rules of natural justice served  originally  to  protect
         the integrity of decision-making by courts but  have  been  applied
         for  more  than  150  years   to   maintain   the   lawfulness   of
         administrative decision-making: see eg Cooper v Wandsworth Board of
         Works (1863) 14 CBNS 180."

22. Although Lord Briggs dissented  in  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,  his
    statement of the  legal  principle  represents  common  ground  in  the
    Supreme Court.

23. This case is not concerned with the first manifestation of  'procedural
    unfairness', namely bias (actual or apparent) by the judge or decision-
    maker.  It concerns the latter, namely the right of both  parties,  and
    in the particular circumstances the respondent,  to  be  fairly  heard.
    Importantly, Lord Briggs recognised that the rules of  natural  justice
    or procedural fairness originated to "protect the integrity of decision-
    making by courts".  That principle is, in my judgment, engaged in  this
    appeal.

24. In this appeal, the judge, and the Secretary of State's representative,
    had no way of knowing  precisely  what  was  the  appellant's  evidence
    without accepting that the interpretation by the appellant's son-in-law
    was accurate.  There was, of  course,  in  the  circumstances  of  this
    appeal no way for the judge or Presenting Officer to  know  whether  or
    not that was the case.  In the usual case, both the judge and the other
    party to the proceedings, can be confident  that  a  witness'  evidence
    that is given through an interpreter can be taken reliably as what  the
    appellant (or witness)  says  because  an  independent  and  accredited
    interpreter has carried out  the  interpretation,  subject  always,  of
    course, to an evidenced complaint that it was not  accurate  (see,  e.g
    TS).  In this appeal, there  could  not  be  that  confidence  because,
    whatever  the  qualifications  of  the  appellant's  son-in-law  as  an
    interpreter  (which  was  asserted  but  not  so  far  as  I  can  tell
    established by documentation at the hearing) he was not independent: he
    was himself a witness in the appeal and had an interest in its outcome,
    quite naturally given that the appellant  was  his  mother-in-law.   In
    those  circumstances,  the  integrity  of  the  judicial  process   was
    inevitably impugned.  The evidence either had to be taken at face value
    (which it could not be given the absence of an independent interpreter)
    or discounted because of that which, in itself, would have been  unfair
    to the appellant in  the  sense  that  she  was  entitled  to  have  an
    opportunity to give evidence  orally  before  the  judge  in  order  to
    establish her case.  The only proper  way  of  proceeding  was,  in  my
    judgment, to ensure that a Japanese interpreter was provided either  at
    this hearing or at  a  future  adjourned  hearing  in  order  that  the
    appellant's evidence could be given and interpreted by  an  independent
    and appropriately qualified interpreter.

25. I do not accept Mr Joseph's submission that there was no dispute on the
    evidence and the facts relevant to the outcome of the appeal.   It  was
    very relevant what would be the appellant's circumstances in  Japan  on
    return which, in part, turned upon  her  health  and  circumstances  on
    return.

26. Whilst I have considerable sympathy for the judge given the position in
    which he found himself at the hearing, and his not unnatural desire  to
    continue with the appeal in the most practical way in which it could be
    proceeded with on the day, in effect the judge  deprived  himself  (and
    the Secretary of State as the other party) of the means to assess  what
    precisely was the appellant's evidence  given  at  the  hearing.   That
    would have arisen even if she had simply purported to adopt her witness
    statement and, of course, her evidence went further.  Even the apparent
    adoption of her statement could not be relied  upon  without  accepting
    that  the  interpretation  leading  to  that  was  reliable.   In   the
    circumstances of this appeal, it simply could not be  relied  upon  and
    the process by which the appellant's evidence  was  given  resulted  in
    procedural unfairness to the respondent and impugned the  integrity  of
    the judicial process.  The judge's decision cannot stand  and  must  be
    set aside.  None of the judge's  findings  can  be  preserved  and  the
    appeal must be reheard de novo.

27. The appeal must be  reheard  and,  if  the  appellant  wishes  to  give
    evidence and still requires an interpreter, one  must  be  provided  by
    HMCTS  (or  at  least  one  who  is  appropriately  qualified  and   is
    independent of the parties) in order for her to give evidence.  Her son-
    in-law cannot act as an interpreter as  he  is  a  person  who  has  an
    interest in the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  is  a  witness  in  the
    appellant's appeal.

28. In the light of that conclusion, it is not necessary to decide  whether
    the Secretary of State has established ground 2.  I, therefore, express
    no view upon it other than to anticipate that if the Secretary of State
    wishes to rely upon the availability of state  funded  social  care  in
    Japan then a judge might expect evidence, and not simply  assertion  in
    the refusal letter, to establish what, if any, is the  availability  of
    such care for the appellant on return to Japan.



Decision

29. For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow
    the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved the making  of  a  material
    error of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

30. Given the nature of the legal error, none of the judge's  findings  can
    be preserved.  In the light of the nature and  extent  of  fact-finding
    required, and having regard to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, the proper disposal of this appeal is to  remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other
    than Judge N J Osborne.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                               17 March 2021

