
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01339/2017
                                                               HU/01344/2017
                                                               HU/01350/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2019                   |On 15 March 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                         Miss R A (first Appellant)
                        Master M K (second Appellant)
                       Master M A K (third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.    The  appellants,  mother  and  sons  and  citizens  of  Nigeria,  have
    permission to challenge the decision of Judge Devittie  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal sent on 29 August 2018 dismissing their appeals.

2.   There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellants.   They  were
    represented at the hearing before Judge Devittie by Mr Knight acting on
    behalf of Duncan Lewis, but the grounds seeking permission were  signed
    by the first appellant alone.  Having checked the file, I am  satisfied
    she was properly served with  notice  of  hearing  at  her  last  known
    address.  I decided to proceed with the hearing in the absence of  one
    of the parties and I heard brief submissions from Ms Jones.

3.   Notwithstanding the brevity of the  grounds  and  the  failure  of  the
    appellants to attend, I consider that there are manifest errors in  the
    judge's decision.  One already identified  by  the  judge  who  granted
    permission, is that the  judge  nowhere  addressed  whether  the  first
    appellant  should  have  been  treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness   in
    accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010.
    Another, similarly identified, is that the judge failed to engage  with
    the extensive  evidence  in  the  bundles  indicating  that  the  first
    appellant had mental health problems and suicidal ideation.  There  was
    also an 8 September 2015 CAF assessment deeming her children to be  at
    risk due to deterioration in her mental health.  At  paragraph  13  the
    judge stated simply that "I find that she is in relatively good health
    and there is no evidence to suggest to the contrary".  Yet even earlier
    in his decision he  had  noted  the  evidence  of  Margaret  Teribo,  a
    community  consultant,  stating  that  the   appellant   was   battling
    depression and mental health problems.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the
    extensive medical evidence all pointed one way, and indeed it  was  the
    position of the respondent in the Reasons for Refusal Letter, that  her
    mental health problems were in the past, but  at  the  very  least  the
    judge should have engaged with this evidence.

4.   It would appear that the judge considered that  the  first  appellant's
    circumstances  on  return  to  Nigeria  with  her  children   did   not
    demonstrate. very significant obstacles, in part because the children's
    father could be expected to return with them.  At paragraph 12  and  13
    the judge noted:

         "12. She was unable to give coherent evidence in regard to  whether
             she was in a relationship with the father of the  children.  A
             reading of her evidence indicates that she  was  unwilling  to
             state whether or not she was in  relationship  with  him.  Her
             evidence was that she does have some contact with him but  she
             would go no further and it was certainly not her case that she
             there is in existence a subsisting relationship and that  they
             intend to live with each other permanently. It  is  not  clear
             what the immigration status of her partner was.  He  certainly
             has not come forward,  as  the  father  of  the  children,  to
             support the appeal. I therefore  proceed  on  the  basis  that
             there is  no  meaningful  relationship  between  him  and  the
             children. To the extent that such a relationship exists, he is
             a national of Nigeria and it is  open  to  him  to  return  to
             Nigeria with his partner and children. As  I  have  indicated,
             what little  information  there  is  about  him,  is  entirely
             unreliable as I do not believe that  the  appellant  has  been
             truthful  in  regard  to  the  true  circumstances   of   that
             relationship.

         13.  There is no record of when the first appellant arrived in  the
             United Kingdom.  It is clear however that she has remained the
             UK in breach of the immigration rules. At the very latest, she
             would have arrived here shortly before the birth of her  first
             child, in 2012. She is an adult, who has spent the majority of
             her life in Nigeria. It is reasonable therefore to expect that
             she would have retained strong  social,  cultural  and  family
             ties in Nigeria. To  the  extent  that  the  appellant  denies
             having any family, I do not accept this evidence, in the light
             of the adverse credibility findings I have made. I  find  that
             she is in relatively good health and there is no  evidence  to
             suggest to the contrary. She would be able to provide  support
             and care for her two children and in this endeavour she  would
             be supported by her immediate family and the  network  in  her
             home area in  Nigeria.  The  appellant  has  shown  tremendous
             resourcefulness in entering  the  United  Kingdom,  apparently
             legally, and living here for a significant period of time.  It
             would be a much easier task for  her  to  reintegrate  into  a
             country in which she grew up and with which  she  is  familiar
             and has effective support from family and friends.

5.   The difficulty with this analysis is that if there was  "no  meaningful
    relationship between [the first appellant's children's father] and  the
    children", then it was not reasonable to assess her case on  the  basis
    that he would return to Nigeria with her and so be able  to  help  with
    the children. From one sentence in para 13, it appears that  the  judge
    proceeded on this basis and considered  she  would  be  a  lone  parent
    having the support of her own immediate family, but at the end  of  the
    preceding paragraph it appears that the husband's support was  what  is
    relied on. A clear assessment of this issue was clearly very  important
    because if he was in fact actively involved in (or was considered to be
    able to be actively involved in) the children's lives as a parent,  the
    first appellant could not expect to have her  case  considered  on  the
    basis she would be returning as a single mother.

6.   In any event, the judge's  decision  did  not  constitute  an  adequate
    treatment of the key issues concerning whether  the  first  appellant's
    mental health  problems  would  prevent  her  from  looking  after  her
    children if returned to Nigeria, whether she would  return  as  a  lone
    parent or with her husband.

7.   For the above reasons I set aside the decision of  the  FtT  Judge  for
    material error of law.

8.   I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT.

9.   In my view the appellants' case is one that would greatly benefit  from
    legal representation, but that is not in the power of this Tribunal  to
    ensure.

10.  I am informed by Ms Jones that the first  appellant  has  now  made  an
    asylum claim.

11.  It would obviously assist the FtT  dealing  with  this  appeal  if  the
    father of the  first  appellant's  children  were  to  attend  to  give
    evidence, but again that is not something I can direct.

12.  To summarise:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law;

    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Devittie).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 12 March 2019

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

