

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number
HU/01049/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Priory Courts
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 4th September 2019                               On 13th September 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD ABID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr R Ahmed (Counsel, instructed by Riaz Khan & co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:   Ms H Aboni (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's application to remain in the UK on the basis of his
   family life and human rights grounds was rejected and his appeal
   dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sills for the reasons given in the
   decision promulgated on the 1st of May 2019. There had been a previous
   refusal and appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa at
   Nottingham and she had dismissed the appeal for the reasons given in her
   decision of the 12th of May 2016. That decision is now available but was
   not before Judge Sills.

2. At paragraph 12 of his decision Judge Sills noted that the previous
   decision had not been provided and made a number of assumptions about the
   nature of the decision and the issues and supporting evidence that would
   have been raised. In paragraph 13 the Judge noted that the medical
   evidence before him post-dated the decision of Judge Gurung-Thapa and in
   the following paragraphs considered it before finding that the evidence
   did not show that the Sponsor was dependent on the Appellant and in any
   event she could relocate and the evidence did not show that medical
   treatment would not be available.

3. The grounds of application for permission to appeal argued that the
   Judge was wrong to have made the assumptions in paragraph 12 of the
   decision. It is also argued that the Judge was wrong to reject the GP's
   evidence and the Judge's medical qualifications had not been explained so
   it was difficult to see how he could have reached that conclusion. There
   is criticism of paragraph 16 and it is asserted that the Judge speculated
   about the doctor's specialism and had not considered if treatment was
   available in Pakistan. It was submitted that there were insurmountable
   obstacles.

4. Permission was granted on the basis that the Judge may have erred in
   speculating what evidence was available. The Home Office rule 24 response
   argued that the Judge's assumption was correct by reference to the
   previous decision and in any event the Judge had considered the evidence
   that was relied on. At the hearing both parties made submissions in line
   with their respective cases with Mr Ahmed adding that there was no
   evidence that the Sponsor had been treated as a vulnerable witness.

5. Taking the last point first there does not appear to have been an
   application for the Sponsor to be treated as a vulnerable witness and
   that was not a ground raised in the application made following the
   decision. In any case the Judge was clearly fully aware of her medical
   issues raised in the reports before him and Mr Ahmed did not suggest in
   submissions that there was any indication that the Sponsor had been
   treated inappropriately in any way. If there had been a concern relating
   to her treatment that would have been raised in the grounds of
   application. The evidence does not show that there was any error in the
   approach taken in the conduct of the hearing.

6. It was not the fault of the Judge that neither party provided him with a
   copy of the previous decision. Given the nature of the application made
   it was hardly speculative to make the assumptions that the Judge did.
   Besides he only referred to "her medical problems" having been the
   subject of evidence, he did not assume what the problems then were or
   what evidence might have been before the previous Judge. Still less did
   he make any assumptions of basic facts that could be said to have been
   then taken as the starting point for his consideration of the evidence he
   had before him.

7. As the observations made in paragraph 12 were obvious from the nature of
   the proceedings I am not persuaded that the contents of paragraph 12
   could be said to be an error. Even if the assumptions in paragraph 12
   were an error they were clearly not material. The decision has to be read
   as a whole and the medical evidence being relied on before Judge Sills
   post-dated the decision. On any view he did consider the fresh evidence
   and nothing in the decision shows that the findings made were influenced
   by the decision that was not before him.

8. As it happens the previous decision has now been provided. A brief
   perusal of that decision shows that Judge Sills' assumptions were correct
   in that medical evidence had been available and had been considered by
   the previous Judge. To repeat the observation above Judge Sills had not
   assumed what that evidence might have been or why Judge Gurung-Thapa
   might have rejected it.

9. Turning to the substance of Judge Sills' decision the grounds at
   paragraph 11 are bordering on the abusive and appear to misunderstand the
   Judge's role. No Judge is obliged to simply accept expert evidence
   without question which is what the grounds appear to be based on and any
   expert's opinion can properly be rejected if the Judge gives sufficient
   reasons.

10. So far as the GP's report was concerned the fact that it was over a
   year-old would significantly undermine the weight that could be attached
   to it. Much can change over a 12 month period and the Sponsor and
   Appellant had been able to travel in 2016, it was not explained what had
   changed or what it was that, in January 2018, prevented the Sponsor from
   flying.

11. The observations by the Judge in the discussion at paragraphs 15 and 16
   were justified. It cannot be argued that the Judge's consideration of the
   psychiatric evidence was superficial and there were aspects of the report
   which were unclear and vague. In any case the Judge found that in
   Pakistan the Sponsor would have the support of the Appellant so the
   question of separation would not arise.

12. The Sponsor's medical issues were fully considered. It was for the
   Appellant and Sponsor to provide evidence that showed that her medical
   needs could not be adequately addressed in Pakistan and the Judge was
   right to observe that there was no such evidence. The fact that the
   Appellant and Sponsor have assets in the UK that could be used to provide
   financial security in Pakistan was relevant too.

13. With regard to the Sponsor's ability to live in Pakistan the assertions
   about the difficulties she would face were unsubstantiated. It is a large
   country with a range of climates and if the Sponsor can handle the
   Appellant's variations the suggestion she could adapt to Pakistan was
   reasonable - there was no evidence she could not.

14. The Appellant's complaints about the decision have no merit and are
   simply a disagreement with a decision that was open to the Judge for the
   reasons given. The decision has to be read fairly and as a whole which
   the grounds fail to do. In the circumstances I uphold the decision of
   Judge Sills which remains as the disposal of the Appellant's appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for anonymity and I make no
order.


Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 4th September 2019


