
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/01562/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 November 2017                       |   On 16 November 2017            |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Eniola Abosede ademola
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Peterson


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  who  appeals  with  leave
    against  a  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Devittie
    promulgated on 6 September 2017.  The respondent in this case  is  Miss
    Eniola Abosede Ademola.  She is a Nigerian citizen who is currently  45
    years of age.  She has a child who was born on 15 August 2002  and  who
    has Irish citizenship.  The respondent and her child came to the United
    Kingdom in 2003.  The respondent has two convictions which are detailed
    at paragraph 2 of the determination, in particular she was convicted on
    26 March 2013 at Woolwich Crown Court of theft  by  finding  and  on  3
    April  2013  she  was  sentenced  to  30  months'  imprisonment.    The
    sentencing remarks of the trial judge are recorded at page 2.

2.   The Secretary of State issued a deportation order on 29  June  2015  in
    respect  of  the  respondent's  convictions.  The  respondent  appealed
    against the decision to refuse her human rights claim. That appeal  was
    allowed by FtT Judge Callow on 20 November 2015. The Secretary of State
    appealed that decision. The appeal was allowed by UTJ Allen on 22 March
    2017. In his decision he said that the  essential  difficulty  was  the
    failure to address the fact of the Irish nationality of the appellant's
    child. The appellant would have a derived right of residence in Ireland
    applying Zambrano principles. He directed that the case be returned  to
    the FtT to address the article 8 claim in the context of the  appellant
    and her daughter living in Ireland.

3.   Accordingly the issue before the FtT was whether or  not  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the child to be removed from  the  United  Kingdom  to
    Ireland where she has citizenship.  In his determination Judge Devittie
    relied on the Court of Appeal judgement in MM (Uganda) v SSHD 2016 EWCA
    617 as to what is meant by unduly harsh in Section 117C(5) of the  2002
    Act.

4.   The appeal by the Secretary of State focuses  on  whether  or  not  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge gave sufficient  weight  to  the  public  interest
    considerations of removing a foreign criminal under  reference  to  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v AJ (Zimbabwe) [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 1012. At paragraph 17 the Court of Appeal held that it will be rare
    for the best interests of the children to outweigh  the  strong  public
    interest in deporting foreign criminals. In order to establish  a  very
    compelling  justification  overriding  the  high  public  interest   in
    deportation there must be some additional feature or features affecting
    the nature or quality of the relationship which takes the case  out  of
    the ordinary.

5.   Applying AJ (Zimbabwe) we are satisfied that there is  nothing  in  the
    findings of Judge Devittie that would suggest  additional  features  in
    the nature and quality of the relationship that would  take  this  case
    out of the ordinary. For these reasons we find that there is  an  error
    of law and we shall allow the appeal.

6.   In her submissions Ms  Peterson  asked  that  we  remake  the  decision
    today, and as she said, bring this matter to  an  end.   We  have  some
    sympathy with her given the long history that this has had through  the
    Tribunals. Nevertheless we do not consider that  it  would  be  in  the
    interests of justice for us to do that.  We are particularly  concerned
    about the position of the child.  While  of  course  there  is  not  an
    overriding consideration, the best interests of the child are a primary
    consideration for any Tribunal.  As well as hearing from the respondent
    we expect to hear evidence directed to  the  child's  welfare  and  the
    possible consequences for her if  she  were  required  to  relocate  to
    Ireland.  That  may  include  school  reports   and   a   psychological
    assessment. Such evidence is not available today.


Notice of Decision

7.   We find an error of law. We shall allow the appeal and  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Devittie. We shall remit this case to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing before a  judge  different  from  Devittie  or
    Callow. We consider that a time of two-and-half-hours would be required
    for evidence and redetermination.  For the avoidance of doubt  the  FtT
    should address the article 8 claim in the context of the appellant  and
    her daughter living in Ireland

8.   No anonymity direction is made.






                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                             9 November 2017








