
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01356/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2017                    |On 20 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [F O]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Reid instructed by Signature Law LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In these proceedings we shall refer to the appellant as "the  Secretary
    of State" and the respondent as "the appellant" as she was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Secretary of State appeals with leave against a decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lingam promulgated on 20 February  2017.   In  that
    decision Judge Lingam  allowed  an  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision made on 31 December 2015 refusing the appellant  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom and  directing  her  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  1969.   She  entered
    the UK as a visitor in 1996 in order to avoid problems  from  her  late
    husband's family who had blamed her for his  death  and  who  had  also
    attempted to separate her  from  her  son.   She  had  previously  been
    rejected by her family for  marrying  a  Muslim  and  they  refused  to
    protect her and her son from her in-laws.   She  allowed  a  friend  to
    adopt her son in order to protect him from  them.   She  then  accepted
    assistance to enter the United Kingdom from a distant relative whom she
    referred to as "aunt".  This lady arranged in time for her to  marry  a
    much older man.  When she refused her aunt turned  hostile  and  forced
    her to work.  She then left her aunt's with the assistance of a  friend
    and their pastor.  She worked at the church as a cleaner and  with  the
    support of the church she lived at a rented property.

4.   She met her second husband in February 2010.  She  was  abused  by  him
    and abandoned by him in 2013.   She  suffered  mental  stress  and  was
    hospitalised for treatment.  She remains under the care of her GP.  Her
    church  friends  have  become  of  vital  support.   She  has  received
    psychiatric care and remains on anti-depressants.  She is on a  waiting
    list to see a psychologist and remains an outpatient at  a  psychiatric
    unit.

5.   She has PTSD and exhibits suicidal ideation.  Judge Lingam  found  that
    she would be without family or non-family support in Nigeria.  While it
    was not suggested that she would not have access to medical services in
    Nigeria the Judge found that as someone suffering  with  PTSD  with  no
    family or other  social  network  she  might  suffer  very  significant
    obstacles in Nigeria.  She might  in  the  heightened  state  of  worry
    ignore her  personal  wellbeing  and  she  could  be  exploited  or  in
    desperation harm herself.

6.   The appeal to the FtT proceeded on two grounds.  The  first  was  under
    IR 276ADE.  At  paragraph  45  Judge  Lingam  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant succeeds on her appeal  on  private  life  under  the  Rules.
    Judge Lingam then went on to consider under the heading of "Exceptional
    and Compassionate Circumstances" Article 3 and 8 issues  based  on  her
    mental health.  She  considered  the  case  of  Paposhvilli  v  Belgium
    (application number  41738/10,  13/12/16).   At  paragraph  56  of  her
    decision  Judge  Lingam  found  that  this  case  softened   the   more
    restrictive approach that had hitherto been followed based on the  test
    in D v The United Kingdom and N v The United  Kingdom.   Applying  this
    "less restricted test" she found that there was clear evidence that the
    appellant would suffer a breach of her Article 3 rights  and  that  the
    appellant's infringement of her Article 8  rights  on  medical  grounds
    would equally be engaged and infringed.

7.   The Secretary of State's ground of appeal focuses  exclusively  on  the
    Article 3 medical grounds; while the appellant might suffer hardship on
    return to Nigeria it was submitted that she did not engage the  Article
    3 medical threshold.  On 4 July 2017  the  appellant  made  a  Rule  24
    response pointing out that in effect the appeal was academic given  the
    judge's findings in regard to the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules.
    Mr Melvin, recognising the difficulty that he was placed in, sought  to
    amend the grounds of appeal to include a challenge to the  findings  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  private  life  of  the
    appellant under 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

8.   Having heard from Mr Melvin and Ms Reid in response,  we  refused  that
    application.  No reason had been advanced for making the application at
    this late stage and we did not accept Mr Melvin's submission that  this
    was effectively the same argument as contained in the ground of appeal.



9.   Mr Melvin maintained his ground of appeal.  Ms Reid conceded  that  the
    reasoning of Judge Lingam on Article 3 could not be supported.

10.  In Paposhvilli the European Court of Human Rights set out the test  for
    the "other very exceptional cases"  which  may  raise  an  issue  under
    Article 3 in considering the removal of a seriously  ill  person.   The
    court held that Article 3 would be engaged where there were substantial
    grounds for believing that, although not at imminent risk of dying, the
    applicant would face  a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of
    appropriate treatment in the receiving country or the lack of access to
    such treatment, of being exposed to a serious, rapid  and  irreversible
    decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense suffering or
    to a significant reduction in life expectancy.  The court  pointed  out
    that  these  situations  correspond  to  a  high  threshold   for   the
    application of Article 3.

11.  Having regard to the appellant's medical circumstances  set  out  above
    and to the finding that there was appropriate  treatment  available  in
    Nigeria, albeit that she  may  suffer  very  significant  obstacles  in
    accessing such treatment, we are in no  doubt  that  her  circumstances
    fall some way short of the high threshold which would involve a  breach
    of the appellant's Article 3 rights.   Nor  do  we  consider  that  the
    medical aspects of her Article 8  rights  would  be  infringed  by  her
    removal to Nigeria.

Notice of Decision

12.  Accordingly, we find that there is an error of law in  respect  of  the
    Article 3 and Article 8 "outside the rules"  parts  of  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision.  However, in view of the fact that the appeal  before
    the First-tier Tribunal succeeded on private  life  grounds  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the error of law is not material and we  decline  to
    set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.


                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                             7 November 2017

