







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/01885/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 December 2018                   |On 20 December 2018                    |
|                                      |                                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                          MR SAMEERALI MANGALASSERI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singer of Counsel instructed by Chhokar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clark Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Peter-John S White promulgated on the 11th October  2018
    whereby the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision
    of the respondent to refuse the appellant's claims based on  Article  8
    of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes on 5th  November  2018.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision. Leave was granted on all grounds. Ground 6 sets out :-

    The FTJ failed to have regard to relevant matters in his assessment  of
    'reasonableness' under section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002

 4. At the hearing before me taking account of the  provisions  of  section
    117 B (6) of the 2002 Act; taking account of the fact that there was  a
    British citizen child; and taking account of the case of KO 2018  UKSC,
    it was accepted by the representative for the respondent that there was
    a material error of law in the decision.

 5. It was accepted on the part of the Secretary of State that where  there
    was a British citizen child it was not reasonable to expect the British
    citizen child to leave the United Kingdom. It  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a genuine parental relationship with the British  citizen
    child and therefore the provisions of 117B (6)  applying  the  decision
    under appeal was not proportionately justified.

 6. On behalf of the appellant Mr Singer  wished  to  argue  the  remaining
    grounds, grounds  1  to  5.  The  grounds  were  not  conceded  by  the
    respondent. However equally as I was  setting  aside  the  decision  of
    Judge Jones, the findings, in respect of which  challenges  were  made,
    would  not  stand.  Clearly  in  any  future  proceedings,  if  it  was
    considered  appropriate  and  if  reliance  was  to  be   placed   upon
    allegations that the appellant had acted fraudulently or dishonestly in
    obtaining TOEIC certificate, that would be a  matter  for  evidence  to
    prove the same and the decision by any future judge in any such  future
    proceedings.

 7. As the decision of Judge Jones is set aside, none of  the  findings  of
    fact are preserved.

 8. In the circumstances it is found that there is a British citizen  child
    and the respondent accepts that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    that British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom. It  is  further
    found that the appellant is in a  genuine  parental  relationship  with
    that British citizen child. Therefore by reason of Section  117  B  (6)
    and taking account of the case of KO it is accepted that the appeal  of
    the appellant is to be allowed under Article 8. For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt by reason of the matters set  out  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and  thereupon
    to remove him is not in all the circumstances proportionately justified
    and is therefore in breach of  his  and  the  British  citizen  child's
    article 8 rights.

    Notice of Decision

 9. I allow the appeal on article 8 grounds.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 11th December 2018



