
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01058/19 (P)
     HU/01060/19 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (Skype)               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the: 15th September 2020                   |On the: 27th January 2021     |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              Miss Sobha Thapa
                              Mr Narendra Thapa
                          (no order for anonymity)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mr Moll of Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants are respectively a sister (born on the 19th March 1977) and
her brother (11th August 1978).  They are both nationals of Nepal who seek
entry clearance to the United Kingdom on human rights grounds; specifically
they wish to join their father Mr Radhe Shyam Thapa, a former Gurkha now
settled in the United Kingdom.  The applications for entry clearance were
refused in a decision dated the 11th December 2018.

The Appellants' linked appeals against that decision came before the First-
tier Tribunal (Judge Sweet) on the 19th September 2019.  By his decision
promulgated on the 25th September 2019 Judge Sweet dismissed both appeals
on human rights grounds.  He concluded that neither Appellant could meet
the requirements of Annex K of the Immigration Rules.  Insofar as the
Appellants relied on Article 8 'outside of the rules' Judge Sweet did not
consider that a family life existed nor accordingly that the decision to
refuse entry clearance was disproportionate.

The Appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was granted by
the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Brien) on the 31st January 2020.

The matter was listed for hearing at on the 15th April 2020.  That hearing
was, with notice, adjourned as a result of measures taken by the government
to control the spread of Covid-19.  On the 24th March 2020 the Vice
President of the Tribunal Mr CMG Ockelton made Directions.  He indicated
his provisional view that at least in respect of the following two matters,
this appeal could proceed on the papers: did the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Sweet contain an error of law, and if it did, should it be
set aside?  Judge Ockelton invited the submissions of the parties on that
matter.

On the 20th April 2020 the Appellants, or rather their representatives in
the United Kingdom (Everest Law), responded on their behalf.  They
indicated that they had no objection to the 'error of law' hearing
proceeding on the papers, and made written submissions which they asked to
be taken into account.  On the 27th April 2020 the Respondent, or rather
his representative in the United Kingdom (the Secretary of State, on this
occasion by way of letter from Senior Presenting Officer Rhona Pettersen)
made his own submissions.

By my decision of the 29th June 2020 (promulgated on the 7th July 2020) I
addressed the two questions identified by Judge Ockelton in his Directions.
 I found error of law and set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
aside.

The error, in brief summary, was in the First-tier Tribunal' approach to
whether a 'family life' exists in this case for the purpose of Article 3
ECHR.  In his very brief decision Judge Sweet held that in the absence of
"beyond normal family ties" between these adult children and their sponsor
father, the Convention obligations of the United Kingdom could not be
engaged.  In doing so Judge Sweet failed to have regard to the binding
authority of Jitendra Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320
wherein the Court of Appeal reviewed the existing jurisprudence relevant to
these Gurkha entry clearance appeals.  The material conclusions of the
court were that Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 has been too
restrictively read, and that in examining whether family life is engaged
there is no requirement of exceptionality: it all depends on the facts.

The facts here were not in dispute.  The Appellants had continued to live
in the family home where they had at all material times lived with their
sponsor father until he eventually came to the United Kingdom to take
advantage of a right of settlement which he should always have had.  He had
in fact delayed in taking up that settlement right because he did not want
to be separated from his children.  They continued to be financially
supported by him and he had maintained his close emotional bond with them
by frequent visits (at the date of the decision he had returned to Nepal
four times) and daily contact via telephone and the internet.  Neither
Appellant has married or founded a family of their own.  On the basis of
the guidance in Rai, these findings were sufficient to demonstrate that a
'family life' continued to exist notwithstanding that these Appellants are
both now adults.

As Mr McVeety acknowledges, that being the finding, it follows that the
appeals must be allowed, because the weight of the historic injustice meted
out to Nepalese members of the Gurkha regiments is such that any public
interest in denying these family members entry is outweighed.  The
Appellants' father served his regiment between 1964 and 2003.  Had he been
permitted to settle sooner he would have done.  Had he been able to settle
sooner it is common ground that his children would have qualified for leave
under Appendix K of the Rules.  The appeals are therefore allowed.




Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error of law.

The decisions in the appeals are remade as follows: the appeals are allowed
on human rights grounds.

There is no anonymity order.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         15th September 2020


