
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01821/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 September 2018                   |On 04 October 2018                  |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MARK ALLEN ENCABO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Heybroek, counsel, instructed by Pines
                    Consultancy Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against the  decision  of
        Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A Khawar (the judge),  promulgated
        on 8 February 2018, allowing the appeal of  Mr  Mark  Allen  Encabo
        (hereafter claimant) against the ECO's  decision,  dated  14  March
        2017,  refusing  him  entry  clearance  as  the  partner  of   [EC]
        (hereafter sponsor).


   Background


     2. The claimant is a national of the  Philippines,  date  of  birth  5
        August 1981. On 11 December 2016 he  applied  for  entry  clearance
        under Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE of the  immigration  rules  as
        the fianc� of the sponsor, a person with Indefinite Leave to Remain
        in the UK. A covering letter accompanying the application indicated
        that the claimant and his sponsor met through Facebook and they met
        face-to-face in the Philippines in April 2014 during a visit by the
        sponsor. The  covering  letter  indicated  that  the  claimant  was
        previously refused a visitor entry clearance  in  August  2014  and
        that he failed to mention his relationship with the sponsor in this
        application on the advice  of  an  agency  who  assisted  with  his
        application. The covering letter referred to a number of  documents
        accompanying the application including a decree  absolute  relating
        to the sponsor's previous marriage which was dated 12 January 2016.


     3. The ECO was not satisfied that the claimant was  seeking  entry  to
        the UK in order to marry his sponsor. The ECO noted  the   omission
        of any reference of the sponsor in the claimant's previous  visitor
        application. The ECO stated that  a  genuine  relationship  extends
        beyond a statement of intent to marry and that the history  of  the
        relationship leading to the commitment to marry,  and  evidence  of
        regular contact and  support,  was  a  reasonable  indicator  of  a
        subsisting relationship. The ECO then noted that the  claimant  had
        provided satisfactory evidence of communication  with  his  sponsor
        and photos of them together on different occasions. The ECO  stated
        however that there was no evidence of the claimant's  intention  to
        marry within 6 months of arrival in  the  UK.  The  respondent  was
        therefore not satisfied that the claimant intended to live with his
        sponsor as a married person permanently in the UK,  or  that  their
        relationship was  genuine  and  subsisting.  The  ECO  refused  the
        application citing E-ECP.2.6, E-ECP.2.8 and E-ECP.2.10. The ECO did
        however find  that  the  financial  requirements  and  the  English
        language requirements of Appendix FM had been met.

     4. The entry clearance application constituted a  human  rights  claim
        and the refusal of the human rights  claim  attracted  a  right  of
        appeal under s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     5. The judge had before him a bundle of documents running to 40 pages.
        This included, inter alia, statements from  the  claimant  and  his
        sponsor, and statements from [RB] and [JB], close  friends  of  the
        sponsor who had both witnessed the interaction between the claimant
        and the  sponsor  on  the  telephone  and  via  Skype.  The  bundle
        additionally contained  email  correspondence  dated  January  2017
        between the  sponsor  and  a  Registration  &  Nationality  Officer
        employed by Barnet Registration And Nationality Service  confirming
        that the local authority could not  book  an  appointment  for  the
        sponsor and the claimant to come to give notice for marriage as the
        claimant needed to establish residence for at least 7  days  before
        notice could be given. Also included in  the  bundle  were  various
        money remittal receipts confirming that the sponsor regularly  sent
        money to the  claimant,  social  media  conversations  between  the
        claimant and the sponsor, with English  translation,  a  record  of
        telephone calls between the claimant and the sponsor and a  receipt
        for wedding rings.


     6. The judge summarised the basis for the refusal of  entry  clearance
        and accurately directed himself as to the  appropriate  burden  and
        standard of proof. The judge heard oral evidence from  the  sponsor
        and [RB]. At [9] of his decision  the  judge  indicated  that  both
        witnesses adopted their  witness  statements  and  gave  additional
        evidence, which was set out in his Record of Proceedings. The judge
        then summarised the claimant's account of his relationship with the
        sponsor, noting that the sponsor had previously been married in  an
        abusive relationship and that she obtained a Decree Absolute issued
        on 12 January 2016. At [14] the  judge  noted  the  sponsor's  oral
        evidence that she and the claimant  had  not  yet  married  in  the
        Philippines because the Philippines did not recognise the sponsor's
        divorce from her ex-husband and a delay in the Philippines judicial
        system meant that her previous marriage had not been annulled.

     7. At [18] the judge explained that, having heard the oral evidence of
        the sponsor and her witness, and having  examined  the  documentary
        evidence,  that  there  was  in  fact  "overwhelming  evidence"  to
        establish that the claimant's relationship  with  the  sponsor  was
        genuine and subsisting and that they intended  to  marry  and  live
        together permanently. Between [19] and [23] the judge  referred  to
        the evidence of contact and communication between the claimant  and
        the  sponsor  in  terms  of  telephone  records  and  social  media
        conversations, evidence of remittance of funds  for  a  substantial
        period of time, evidence  of  the  sponsor's  travel  to  meet  the
        claimant in the Philippines on two occasions, and evidence of  four
        separate witness statements/tutorials from friends of the  sponsor,
        including her employer, who were all aware of the relationship. The
        judge noted in each case that the Presenting Officer (PO)  did  not
        challenge any of the evidence. The judge  additionally  noted  that
        the oral evidence from [RB] was consistent with her  statement.  In
        light of this evidence,  and  the  fact  that  an  Entry  Clearance
        Manager Review only raised the issue of the adequacy of evidence to
        establish wedding plans or arrangements as being in contention, the
        judge concluded that the relationship was  genuine  and  subsisting
        and that the parties intended to live together permanently.


     8. The judge then considered the issue in relation to the intention to
        marry within 6 months of the claimant's entry  clearance.  At  [36]
        the judge stated,

             During  cross  examination   the   Sponsor   has   steadfastly
             maintained that in relation to arrangements for a wedding  she
             has made enquiries with  the  various  hotels  for  a  wedding
             reception  in  order  to  establish  the  costs  involved  and
             availability. However she has not been in  a  position  to  be
             able to book a date and therefore has nothing  in  writing  in
             terms of an agreement with any hotel/venue. However she stated
             that they have purchased their wedding rings. This is  clearly
             corroborated by the receipt for the wedding rings.

     9. The judge additionally noted the sponsor's evidence  that  she  had
        been in touch with the Registry Office (at [27]), that  she  wanted
        to be married in the UK because her life was here  and  she  had  a
        number of close friends who she wanted to attend  the  wedding  (at
        [28]). In the  same  paragraph  the  judge  also  referred  to  the
        sponsor's evidence that she was unable currently to get married  in
        the Philippines because her annulment had not  yet  been  finalised
        through the Philippines legal system. The judge was satisfied  that
        the sponsor had proffered plausible explanations as to the  reasons
        why she and the claimant had not married in  the  Philippines.  The
        judge additionally noted that the sponsor's  account  was  entirely
        cooperated by [RB] who confirmed that she had been present and  had
        overheard conversations between the claimant  and  the  sponsor  in
        relation to wedding  venues.  [RB]  additionally  stated  that  the
        sponsor had been in touch with hotels for a wedding  reception  (at
        [29]).


    10. The judge was  consequently  satisfied  that  the  requirements  of
        Appendix FM had been met and allowed the human rights appeal.

The grounds of appeal, the grant of permission and the parties' submissions

    11. There are 2 grounds of appeal. The first ground contends  that  the
        hearing was procedurally unfair because the judge refused to  allow
        the PO an opportunity  to  take  instructions  in  respect  of  the
        sponsor's assertion that her first  marriage  still  needed  to  be
        dissolved in the Philippines. An extract from the PO's post-hearing
        minute of the hearing stated,


             The rep raised that the appellant  sponsor  is  still  legally
             married in the Philippines and thus cannot marry the appellant
             in the Philippines. The rep stated that  the  sponsor's  first
             marriage needs to be dissolved in  the  Philippines  and  that
             would  take  significant  amount  of  time.  No  evidence  was
             submitted in regards to this issue, or expert  evidence  about
             divorce in the Philippines. I asked to  take  instructions  as
             this was not raised in the refusal, grounds or previously. The
             IJ refused for me to take instructions.


    12. The grounds contend that the judge found strongly in favour of  the
        sponsor's claim that she could not marry  in  the  Philippines  and
        that the ECO was denied a fair opportunity to respond to  this  new
        issue. The grounds additionally contend that it  was  difficult  to
        see how the claimant could discharge the burden of  proof  with  no
        supporting evidence about his alleged inability  to  marry  in  the
        Philippines.


    13. The 2nd ground contends that the judge improperly prevented the  PO
        from cross-examining the sponsor in respect of her plans  to  marry
        within 6 months. Once again the Grounds  rely  on  the  PO's  post-
        hearing minute of the hearing which read,

             I attempted to cross-examine of plans that the sponsor and the
             appellant had made  which  demonstrate  an  intention  to  get
             married within 6 months.


             The IJ stopped me, he stated that the  question  of  pointless
             and unreasonable as the appellant doesn't know when  he  would
             be granted entry therefore cannot expect him to be  making  or
             have made any plans.

    14. Permission was granted on both grounds.


    15. At the start of the 'error of law' hearing I provided both  parties
        with copies of the judge's actual notes from the  hearing.  I  drew
        the representatives' attention to the 3rd page of manuscript notes.
        This was headed "cross-exam".  The  first  recorded  question  was,
        "Made any plans for marriage?" The answers recorded  by  the  judge
        included reference to enquiries made by the sponsor with hotels for
        a wedding reception and  the  costs  involved,  and  the  sponsor's
        explanation that she could not set a date and therefore  could  not
        reach any agreement with them. The sponsor  also  referred  to  the
        purchase of wedding rings and shoes. Cross examination continued in
        respect of the sponsor's family in  the  Philippines.  The  sponsor
        explained that she has all her friends in the UK. The  sponsor  was
        additionally asked about remittances to the claimant  and  why  she
        could not arrange for her marriage in the Philippines and  answered
        that her divorce was not accepted in the Philippines and she had to
        have her marriage annulled.

    16. I additionally note that, at the point in the examination in  chief
        of the sponsor when she  was  asked  about  the  annulment  of  her
        marriage in the Philippines, the judge  recorded,  "Application  to
        Adjourn: Refused".

    17. The sponsor was able to provide a copy of her  Decree  Absolute  on
        her mobile phone,  which  was  shown  to  the  representatives  and
        myself, and which indicated that it was issued by the Barnet County
        Court on 12 January 2016.

    18. Ms Kelly made no separate submissions in respect of the 2nd  ground
        of appeal and I indicated to Ms Heybroek that I  did  not  need  to
        hear from her in respect of the 2nd ground. Ms Kelly submitted that
        the judge relied on the sponsor's assertion that she was unable  to
        get married in the Philippines,  that  this  was  material  to  the
        judge's decision, and that it may have made  a  difference  to  his
        ultimate conclusion. It was not possible to speculate  as  to  what
        may have  happened  if  the  judge  had  allowed  the  PO  to  take
        instructions and that an adjournment request may have been made  to
        investigate the sponsor's assertion. Ms Heybroek submitted that any
        failure by the judge to enable the PO to obtain instructions  could
        not be material because the sponsor and the  claimant  could  marry
        under British law and there was  overwhelming  evidence  that  they
        intended to do so.

    19. I reserved by decision.

Discussion

    20. I can deal with the 2nd ground in the briefest of terms.  The  PO's
        note was created after the hearing. The  Judge's  own  note,  taken
        contemporaneously with the actual questioning during  the  hearing,
        constitutes powerful evidence that the PO was  not  prevented  from
        cross-examining the sponsor on the issue of marriage plans. On  the
        contrary, the judge's note records a number of answers given by the
        sponsor in respect of this very question. This is further supported
        by reference to the decision  itself  where,  at  [26],  the  judge
        describes the sponsor remained steadfast in relation to the wedding
        arrangements "during the cross examination."  I  am  not  satisfied
        that the PO's  minute  of  the  hearing  accurately  reflects  what
        actually happened. I find there is no merit whatsoever in  the  2nd
        ground.


    21. I approach the 2nd  ground  with  a  degree  of  caution  given  my
        concerns with the accuracy of the PO's minute.  The  judge's  notes
        refer to an application to adjourn being made during examination-in-
        chief, which was refused. No other reference is made in the judge's
        note to an application by the PO to take instructions on the  issue
        of the non-recognition by the Philippine authorities of the  Decree
        Absolute obtained in the UK. I am nevertheless prepared to  proceed
        on  the  basis  that  the  PO  did  seek  an  opportunity  to  take
        instructions on this issue, and that this was refused by the judge.



    22. The claimant only had to demonstrate that he was seeking  to  enter
        the UK  to  enable  his  marriage  to  take  place.  It  is  not  a
        requirement of the immigration rules that the claimant is unable to
        get married in his country  of  origin.  As  the  judge  accurately
        described, there  was  "overwhelming  evidence"  to  establish  the
        claimant's genuine relationship with the sponsor and  that  he  and
        the sponsor intended to marry in the UK.  I  have  summarised  this
        evidence at paragraph 7 above. Significantly, this evidence was not
        challenged by the PO. From [26] to [29]  the  judge  gave  powerful
        reasons for concluding that the sponsor and the  claimant  intended
        to marry in the UK. These included the evidence of  inquiries  made
        with various hotels, the purchase of wedding rings,  correspondence
        with a Registry Office concerning an appointment to give notice  of
        marriage, the sponsor's desire to marry in the UK  because  of  the
        number of  close  friends  she  has  here,  and  the  corroborative
        evidence of [RB] confirming the sponsor's investigations of wedding
        arrangements with hotels. The sponsor's evidence that she could not
        marry in the Philippines because her marriage was not yet  annulled
        under Philippine law was only  a  small  element  in  the  evidence
        before the judge. In light of the  considerable  body  of  evidence
        supporting the claimant's stated intention to marry in the  UK,  it
        is difficult to discern any purpose in  seeking  instructions  from
        the ECO. It was open to the PO to submit that there was no evidence
        that  the  sponsor  and  the  claimant  could  not  marry  in   the
        Philippines, but it does not appear that any  such  submission  was
        made. In any event, in  concluding  that  the  claimant  could  not
        discharge the burden of proof regarding his  alleged  inability  to
        marry in the Philippines, the grounds entirely fail  to  appreciate
        that the claimant does not need to prove his inability to marry  in
        the Philippines. There was no dispute between the parties that  the
        sponsor and the claimant were legally free to marry in  the  United
        Kingdom. There was simply no need for the sponsor to show  that  he
        could not marry in the Philippines. The evidence before  the  judge
        overwhelmingly pointed to an intention on the part of the  claimant
        and his sponsor to get married in the UK and the  question  whether
        the sponsor was unable to marry in the Philippines  was,  in  these
        particular circumstances, insufficiently material  to  the  judge's
        overall conclusion.


    23. For these reasons I find there was no procedural unfairness in  the
        hearing that could, on any rational view, have led to a  materially
        different outcome.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  of
law on a point of law. The ECO's appeal is dismissed.



[pic]                               28 September 2018

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



