
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01229/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 30 October 2020                        |On 18 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     ool
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Lewis, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction:

      1. On  18  December  2019  the  respondent  made  an  order  that  the
         appellant is  to  be  deported  from  the  United  Kingdom  ('UK'),
         following his criminal convictions as it was  considered  that  his
         presence in the UK was  not  conducive  to  the  public  good.  The
         respondent refused the appellant's human rights claim in a decision
         letter dated 6 January 2020.


      2. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, appealed this decision to  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Griffith) (hereinafter  referred  to  as
         the "FtTJ").  In a decision sent on 5 May 2020, the FtTJ  dismissed
         his appeal on human rights  grounds,  and  the  appellant  has  now
         appealed, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 30 October 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business which has been consented to and not  objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable and both  parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. I conducted the hearing from  court
         with the parties'  advocates.  No  technical  problems  encountered
         during the hearing and I am satisfied both advocates were  able  to
         make their respective cases by the chosen means. I am  grateful  to
         Mr Lewis and Mr Diwnycz for their oral submissions.

      4. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the circumstances of minor children.  I  have
         referred to the children as "SH1, SH2, SH3, SH4 and  SH5,  and  the
         appellant's partner as "X". No disrespect is intended to them,  but
         it is so that the Tribunal can maintain anonymity and that was  how
         the FtTJ anonymised the children.  Unless and until a  Tribunal  or
         court directs otherwise the appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No
         report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify
         him or members of his family.  This direction applies both  to  the
         appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Background:

      5. There is a long litigation history in relation to this appellant.
         The appellant arrived in the UK on the 24 July 1997 aged 25 on a
         visitor's visa which had been granted for 6 months.  On 10 December
         1997 he married a British Citizen and submitted an application to
         remain in the UK based on his marriage, which was granted until 11
         February 1999. That marriage was dissolved.


      6. Between 1997 and 1998 the appellant committed a number of criminal
         convictions. He first came to the attention of the police in August
         1997 only two months after his arrival in the UK and the following
         month he was given a conditional discharge of 12 months for theft.

      7. In June 1998 he was sentenced to three months imprisonment for
         three counts of assault of a constable, one count of driving with
         no insurance.

      8. Following his conviction on 30 November 1998 for five counts of
         supplying class A controlled drugs and one count of possessing a
         controlled drug with intent to supply drugs offences he was
         sentenced to 4 years imprisonment.

      9. A deportation order was made against him. He appealed against that
         decision and on the 18 January 2001 submitted an asylum claim which
         was subsequently refused on the 18 April 2001.

     10. On 20 July 2001, his appeal was dismissed and by 19 September 2001
         he was appeal rights exhausted and was deported to Jamaica that
         day. He returned to the UK illegally and in breach of the
         deportation order in October 2001 using a false passport.

     11. The appellant next came to the attention of the police in 2004 for
         drugs offences, when he was sentenced to 4 years imprisonment. The
         sentencing judge noted that the appellant had pleaded guilty to
         possession with intent to supply of 13 packs of crack cocaine and
         possession with intent to supply seven packs of heroin. The
         relevant offences took place on 7 May 2004. The judge took into
         account the fact that he pleaded guilty at an early stage, the
         remorse expressed through a letter handed to court, the fact that
         he was going to miss his family while in prison and accepted that
         he had returned from Jamaica not only to supply drugs but because
         he had connections in the UK. He had a partner, two children and
         his mother living in the UK.

     12. On 17 July 2007, the appellant was sentenced to a further 11 months
         and 29 days imprisonment at the magistrate's court because he was
         in default of a payment outstanding when he was imprisoned.

     13.  As a result, the respondent revoked the deportation order to
         consider that conviction. The appellant appealed against the notice
         of intention to deport him and lodged an appeal against the
         decision.

     14. On 16 February 2007, an Asylum, and Immigration Tribunal panel
         (Judge Lobo and Ms Endersby) dismissed his appeal against the
         decision to make a deportation order. The appellant had relied upon
         his article 8 claim.

     15. The panel made the following findings:

             . He had lied in his witness statement in his asylum appeal.
             . He had also faked a urine sample during his first prison
               sentence when being tested for drugs.
             . He admitted re-entering the UK after his deportation by using
               false documentation.
             . The appellant's partner X also lied in the appellant's asylum
               appeal by describing herself as his cousin where she had been
               involved in a relationship with him since 1997/1998.
             . The panel did not find either the appellant or his partner X
               to be credible witnesses.
             . The panel did not accept that he was a different person to
               that which had been up until his second prison sentence for
               supplying drugs.
             . They found his claim to be drug free and a practising
               Christian unconvincing.
             . The evidence put forward of his domestic and compassionate
               circumstances was unreliable.
             . He had demonstrated a propensity to commit serious crime by
               supplying class A drugs and he was a drug addict.
             . There was little reliable evidence of family life.
             . There was no evidence of the appellant and ex-ever living
               together prior to his going into prison for the second time.
               The appellant was still married to his former wife.
             . The panel were not satisfied that the appellant enjoyed
               family life but that if they were wrong, removing the
               appellant to Jamaica would be proportionate.


     16. It is recorded that the Tribunal had been told that the appellant
         had three children by three different mothers; a claim which was
         found not to be the position in the second appeal hearing heard in
         2012 (see paragraph 27 of their decision).


     17. Following the dismissal of his appeal, it appears that no attempts
         were made to remove him at this time.

     18. On 18 June 2008 he submitted an application for leave to remain in
         the UK on the basis of his relationship with X. He also submitted
         representations under article 8 which was treated as an application
         to revoke the deportation order.

     19. On 19 November 2009, a decision was issued refusing to revoke the
         deportation order. He was refused an in country right of appeal and
         brought proceedings for judicial review.

     20. He was detained on 16 October 2009 until he was granted bail on 17
         November 2009.

     21. On 15 January 2010, a further decision was made refusing the
         application but with an in country right of appeal. The appellant
         did not appeal that decision  and it was about this time that the
         appellant became an absconder and did not come to light for a
         further two years until he was encountered in July 2012 by the
         police after he had been made the victim of a stabbing.

     22. On 21 September 2011, the appellant's third child (S3) was born.

     23. A decision was made on 22 July 2012 to remove the appellant as an
         overstayer. The First-tier Tribunal hearing the appeal against that
         decision found that the appellant did not have an in country right
         of appeal because there had been no fresh claim which could be
         regarded as human rights claim.

     24. On 21 August 2012, the appellant's solicitors submitted an
         application for revocation of the deportation order, which was
         refused, and he was served with the illegal entry papers. He sought
         to appeal a decision made in January 2010 in respect of his article
         8 claim but was unsuccessful and became appeals rights exhausted.

     25. On 14 September 2012 he lodged an appeal against a decision made by
         the respondent on 4 September 2012 (revocation of the deportation
         order) and his appeal was allowed on human rights grounds by a FtT
         panel in a decision promulgated on 7 November 2012.

     26. There is a copy of that decision in the respondent's bundle at A1-
         A19.

     27. The appellant was granted leave to remain from 14 June 2013 until 4
         December 2015.

     28. On 28 December 2015 he submitted an application for leave to remain
         on family and private life grounds (the application was considered
         in the course of the January 2020 decision letter).

     29. On 9 June 2016, the appellant was sentenced to a conditional
         discharge for offences of possession of heroin, possession of
         cocaine and assault charges.

     30. On 25 November 2016 he was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment for
         driving offences and steps were taken to deport him. The sentencing
         remarks are set out in the respondent's bundle at E1-E4. The judge
         noted that the appellant should not have been driving at all, he
         had never taken a driving test, he had no insurance for the car
         should not have been on the road. He received a sentence of 12
         months imprisonment for dangerous driving having entered a guilty
         plea. The court also sentenced him for the breach of the
         conditional discharge which was made in June 2016. Those offences
         were for the possession of heroin, which the judge imposed a
         sentence of three months' imprisonment which would be consecutive
         to the 12 months. A further three months imprisonment was imposed
         for the possession of cocaine and a further sentence of three
         months' imprisonment on each of the two assault charges each to be
         consecutive to each other. Thus the appellant was sentenced to a
         total period of two years imprisonment.

     31. On 23 February 2017 he made an article 8 claim. He was served with
         a deportation order on 19 September 2017 and human rights claim was
         refused. He appealed against that decision in October 2017.

     32. However on 1 December 2017 he was sentenced for offences of
         possession with intent to supply class a drugs and was sentenced to
         terms of six years imprisonment to run concurrently.

     33. There are no sentencing remarks but the pre-sentence report refers
         to the appellant being in possession of 5 wraps of cocaine and
         wraps of heroin  which he claimed were for personal use but that
         the Crown Court  rejected that during a trial of an issue and thus
         he was convicted of possession with intent to supply class A drugs.
         What aggravated the offences were that they were committed whilst
         on bail for the dangerous driving offences.

     34. Following directions made at a Case Management review on 17 July
         2018, the respondent was directed to make a fresh decision in light
         of the most recent conviction and sentence. Accordingly, the
         deportation order and deportation decision were revoked.

     35. On 6 June 2019 the respondent informed the Tribunal that the
         decision of 19 September 2017 to refuse human rights claim had been
         withdrawn and the deportation order signed on the same day revoked;
         a fresh notice of decision to make a deportation order had been
         sent to the appellant and his representatives and the earlier
         decision was therefore treated as withdrawn.

     36. In light of his conviction, a decision to deport him was issued  on
         7 June 2019. This was responded to by the appellant on 5 July  2019
         and the appellant made a human rights claim. A decision was made on
         6 January 2020 to refuse a protection and human rights claim.

The decision of the Secretary of State dated 6 January 2020

     37. The decision letter is a lengthy document extending to 15 pages. It
         is not necessary to set out all that letter and it is summarised at
         paragraphs 14-32 of the FtTJ's decision.


     38. Having set out the appellant's immigration history and his criminal
         convictions, including the most recent one for which he received  a
         sentence of 6 years  imprisonment,  the  respondent  addressed  the
         submissions made in respect of the article 8 claim.

     39. In respect of his article 8 claim the respondent set out the nature
         of his claim which related to his relationship with his partner and
         five children in the United Kingdom and  his  private  life  having
         been resident since 2001.

     40. The decision noted that his deportation was conducive to the public
         good and in the public interest because he had been convicted of an
         offence for which he had been sentenced to a  period  of  at  least
         four years (offences relating to  the  supply  and  importation  of
         drugs )and thus in accordance with paragraph 398 of the Immigration
         Rules, the public interest required  his  deportation  unless  they
         were "very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
         in the exceptions of deportation" set out at paragraph 399 and 399A
         of the Immigration Rules.

     41. In respect of his offence, there was significant public interest in
         his  deportation  because  he  had  been  convicted  of  a  serious
         offences, namely possession with intent to  supply  class  a  drugs
         (crack cocaine and heroin) and was sentenced to terms of six  years
         imprisonment to run concurrently . The respondent made reference to
         the trade in illicit drugs which had a severe  negative  impact  on
         society and that drug addiction affected not only  drug  users  but
         also their families.

     42. When addressing his family life, it was  noted  that  he  had  five
         children in the United Kingdom. The  decision  addressed  the  best
         interests of the children, and it was accepted  that  the  children
         were all under the age of 18 and  were  British  citizens.  It  was
         further acknowledged that the children resided with  the  appellant
         and his partner and that he had previously been  granted  leave  to
         remain on the basis of family life in the United Kingdom.  Thus  it
         was  accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
         relationship with the children.

     43. It was however noted that he had effectively removed  himself  from
         the family home as a result of his criminal behaviour and that  the
         six- year sentence was  a  period  of  time  which  amounted  to  a
         significant part of the children's lives to date. Thus as a  result
         of his imprisonment he had not been part of  a  functioning  family
         unit the last three years or provided for the  health  and  welfare
         needs on a day-to-day basis.

     44. It was recorded that he had been imprisoned since 27 November  2016
         which is a relatively large part of the children's  lives  and  had
         provided no evidence that  it  had  day-to-day  contact  with  them
         during that time and there was no compelling evidence that  he  had
         provided  financial  or  emotional  support  to  them  during   his
         imprisonment  or  from   any   legitimate   earnings   before   his
         imprisonment.

     45. It was not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the  children
         to live in Jamaica and that the  appellant  had  not  provided  any
         evidence to demonstrate that this would be so. Whilst it was except
         the children were British citizens, had not provided  any  evidence
         to demonstrate that  they  would  not  be  entitled  to  apply  for
         citizenship of Jamaica  stop  it  was  considered  that  there  was
         nothing unduly harsh about  them  being  raised  within  their  own
         culture bearing in mind they would still be a  relative  young  age
         when the appellant would be  released  from  prison.  It  was  also
         considered that the children could be educated in Jamaica.

     46. It was not accepted either that it would be unduly  harsh  for  the
         children to remain in the UK without the appellant. It  was  stated
         that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  evidence  sufficient   to
         demonstrate that it would be unduly harsh and it was noted that  as
         British  citizens,  the  children  were  not  dependent  upon   the
         appellant for their right to remain in the United  Kingdom  or  for
         the entitlement to any relevant benefits and entitlements.  It  was
         noted that the appellant had not provided any evidence to show that
         his presence in the United Kingdom is needed  to  prevent  children
         from being ill-treated, their health or development being  impaired
         or their care being other than safe and effective.  Whilst  it  was
         acknowledged that his absence may result in some negative emotional
         impact upon them as they become older, however their  mother  would
         be in a position to support them and  assist  them  to  access  any
         relevant rights and entitlements. It was  further  considered  that
         they would be to maintain contact  with  the  appellant  by  modern
         means of communication or by visits to Jamaica.

     47. When considering the best interests of the children, the respondent
         noted that there was no evidence to support the conclusion that his
         presence was needed in the United Kingdom  and  that  their  mother
         would be able to provide for them as she  had  been  providing  for
         their day-to-day health and welfare needs during the time  that  he
         had been  serving  his  sentence.  As  the  children  were  British
         citizens, their  mother  would  be  able  to  access  benefits  and
         provisions available from the government or the local authority  to
         support the children's development.

     48. The decision letter expressly considered the medical  condition  of
         S1 who had hyperthyroidism and depression. It  was  noted  that  by
         reference to the country materials  that  both  medical  conditions
         could be adequately treated in Jamaica. It was further  noted  that
         she would attain the age of 18 before he was released  from  prison
         and therefore would be an adult and would have sole  responsibility
         for decisions concerning her life.

     49. As to family life with his partner X, it was accepted that  he  was
         married to his partner but not accepted that they had a family life
         for the last three years as  a  result  of  his  imprisonment.  The
         decision letter noted that their relationship was formed  when  the
         appellant was in the UK unlawfully and his immigration  status  was
         precarious relying upon the decision in November 2012 in which  the
         panel reached the conclusion "their relationship has  been  on  and
         off and was clearly formed and continued in the knowledge that  the
         appellant's immigration status was highly precarious."

     50. It was not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for X to live  in
         Jamaica and that would be a choice for her to make.

     51. The decision letter made reference to the earlier decision made  by
         the FtT panel in 2012 where it was found that  his  partner  X  had
         formed a support network with her brother to  take  care  of  their
         mother who suffered with paranoid schizophrenia which would prevent
         X  from  accompanying  the  appellant  to  Jamaica.   However   the
         respondent considered that there was no new evidence to show that X
         currently had care responsibilities for her mother or that a mother
         continued to need to her support.

     52. It was further not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for X  to
         remain United Kingdom in the event of the appellant's  deportation.
         This was because he had not provided any compelling  evidence  that
         there would be a serious adverse impact on his  partner  such  that
         the public interest in deportation was  outweighed.  There  was  no
         evidence that he provided financially for his partner  or  children
         in any significant way since his imprisonment.

     53. The decision letter  also  addressed  other  considerations,  which
         included the appellant's private life. It was  noted  that  he  had
         been present in the United Kingdom for 22 years although only  four
         years of that period had been lawful residence and during that time
         he had committed criminal offences.

     54. It was  noted  that  he  was  previously  deported  to  Jamaica  in
         September 2001 and returned almost immediately  in  breach  of  the
         deportation order. He had previously faced deportation  action  and
         knew full well that if he offended  again  he  would  face  further
         deportation action and since that time was offending  increased  in
         severity, culminating in a six-year sentence. The  appellant  could
         not claim that he was unaware of  the  repercussions  in  terms  of
         deportation resulting from the criminal actions, yet  he  continued
         to offend. The appellant was fully aware that his criminality would
         result in a long prison sentence in deportation if he were  caught,
         including depriving him and his family were  settled  family  life.
         However he took that chance and embarked on a very serious criminal
         enterprise.

     55. In conclusion, the respondent considered that his deportation would
         not breach the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR and the
         public interest in deporting him outweighed his right to a  private
         and family life.


The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

     56. The appeal came before the FtTJ on 18 March 2020.  The  FtTJ  heard
         oral evidence  from  the  appellant,  and  his  partner  which  was
         summarised at paragraphs [37]-[77]. The FtTJ also had a  bundle  of
         documentation including a witness statements from the appellant and
         his partner, a psychological  assessment  of  the  family  members,
         evidence relating to the children.

     57. The FtTJ findings of fact and analysis of the issues are set out at
         paragraphs [92]-[124]. The FtTJ began her consideration  by  making
         reference to the earlier decision of the FTT panel in 2012 applying
         the principles in Devaseelan but taking into account that facts  or
         circumstances since the first decision could always be  taken  into
         account. The judge recorded at [97] that the thrust of  the  appeal
         centred on his family life rather than private life. The nature  of
         his family life identified at [98] was that he had a partner X  and
         had five children (at the date of the hearing they were 17, 11,  8,
         6 and 3 years of age). The youngest child born when  the  appellant
         was in custody. All the children and X were British citizens and in
         the UK.

     58. At [101] the FtTJ reached the conclusion that in the light  of  the
         circumstances  of  children,  their  nationality  and   having   no
         connection with Jamaica, she was satisfied that it would be  unduly
         harsh for them to follow their father to Jamaica.

     59. The FtTJ then addressed the issue of whether  it  would  be  unduly
         harsh for the children to remain in the UK  without  the  appellant
         (see [102]-121]), focusing on the effects of the deportation on the
         children and on X (at [103].

     60. At [104] the FtTJ found that the children were  being  well  looked
         after by their mother and that her circumstances were  relevant  to
         the family's well-being generally she was the one who was currently
         bearing the practical emotional responsibilities bringing them  up.
         The judge made reference to X's mental health issues and  that  she
         was her own mother's full-time carer. In the later  paragraphs  the
         FtTJ address the evidence  relating  to  the  individual  children,
         taking into account SH1 had medical conditions it affected her both
         physically  and  mentally  (at  [104]  and  [115],  SH2   displayed
         behavioural problems (at [104], [111],[112, [113] and SH4 at [114].
         The FtTJ also considered the circumstances of all the children  set
         out in the psychological  assessment  at  [108]-[109]  which  is  a
         report that she placed weight upon and accepted that  the  children
         had an attachment to their father and had a close bond with them  (
         see conclusions at [117]). During her assessment  of  the  evidence
         relating to the children, the FtTJ identified  where  the  evidence
         was inconsistent with other evidence that had  been  provided.  For
         example, when considering SH2 in the school report set out at [111]
         the FtTJ  found  that  the  report  of  the  psychologist  made  no
         reference to any behavioural difficulties  and  that  he  told  the
         psychologist that he  was  in  good  general  health  and  took  no
         medication. At  [112]  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  report
         containing significant errors where SH2 was described  as  a  young
         carer having responsibilities  the  caring  for  his  siblings  and
         mother when that was not the position. The  judge  also  identified
         evidence relating to SH2 and his  relationship  with  his  maternal
         uncle (at [113]).

     61. As to the circumstances of X the FtTJ took into account the medical
         evidence that she suffered from anxiety and depression but that she
         did not take medication and be  referred  to  talking  therapy.  At
         [105] the FtTJ concluded that assistance in talking therapies could
         provide with assistance to help cope with day-to-day  life.  As  to
         her position as her mother's carer that was  considered  at  [106]-
         107] where the judge reached  the  conclusion  that  there  was  no
         evidence that her mother could not be cared  for  by  the  NHS  and
         social services and thus reducing the daily burden on X.

     62. In her conclusions the FtTJ found that there was no evidence that X
         had reach a stage where she would  be  unable  to  look  after  the
         children  adequately  took  into  account  that   there   was   the
         availability  of  therapy  to   treat   anxiety   and   depression.
         Furthermore, there were alternative care packages  to  address  her
         mother's needs and that she had support from her brother  whom  she
         described on her own evidence is having a close  relationship  thus
         concluding that X had "avenues of support available to help cope in
         the appellant's absence". The judge also found that  there  was  no
         evidence that the appellant was in any regular well-paid employment
         or making a significant contribution to the running  of  the  house
         before he went to prison (at [118]).

     63. After applying the elevated threshold,  the  FtTJ  found  that  the
         circumstances of the family were not sufficient to meet the meaning
         of "unduly harsh" and that  the  exception  was  not  met.  In  the
         alternative, the judge considered that even  if  exception  to  was
         met, the appellant needed to  show  very  compelling  circumstances
         over above those described in the exceptions.  The  FtTJ  concluded
         that she could not find any such "very  compelling  circumstances".
         At [122]  the  judge  addressed  the  matter  is  weighing  on  the
         appellant side of the balance which he relied upon which related to
         his rehabilitation (undergone drug and alcohol courses  to  address
         addiction and found to be drug-free when tested in prison). However
         the judge found that had  been  undertaken  within  a  "secure  and
         structured environment" and that had yet to show he would  be  able
         to put into practice what he learnt in prison. Reference is made to
         the medium risk of reoffending and risk of harm to  the  public  as
         medium but that his behaviour demonstrated that "he is  not  learnt
         from experiences or give much thought to the  consequences  of  his
         behaviour on his closest family members."

     64. At [123]the FtTJ addressed the public interest and  that  the  more
         serious the  offence,  the  greater  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of the criminal and reached the conclusion that in  the
         light of the nature of his fences and the fact that he was a repeat
         offender, the public interest in his removal "is very high".

     65. Returning to the issues at [124] and the decision of the  panel  in
         2012 that the best interests of the children  required  him  to  be
         permitted to remain, the judge stated that "the situation is  moved
         on since then in the light of his further offending in  the  public
         interest in his removal has increased". The judge took into account
         the best interests of  the  children  that  they  were  a  "primary
         consideration", but they were not "paramount nor a trump card". The
         judge concluded that the appellant could not  meet  the  rules  nor
         could he show "any very compelling circumstances over and above the
         exceptions", and concluded that "the very high public  interest  in
         his deportation was not outweighed by the  best  interests  of  the
         children or any other matters relied upon".

     66. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.


The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

     67. The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  and
         permission was refused by  the  FtTJ  but  on  reconsideration  was
         granted by UTJ Smith on 24 August 2020 where he stated that

         "it is at least arguable that the judge should  have  addressed  in
         express terms why she was departing from the findings of the FtT in
         November 2012 decision at [52] that, if the appellant were deported
         "the family would face a crisis, probably  leading  to  significant
         harm to the children..." Arguably the judge should  have  addressed
         why she considered that starting point  have  been  displaced.  The
         materiality of any error on that basis will have to be explored  in
         submissions, as there could be any number of reasons why  different
         approach is now called for or permitted, such  as  the  passage  of
         time, age of the children, the appellant's absence in prison  since
         December 2017. However, it is at  least  arguable  that  the  judge
         should have addressed this point directly.

         The remaining grounds of appeal are largely disagreements of  fact.
         However, they all sit within the wider context of the "crisis"  the
         FTT found the family would face in 2012, in the event the appellant
         were  deported,  and  are  arguably  part  of  the   same   overall
         assessment. For that reason, I grant permission to  appeal  on  all
         grounds"

     68. The appellant was represented before the Upper Tribunal by Mr Lewis
         of Counsel and had drafted the grounds of appeal. The Secretary  of
         State was represented by Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer.

     69. Mr Lewis relied upon the written grounds and  the  further  written
         submissions he had sent to the Tribunal dated 15 September 2020.

     70. Mr Diwnycz confirmed that there had been no Rule 24 response  filed
         on behalf of the Secretary of State as directed  by  UTJ  Smith  on
         behalf of the respondent. He submitted that the FtTJ did  not  make
         any material error of law in his decision and that ground 2  was  a
         "weight argument" characterised by the submission  that  the  judge
         did not accord sufficient weight to the letter.

     71. I intend to consider the submissions when setting out my assessment
         of the grounds and in the context of  the  FtTJ's  decision.  I  am
         grateful to the advocates for their helpful and clear submissions.

    The relevant legal framework:

     72. There is no dispute as to the applicable legal  framework.  When  a
         person who is not a British citizen is convicted in the  UK  of  an
         offence for which he is sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at
         least 12 months, section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007  requires
         the Secretary of State to make a deportation order  in  respect  of
         that  person  (referred  to  in  the  legislation  as  a   "foreign
         criminal"),  subject  to  section  33.  Section  33  of   the   Act
         establishes certain exceptions, one of which is  that  "removal  of
         the foreign criminal in pursuance of the  deportation  order  would
         breach a person's Convention rights": see section 33(2)(a).

     73. The right protected by article 8 is a qualified  right  with  which
         interference may be justified on the basis  of  various  legitimate
         aims which include the prevention of disorder or crime. The way  in
         which the question of justification should be  approached  where  a
         court or Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision  made
         under the Immigration Acts breaches article 8 is governed  by  Part
         5A (sections 117A-117D) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
         Act 2002 (inserted by amendment in 2014).

     74. Section 117B lists certain public interest considerations to which
         the court or Tribunal must have regard in all such cases. These
         include the considerations that:
         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigrations controls is in the
         public interest.
         ?
         (4) Little weight should be given to -
         (a) a private life, or
         (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.
         ?"


     75. Section 117C lists additional considerations to which the court or
         Tribunal must have regard in cases involving "foreign criminals"
         (defined in a similar way to the 2007 Act). These considerations
         are:
         "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
         interest.
         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
         (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.
         (4) Exception 1 applies where - (a) C has been lawfully resident in
         the United Kingdom for most of C's life, (b) C is socially and
         culturally integrated in the United Kingdom, and (c) there would be
         very significant obstacles to C's integration into the country to
         which C is proposed to be deported.
         (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.
         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.
         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or Tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted."


     76. "Foreign criminals" who fall within section 117C(3) because they
         have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
         months but less than four years have been referred to in the case
         law as "medium offenders" - in contrast to those with a sentence of
         four years or more, who are described as "serious offenders". By
         reason of his sentence, the appellant fell into the latter
         category.


     77. The focus of the FtTJ and that of the advocates was on the
         appellant's relationship with X and his five children.  At the date
         of the hearing the children were aged 17,11,8,6 and 3. The youngest
         child was born whilst the appellant wad in custody where he was at
         the date of the hearing. In so far as the appellant sought to rely
         on the effect of his deportation on his children  (who, being
         British citizens, were a qualifying children) it would not be
         enough to show that that effect would be "unduly harsh", in the
         sense explained in KO. That would satisfy Exception 2, but because
         his case fell within section 117C (6) he needed to show something
         over and above that, which meant showing that the circumstances in
         his case were, in Jackson LJ's phrase in NA, "especially
         compelling".

     78. In the decision of AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 the
         Court of Appeal made reference to its earlier decision in HA (Iraq)
         v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 stated :

    "10. In relation to what is meant by "unduly harsh" in section 117C(5),
    the authoritative guidance is now that given by Lord Carnwath JSC in KO
    (Nigeria) and by this court in HA (Iraq). The former addressed this
    issue notwithstanding that the main question in that case was not the
    meaning of "unduly harsh" but whether it involved consideration of the
    seriousness of the offence. At [23] he said:
                 "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems
                 clearly intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of
                 "reasonableness" under section 117B(6) , taking account of
                 the public interest in the deportation of foreign
                 criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element of
                 comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
                 "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or
                 justifiable in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies
                 something going beyond that level. The relevant context is
                 that set by section 117C(1) , that is the public interest
                 in the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking for
                 a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily
                 be involved for any child faced with the deportation of a
                 parent. What it does not require in my view (and subject to
                 the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a
                 balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's
                 offence, other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by
                 the section itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor
                 (contrary to the view of the Court of Appeal in IT
                 (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home
                 Department [2017] 1 WLR 240 , paras 55 and 64) can it be
                 equated with a requirement to show "very compelling
                 reasons". That would be in effect to replicate the
                 additional test applied by section 117C(6) with respect to
                 sentences of four years or more."
   1. At paragraph [27] he said:
                 "27. Authoritative guidance as to the meaning of "unduly
                 harsh" in this context was given by the Upper Tribunal
                 (McCloskey J President and Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins)
                 in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for the Home
                 Department [2015] INLR 563 , para 46, a decision given on
                 15 April 2015. They referred to the "evaluative assessment"
                 required of the tribunal:
                       "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that
                       'unduly harsh' does not equate with uncomfortable,
                       inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.
                       Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated
                       threshold. 'Harsh' in this context, denotes something
                       severe, or bleak. It is the antithesis of pleasant or
                       comfortable. Furthermore, the addition of the adverb
                       'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still
                       higher."
   1. As explained in HA (Iraq) at [44] and [50] to [53], this does not
      posit some objectively measurable standard of harshness which is
      acceptable, but sets a bar which is more elevated than mere
      undesirability but not as high as the "very compelling circumstances"
      test in s.117C(6). Beyond that, further exposition of the phrase
      "unduly harsh" is of limited value. Moreover, as made clear at [56]-
      [57], it is potentially misleading and dangerous to seek to identify
      some "ordinary" level of harshness as an acceptable level by reference
      to what may be commonly encountered circumstances: there is no reason
      in principle why cases of undue hardship may not occur quite commonly;
      and how a child will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend
      upon an almost infinitely variable range of circumstances. It is not
      possible to identify a baseline of "ordinariness".
   1. In relation to what is meant by "very compelling circumstances",
      in Byndloss Lord Wilson JSC said at [33]:
                       "33. The deportation of a foreign criminal is
                       conducive to the public good. So said Parliament in
                       enacting section 32(4) of the 2007 Act: see para 11
                       above. Parliament's unusual statement of fact was
                       expressed to be for the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of
                       the 1971 Act so its consequence was that every
                       foreign criminal became automatically liable to
                       deportation. Parliament's statement exemplifies the
                       "strong public interest in the deportation of foreign
                       nationals who have committed serious offences": Ali v
                       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] 1
                       WLR 4799, para 14, per Lord Reed JSC. In the Ali case
                       the court was required to identify the criterion by
                       reference to which the tribunal should determine an
                       appeal of a foreign criminal on human rights grounds
                       against a deportation order. The decision was that
                       the public interest in his deportation was of such
                       weight that only very compelling reasons would
                       outweigh it: see paras 37 and 38, per Lord Reed JSC.
                       ...........
                       55. The third [feature of the background] is that,
                       particularly in the light of this court's decision in
                       the Ali case, every foreign criminal who appeals
                       against a deportation order by reference to his human
                       rights must negotiate a formidable hurdle before his
                       appeal will succeed: see para 33 above. He needs to
                       be in a position to assemble and present powerful
                       evidence. I must not be taken to be prescriptive in
                       suggesting that the very compelling reasons which the
                       tribunal must find before it allows an appeal are
                       likely to relate in particular to some or all of the
                       following matters: (a) the depth of the claimant's
                       integration in United Kingdom society in terms of
                       family, employment and otherwise; (b) the quality of
                       his relationship with any child, partner or other
                       family member in the United Kingdom; (c) the extent
                       to which any relationship with family members might
                       reasonably be sustained even after deportation,
                       whether by their joining him abroad or otherwise; (d)
                       the impact of his deportation on the need to
                       safeguard and promote the welfare of any child in the
                       United Kingdom; (e) the likely strength of the
                       obstacles to his integration in the society of the
                       country of his nationality; and, surely in every
                       case; (f) any significant risk of his reoffending in
                       the United Kingdom, judged, no doubt with difficulty,
                       in the light of his criminal record set against the
                       credibility of his probable assertions of remorse and
                       reform."
   1. The interrelationship between these principles and the Exceptions in
      Section 117C(3)-(5), both in relation to medium term offenders (with
      sentences of one to four years) and serious offenders (with sentences
      of four years or more), was authoritatively set out by Jackson LJ
      in NA (Pakistan) at paragraphs [28]-[39], of which the following are
      of particular relevance in this case:
                       "29. In our view, the reasoning of the Court of
                       Appeal in the JZ (Zambia) case [2016] Imm AR
                       781 applies to those provisions. The phrase used in
                       section 117C(6) , in paragraph 398 of the 2014 rules
                       and which we have held is to be read into section
                       117C(3) does not mean that a foreign criminal facing
                       deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking to
                       rely on matters falling within the scope of the
                       circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when
                       seeking to contend that "there are very compelling
                       circumstances, over and above those described in
                       Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have indicated above, a
                       foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon such
                       matters, but he would need to be able to point to
                       features of his case of a kind mentioned in
                       Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paragraphs 399 or 399A of
                       the 2014 rules), or features falling outside the
                       circumstances described in those exceptions and those
                       paragraphs, which made his claim based on article 8
                       especially strong.
                       30. In the case of a serious offender who could point
                       to circumstances in his own case which could be said
                       to correspond to the circumstances described in
                       Exceptions 1 and 2, but where he could only just
                       succeed in such an argument, it would not be possible
                       to describe his situation as involving very
                       compelling circumstances, over and above those
                       described in Exceptions 1 and 2. One might describe
                       that as a bare case of the kind described in
                       Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand, if he could
                       point to factors identified in the descriptions of
                       Exceptions 1 and 2 of an especially compelling kind
                       in support of an article 8 claim, going well beyond
                       what would be necessary to make out a bare case of
                       the kind described in Exceptions 1 and 2, they could
                       in principle constitute "very compelling
                       circumstances, over and above those described in
                       Exceptions 1 and 2", whether taken by themselves or
                       in conjunction with other factors relevant to
                       application of article 8.
                       .....
                       33. Although there is no "exceptionality"
                       requirement, it inexorably follows from the statutory
                       scheme that the cases in which circumstances are
                       sufficiently compelling to outweigh the high public
                       interest in deportation will be rare. The commonplace
                       incidents of family life, such as ageing parents in
                       poor health or the natural love between parents and
                       children, will not be sufficient.
                       34. The best interests of children certainly carry
                       great weight, as identified by Lord Kerr of
                       Tonaghmore JSC in H (H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the
                       Italian Republic, Genoa (Official Solicitor
                       intervening) [2013] 1 AC 338 , para 145.
                       Nevertheless, it is a consequence of criminal conduct
                       that offenders may be separated from their children
                       for many years, contrary to the best interests of
                       those children. The desirability of children being
                       with both parents is a commonplace of family life.
                       That is not usually a sufficiently compelling
                       circumstance to outweigh the high public interest in
                       deporting foreign criminals. As Rafferty LJ observed
                       in CT (Vietnam) v Secretary of State for the Home
                       Department [2016] EWCA Civ 488 at [38]: "Neither the
                       British nationality of the respondent's children nor
                       their likely separation from their father for a long
                       time are exceptional circumstances which outweigh the
                       public interest in his deportation."
                       .....
                       37. In relation to a serious offender, it will often
                       be sensible first to see whether his case involves
                       circumstances of the kind described in Exceptions 1
                       and 2, both because the circumstances so described
                       set out particularly significant factors bearing upon
                       respect for private life (Exception 1) and respect
                       for family life (Exception 2) and because that may
                       provide a helpful basis on which an assessment can be
                       made whether there are "very compelling
                       circumstances, over and above those described in
                       Exceptions 1 and 2" as is required under section
                       117C(6). It will then be necessary to look to see
                       whether any of the factors falling within Exceptions
                       1 and 2 are of such force, whether by themselves or
                       taken in conjunction with any other relevant factors
                       not covered by the circumstances described in
                       Exceptions 1 and 2, as to satisfy the test in section
                       117C(6).
                       38. Against that background, one may ask what is the
                       role of the Strasbourg jurisprudence? In particular,
                       how does one take into account important decisions
                       such as ner v The Netherlands (2006) 45 EHRR 14
                       and Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47? Mr Southey QC,
                       who represents KJ and WM, rightly submits that the
                       Strasbourg authorities have an important role to
                       play. Mr Tam rightly accepted that this is correct.
                       The answer is that the Secretary of State and the
                       tribunals and courts will have regard to the
                       Strasbourg jurisprudence when applying the tests set
                       out in our domestic legislation. For example, a
                       tribunal may be considering whether it would be
                       "unduly harsh" for a child to remain in England
                       without the deportee; or it may be considering
                       whether certain circumstances are sufficiently
                       "compelling" to outweigh the high public interest in
                       deportation of foreign criminals. Anyone applying
                       these tests (as required by our own rules and
                       legislation) should heed the guidance contained in
                       the Strasbourg authorities.......

Discussion:

     79. The first ground advanced on behalf of the appellant relies upon
         the assessment made of the family by the FTT panel in 2012. Mr
         Lewis submits that the previous Tribunal made a "stark finding of
         fact" at [52] and that this finding should be the starting point as
         it was an authoritative assessment at the time it was made. Thus it
         is submitted that the FtTJ was in error by failing to treat it as
         such.




     80. Paragraph 52 of the panel's decision was based on the evidence of a
         family GP set out in a letter dated 17/10/12 and summarised in
         their decision at [34]. The letter refers to X reporting increasing
         levels of stress amongst the children since the appellant was
         detained and X being treated for depression and that she was
         finding it increasingly difficult to handle the children due to
         their behaviour. The doctor concluded "I am reviewing X regularly,
         but I am concerned that if the appellant is deported that things
         will reach crisis point." At [52] the panel considered the evidence
         and that if the appellant were deported "we agree with Dr G that
         the family would face a crisis, probably leading to significant
         harm to the children."


     81. It is further submitted that if the FtTJ had taken the previous
         finding as a starting point and asked herself whether the changes
         between 2012 and 2020 justified a departure from them, she could
         well have concluded that they did not.



     82. In the written grounds and in the oral submissions made, Mr Lewis
         made reference to the evidence relating to the children and the
         appellant's partner X. His submission was that if the judge had
         approached the 2012 findings of fact in the correct way, the judge
         would have reached a different overall conclusion on
         proportionality.



     83. I have given careful consideration to those submissions and have
         done so in the light of the previous decision, the decision of the
         FtTJ and the evidence that was before the Tribunal.



     84. Having done so, I am satisfied that the FtTJ properly took into
         account the decision of the panel in 2012. At [92] the FtTJ began
         her consideration of the factual circumstances by expressly stating
         that the appellant was successful in his appeal in October 2012 and
         that she took that decision as her "starting point". The FtTJ went
         on to make reference to the guidance set out in the decision of
         Devaseelan correctly in my view, that the facts happening since the
         previous decision can always be taken into account. At paragraphs
         [93 - 94] the judge recited parts of the decision of the previous
         panel in their assessment of the evidence that was before them. In
         particular, that the panel had concluded that the appellant's
         deportation would amount to a disproportionate interference with
         family life between the appellant and his children. The FtTJ
         recorded that the Tribunal had found "that it was plain that the
         children were currently suffering as a result of their father's
         absence" and also recorded the panel's consideration that they had
         set out at paragraph 53 of their decision. Further on in the FtTJ's
         decision the judge set out the panel's previous finding that family
         life could not be pursued in Jamaica and that the "best interests
         of the children require the appellant to be permitted to remain
         here. The best interest of the children in this case require the
         presence of two parents."




     85. Whilst Mr Lewis submits that the judge made no reference to
         paragraph 52, in my judgement it is clear from reading the decision
         that the judge was well aware of the previous findings of the FTT
         panel and the assessment which had been made in 2012 and had made a
         summary of those points between paragraphs [92 - 94].



     86. In my judgement it is not necessary for the judge to recite each
         and every paragraph of the previous decision and it is plain that
         the essential parts of that previous judgement and the findings
         made by the panel were properly understood by the FtTJ when
         undertaking her assessment based on the circumstances as they were
         in 2020. The judge expressly had regards to the previous finding
         relating to the best interests of the children and the effect upon
         them of the appellant's deportation.



     87. In my judgement the FtTJ properly directed herself to the decision
         in Devaseelan and the previous decision of the panel as a starting
         point. It was open to the FtTJ to take into account in her
         assessment evidence of events that occurred since the decision (see
         her observation at [92]).


     88. As Mr Lewis conceded at paragraph 6 of his written submissions the
         Devaseelan principles are not a "straitjacket" and there were a
         number of reasons why the circumstances in 2020 were different to
         those in 2012. The FtTJ properly recorded that the earlier hearing
         in 2012 was on a different basis as it was an appeal against the
         decision to revoke a deportation order. In the proceedings in 2020,
         the decision appealed against was a different decision and this
         involved the judge applying different principles of law in
         different statutory framework.



     89. Furthermore, the earlier panel had made express findings relating
         to the appellant's conduct. At [54] they took into account that he
         had no convictions since July 2004 and that there were no reports
         of the appellant continuing to show a propensity towards offending.
         They found that the evidence pointed towards the appellant being
         involved in the past in drug dealing to fund his own habit and at
         [55] when considering his family connections they were "much more
         firmly established and they were in 2004" and at [56] they stated
         "the evidence does not suggest to us that we must infer from the
         appellant's history that there is anything more than a fairly
         remote prospect that he will reoffend. There is no evidence that he
         continues to use drugs, and this was denied by the appellant and X.
         He appears also to have matured in his attitude towards his family
         responsibilities...".



     90. However since the decision of the panel, the appellant, after he
         had been granted a period of leave to remain between 2003 - 2015,
         in November 2016 it received a sentence for two years imprisonment
         for dangerous driving and offences involving drugs and whilst he
         was served with a deportation order and having appealed it, he then
         went on to commit offences involving drugs for which he received a
         sentence of six years in imprisonment. His criminality rather than
         receding as the 2012 panel considered was likely, had in fact
         continued and had also increased in severity.



     91. Furthermore their view that he had matured in his attitude towards
         the family responsibilities (set out at paragraph 56 of their
         decision) had been demonstrably undermined by his offending that
         had taken place.




     92. In my judgement the passing of time since the 2012 decision, the
         appellant's reoffending, the circumstances the children in the
         light of their ages and individual circumstances, and A's absence
         from the family home for a further prolonged period of time were
         all matters which the FtTJ was entitled to consider in reaching an
         assessment upon the evidence before the Tribunal and as at the date
         of the hearing.



     93. I do not consider that the FtTJ was in error in departing from the
         2012 decision which required the evidence to be revisited.



     94. The submissions on behalf the appellant refer to the changes since
         2012. I observe that the written submissions make reference to 3
         children that have been born since the decision in 2012. However
         that is factually incorrect. There were two further children born
         (SH4 in 2014 and SH5 in 2016). Mr Lewis identifies the
         circumstances of the children and X had not improved since 2012 but
         had worsened.




     95. In my judgement, the real issue was whether the FtTJ properly
         considered the evidence which was before the Tribunal in 2020
         concerning the circumstances of X, the children, and the appellant
         rather than whether the circumstances had changed since 2012.


     96. The written grounds at paragraph 10 criticise the finding made by
         the FtTJ on the general basis that the points relied upon by the
         judge did not reflect new evidence which undermined the previous
         findings in 2012. In my judgement that submission fails to consider
         that the judge was entitled to consider the evidence as it stood at
         the date of the hearing and to assess the evidence, given the
         passage of time and the different circumstances of the children,
         the appellant, his offending history and the level of that
         offending in the different legal test that had to be applied. I can
         see no error in that approach, and it was one that was consistent
         with the decision in Devaseelan.


     97. The submissions made by Mr Lewis seek to compare the circumstances
         in 2012 with those in 2020 without recognising those factors which
         in my judgement were of such relevance to entitle the judge to
         consider the evidence as it stood at the date of the hearing and to
         make a full and proper assessment of that evidence. That the judge
         reached a different conclusion from the earlier panel does not
         demonstrate any error of approach but reflected the evidence as it
         was before the judge on her analysis in 2020.


     98. Even when considering those submissions made by Mr Lewis as set out
         at paragraph 10 of the written submissions, they do not support his
         primary submission. He submits that the reasons given by the judge
         to support the view that X could cope with caring for the children
         in the absence of the appellant did not reflect new evidence to
         undermine the 2012 panel. The identifies that the 2012 panel "can
         be taken to have been aware of the availability of "talking
         therapies" when it reached its conclusion.


     99. However, in my view the submission fails to consider properly the
         evidence that was before the FtTJ. Whilst in 2012 the panel took
         into account the evidence of the family GP and the strain that X
         was under, no reference was made to any possible therapeutic input
         to help address any difficulties or alleviate the circumstances as
         regards the children. Against that evidential background, it cannot
         properly be said as Mr Lewis submits, that the 2012 panel could
         have been taken to be aware of "talking therapies" when it reached
         its conclusion.


    100. However the judge in 2020 did have evidence upon which she could
         form a different view. At [105] the judge set out the medical
         evidence confirming that X was suffering from anxiety and
         depression. However the judge observed that X was not taking
         medication and that she had been referred to "talking therapies".
         At [105] onwards, the judge considered whether she could properly
         access that support and in doing so took into account X's evidence
         as to why she could not do so. Her evidence was to the effect that
         she did not have the time to get in touch with the providers. The
         FtTJ found, even taking into account and acknowledging that she was
         a single parent with a heavy burden upon her, did not accept that
         she was too busy to refer herself to talking therapies which could
         have provided her with the assistance and support necessary to help
         cope with the children on a daily basis and without the support of
         the appellant.


    101. Those findings are also the subject of ground 4. It is therefore
         convenient to deal with that ground at this point. It is submitted
         by Mr Lewis that those findings made little sense and did not
         explain how psychological assistance would assist X.


    102. Having considered the evidence, the FtTJ made findings relating to
         support available for X. I am satisfied that those were findings
         properly open to the judge to make on the evidence. The FtTJ
         properly took into account the evidence that without the appellant
         X would have problems caring for the children and that during his
         absence (since 2016 due to his imprisonment and on previous
         occasions) that this had caused her anxiety and depression. The
         judge was entitled to place weight on the GPs letter that despite
         this, she was not taking any medication and that therapy to provide
         support for her mental health was available. Therefore it was open
         to the judge to reach the conclusion that the therapy would assist
         her in her day-to-day functioning and therefore the care of the
         children and that such therapy was beneficial and available. The
         judge demonstrably took into account X's explanation as to why she
         did not undertake therapy but gave adequate and sustainable reasons
         as to why she had rejected that evidence.


    103. The FtTJ also had a psychological report which the judge had made
         reference to at paragraphs [108 - 109]. At [118] the judge made the
         overall assessment that there was "no evidence that X has reached a
         stage where she is unable to look after children adequately such
         that there is a risk that they might be taken into care. I refer to
         what I have said above about the availability of therapy to treat
         anxiety depression and the options - in the absence of any evidence
         that she alone can care for her mother, an alternative care package
         packages to address her mother's needs. She has a brother here and
         she described her relationship with him in a You turn report as a
         "close one". There are, therefore, avenues of support available to
         help her cope in the appellant's absence."



    104. There is no error in that approach nor is it illogical to reach
         such a finding when the evidence is considered "in the round".


    105. A further point made in support of ground 1 (which also involves
         ground 3) relates to the circumstances of X's mother. The written
         submissions and oral submissions made by Mr Lewis set out at
         paragraphs 10 - 11 refer to the findings made by the FtTJ that X's
         mother could be cared for by the NHS and social services and that
         this did not reflect new evidence to undermine the findings of the
         2012 panel. Mr Lewis submits that the 2012 Tribunal having
         considered the care X provided for her mother can be taken to have
         been aware of the possibility of NHS assistance and care.


    106. Again, in my judgement those submissions fail to consider the
         different evidence before the panel in 2020 from that in 2012. The
         panel in 2012 referred to the evidence given by X that she and her
         brother had formed a support network for her mother (paragraph 35].
         There was no specific finding as to the necessity for X to care for
         her mother but at [48] the panel considered that X's mother was
         part of the family jigsaw and did not consider that she could adapt
         to life in Jamaica.


    107. The FtTJ in 2020 did address the position of X's mother at [106]-
         [107] of the decision and did so in the context of the evidence of
         X. The FtTJ accepted that there was evidence confirming that X was
         her mother's carer, but the judge stated "however, her claim that
         her mother did not interact with outside agencies is not
         corroborated. I refer to a letter from her mother's GP dated 19
         December 2019 which states, "I have no record that [V] was
         unresponsive to external care in the past." The letter gave some
         background information about the medical history of X's mother. At
         one stage she was receiving four times a day package of care which
         was stopped as children decided to take care of her themselves."
         The letter went on to say that she is now fully dependent on
         assistance "for all ADLs and is at risk of self neglect without a
         family support." The judge found "whilst the letter states that it
         is "very likely" that her mental and physical health would
         deteriorate if X stopped providing support, what the letter does
         not address is whether and if so, why, only X can provide
         appropriate care. The GP reported a deterioration in her mental
         state of X mother in 2009, but at that stage it stopped taking her
         medication.




    108. At [107] the judge concluded "there is therefore no evidence that
         X's mother cannot be cared for by the NHS and social services. In
         oral evidence, X was asked to elaborate on what she meant by her
         mother not interacting with the agencies. She said her mother feels
         more comfortable with her family taking care of her. That is not
         surprising, but it is not evidence of some significant reason why
         alternative NHS care cannot be provided, thus reducing the daily
         burden on X."



    109. In his oral submissions Mr Lewis submitted that the judge gave no
         reasons for rejecting X's evidence as either being untruthful or
         not credible. However, in my judgement the FtTJ properly addressed
         the evidence and was entitled to consider whether that evidence was
         supported by an independent third party. It was not and thus the
         findings reached were ones open to the FtTJ in the context of the
         evidence. The judge was also aware that X had not been truthful on
         previous occasions (see the observation made at [92] by reference
         to earlier findings made).



    110. As to the burden of caring for her mother, the judge found that X
         could be assisted by the provisions of services from the NHS which
         would reduce the daily burden on her and thus mean that she would
         have greater availability for the children and their needs.



    111. As to the assistance that X could receive from her brother, the
         grounds (ground 1) also referred to the position 2012. Mr Lewis
         submits that in 2012 the Tribunal were aware of her brother but
         that he was working full-time and "no doubt had his own life and
         preoccupations." It is submitted that this had remained the case in
         2020 and that there was no evidence that X's brother was able or
         willing to provide a higher level of support in 2020 than he was in
         2012.



    112. Having considered the evidence and the assessment of the FtTJ, I am
         satisfied there is no error in her assessment of the circumstances
         of X's brother and that the judge was entitled consider the passing
         of time since 2012 when X's brother was 23 years of age in addition
         to the specific evidence given at the date of the hearing to reach
         a different view.



    113. The evidence of X (set out in the witness statement) was that her
         brother lived with their mother but was busy with a business.
         Again, she referred to her mother being unresponsive to external
         services (a point which the judge addressed and rejected the
         reasons set out in referred to earlier in this decision are
         paragraphs 106 - 107). At pages 27 - 28 of the bundle X's brother
         had written a letter stating that he did the best he could for his
         mother and that X did most, if not all, of her care. Reference is
         made to both he and X accompanying their mother for the purposes of
         the scan.




    114. It is correct that he did not attend the hearing to give evidence
         on behalf of the appellant or to support X's evidence. At [71] the
         judge recorded that the reason given for his non-attendance was
         that he was unable to come to the hearing. No further elucidation
         was given by X as to why he was not present given his part in the
         family dynamics.



    115. The judge did not make any express finding relation to her brothers
         help for the purpose of caring for their mother. That may be
         because it was common ground that he had undertaken at least some
         of his mother's care as they lived in the same house but also
         because the FtTJ had reached the conclusion that X could call on
         greater assistance from the NHS.



    116. However the FtTJ did make an express finding as to the help and
         assistance her brother could give to X in terms of support for the
         children and that this was different to the evidence in 2012 which
         demonstrates that he was able to provide some support for the
         children in the absence of the appellant.



    117. This evidence was set out in the You turn report relating to SH2
         where it was recorded that SH2 spoke about his uncle with fondness
         saying that his uncle taught him a lot about life and being
         confident with who he is. SH2 also identified his uncle as someone
         he would go to if he did not feel safe. Additionally the judge
         recorded at [117] that X stated that her brother was a "positive
         influence" on SH2. At [118] the FtTJ found that X had described her
         relationship with her brother as a "close one" and that alongside
         the assistance of therapy, and alternative care packages for her
         mother that she would be able to care for the children adequately.
         Consequently it was open to the FtTJ to conclude that there were
         other avenues of support that X could call upon in the absence of
         the appellant.



    118. Therefore contrary to paragraph 11 of the written submissions and
         those made in his oral submissions, there was evidence upon which
         the judge could properly conclude that the position in respect of
         X's brother was different to that in 2012.



    119. Similar submissions were made in respect of SH1. The written
         submissions relied upon by Mr Lewis in paragraph 9 refers to the
         circumstances of SH1 and provide page references to the evidence.
         The circumstances of SH1 were summarised at [115] of the decision
         and the FtTJ took into account her medical problems for
         hypothyroidism and enuresis. The medical evidence referred to in
         the written submissions consisted of general medical records
         stretching back to 2009. Her enuresis was identified as a long-
         standing problem from when she was little (at 115 and 121). Other
         medical evidence from 2013 - 2017 referred to her hypothyroidism
         and receiving medication for her thyroid problems. There was no up-
         to-date medical evidence for SH1, and the evidence given by her
         mother X was set out at [75] that her health was "moderate" and
         "being managed". SH 1 had provided a letter at pages 21 - 23 of the
         bundle setting out that she had experienced anxiety and depression
         as a result of a father's imprisonment. SH 1 was now 17 years of
         age (nearly 18) and the evidence in the bundle pointed to her
         having achieved academic achievements (page 169) and having
         received an outstanding achievement award (page 172) and had a
         conditional offer for university. The assessment made of the
         circumstances of SH1 are consistent with that material and do not
         demonstrate the point made in the grounds that the FtTJ was
         required to justify a departure from the decision of the panel in
         2012.




    120. I now turn to ground 2 which relates to the circumstances of SH4
         who was born in 2014 and therefore the decision of the panel in
         2012 did not consider circumstances.



    121. Mr Lewis submits that the FtTJ was wrong to dismiss the evidence of
         Miss P on the basis that she was not a "qualified practitioner" and
         that the letter she provided was a mixture of opinion evidence and
         evidence of primary fact and therefore did not rely on the author's
         experience.



    122. I have considered that submission in the light of the contents of
         the letter set out at page 88 of the bundle. Miss P is described as
         a master's student studying child psychology and that she was
         currently on a placement at the school. SH4 was referred to her for
         emotional support relating to his father's imprisonment. The letter
         set out that SH4 presented as an intelligent, gentle, and creative
         child. It is recorded that he often spoke of deep sadness in his
         tummy in connection with missing his father. She stated, "in my
         opinion with the right therapeutic support and the physical
         presence of his father SH4 has every chance of developing emotional
         and academic skills appropriate for his age." She later referred to
         difficulties in behaviour to self -regulate and gave her opinion
         that he was suffering from the absence of his father and that this
         is having an adverse effect on his emotional development.



    123. The FtTJ did not take issue with the general evidence that any of
         the children with whom she was concerned did not miss their father
         and that this was adversely affecting them as set out in the second
         paragraph of Miss P's letter. Whilst Mr Lewis submits that the
         judge rejected that evidence that is not reflected in the decision.
         At [114] the FtTJ did not state that she gave the report no weight
         but that she gave the report "limited weight". Having considered
         the contents of the letter, I do not consider that the FtTJ was in
         error by stating that its author was not a "qualified
         practitioner". She was not. Miss P was a graduate student in a
         placement as part of a master's degree. While she was able to set
         out what she saw, any opinion as to the cause of any adverse
         behaviour would have to be seen and considered in the light of all
         of the evidence. By way of example, it is not been said whether
         Miss P had been given any of the background material in order to
         reach her opinion as to the physical presence of his father.
         Nothing is said about the period where SH4 was separated from his
         father due to period of imprisonment. Nor was any reference made to
         any particular care of SH4 beyond his "physical presence".




    124. Conversely the judge did place weight on evidence relating to all
         of the children set out in the psychological assessment summarise
         at [108 - 109]. At [119] the judge concluded that this was the only
         report that she felt able to give weight. At [109] the judge as set
         out the conclusions that each of the children had an attachment to
         their father, that that was in line with the close bond that they
         had with him and that they were worried about the prospect of
         losing their father. In the light of that evidence, the judge was
         entitled to prefer this evidence over that of Miss P as set out in
         the letter at page 88. Consequently I find no error on the basis of
         the submissions made and as set out in ground 2.



    125. In summary, I conclude that the FtTJ did not err in her approach as
         set out in ground 1 ) even seen in the context of the evidence
         referred to in ground 2(relating to the circumstances of SH 4), or
         ground 3, relating to evidence of X, or ground 4 (by reference to
         "talking therapies"). The FtTJ properly had regard to the panel's
         findings in 2012 but was entitled to reach the conclusion that
         whilst they provided a starting point, that she was entitled
         consider the evidence as it was in 2020 relating to the children
         circumstances, those of the appellant, those of X,  alongside the
         passage of time and in the context of a different legal test and
         framework. For those reasons I am not satisfied that there was any
         error in her approach on the basis of the submissions made by Mr
         Lewis.



    126. I should deal with one point which is raised generally in the
         grounds at paragraph 14. In his written submissions Mr Lewis refers
         to the FtTJ having quoted the well-known aphorism in the decision
         of Lee and that Underhill LJ in the decision of HA (Iraq) v SSHD
         [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 (4 September 2020)  set out that it was not a
         substitute for consideration of the individual case. It is
         submitted in that paragraph that the analysis at paragraphs 119 -
         121 gives the impression the judge was asking herself whether the
         harm to the children went beyond that which was ordinarily to be
         expected from the deportation of a parent, an approach which was
         disapproved of in HA (Iraq).



    127. Beyond that, no further submissions either in the written
         submissions or in the oral submissions made any reference to the
         test applied by the FtTJ relating to the "unduly harsh" test, or by
         reference to the later decisions in  HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA
         Civ 1176 (4 September 2020)  or AA (Nigeria).

    128. Having considered the overall assessment of the FtTJ, I do not
         consider that she erred in her consideration of that issue. At [95]
         the judge considered the circumstances of the appellant and that by
         reason of the length of the sentence he fell into the category of
         what is now described as a "serious offender" and therefore was
         required to show "very compelling circumstances". The FtTJ did not
         have the advantage of the later case law in  HA (Iraq) v SSHD
         [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 (4 September 2020)  and AA (Nigeria)  but
         those decisions identify that it is not necessary to refer to case
         law beyond that in KO (Nigeria) and NA (Pakistan) both of which the
         judge made reference to ( see the FtTJ's application of NA
         (Pakistan) at [96) and KO Nigeria at [102].


    129. Whilst the judge made a reference to MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT,
         the FtTJ's reference to there being an "elevated threshold" still
         remains the position.

    130. In KO (Nigeria) at [23], the Supreme Court held that: '... the
         expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to introduce a
         higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness" under section 117B(6),
         taking account of the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element of
         comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness",
         that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable in the
         relevant context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond that
         level.


    131. Importantly at [103] the judge focused her attention upon the
         effects of deportation upon the children and X and recognising the
         elevated threshold again.


    132. At [101] the judge set out her reasons for reaching the conclusion
         that it would be unduly harsh for the children to relocate to
         Jamaica (the "go scenario"). No issue is taken with those findings.


    133. It is recorded at [97] the Counsel relied upon Exception 2. No
         submissions have been made that the FtTJ failed to consider any
         factors under Exception 1. At paragraphs [102 - 121] the judge set
         out and addressed the evidence relevant to the consideration of
         undue harshness and expressly considered the points raised on
         behalf of the appellant which the judge summarised at [104]. In
         doing so, I am satisfied that the FtTJ carried out an assessment of
         the evidence that was before the FtTJ and did not fall into error
         in the way that grounds 1-4 asserts for the reasons that I have
         given earlier.

    134. The FtTJ did not find that the appellant could meet the Exception 2
         (S117C (5)) but in the alternative, even if it were met, that the
         appellant had not shown that there were "very compelling
         circumstances" over and above those Exceptions and addressed the
         other relevant factors identified including the appellant's claimed
         rehabilitation at [122] and the public interest at [123].

    135. The judge property took into account in favour of the appellant
         that he had undergone drug and alcohol courses to addresses
         addiction and that when tested randomly for drugs was found to be
         drug-free. However, the judge was entitled to take into account
         that this had taken place within a secure and structured
         environment and that he had yet to show that once in the community
         he was able to "put into practice what he learnt in prison". There
         had been no OASY's report before the Tribunal only the presentence
         report which had assessed his risk of reoffending as medium and
         also risk to the public as medium. The judge properly found "he has
         been given chances in the past, but his behaviour shows he has not
         learnt from his experiences or given much thought to the
         consequences of his behaviour on his closest family members." The
         FtTJ's assessment of his conduct or steps towards rehabilitation
         was consistent with the guidance given in HA (Iraq) at [141] that
         '... tribunals will properly be cautious about their ability to
         make findings on the risk of re-offending, and will usually be
         unable to do so with any confidence based on no more than the
         undertaking of prison courses or mere assertions of reform by the
         offender ...'

    136. In addressing the public interest at [123] in light of the
         appellant's conviction, the nature of his offences, that he was a
         repeat offender, the conclusion reached that the "public interest
         in his removal is very high" was a finding demonstrably open to the
         FtTJ to reach. Consequently the omnibus conclusion set out at [124]
         properly considered the best interests of the children but that
         whilst they were a primary consideration, they were not "paramount"
         and that given the "very high public interest in deportation of the
         appellant" it was not "outweighed by the best interests of children
         or any other matter relied upon."

    137. In my view the reference to the decision in Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348
         set out at the end of paragraph 124 was referred to only in the
         context of his offending outweighing the best interests of the
         children and did not fall into any legal error in the way
         disapproved in HA (Iraq) at [56].


    138. In a S117C(6) case, as here, there was a requirement to consider
         the seriousness of the particular offence and to balance the strong
         public interest in support of deportation against the circumstances
         over and above Exceptions and 2.  On the facts of this appeal the
         issue related to Exception 2.  I am satisfied that this is
         precisely what the FtTJ did.  Therefore the FtTJ having considered
         all factors weighing in the appellant's side of the balance
         cumulatively was entitled to conclude that the weight of the public
         interest in this particular case required deportation because it
         cannot be said that there are "very compelling circumstances" over
         and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2 .

    139. The question whether the decision contains a material error of law
         is not whether another Judge could have reached the opposite
         conclusion but whether this Judge reached a conclusion by
         appropriately directing herself as to the relevant law and
         assessing the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

    140. The judge had the advantage of considering all the evidence in the
         case.  As the Supreme Court stated in Henderson v Foxworth
         Investments Ltd [2014] UKSC 41; [2014] 1 WLR 2600 at [62]:

         "It does not matter, with whatever degree of  certainty,  that  the
         appellate court considers that it would have  reached  a  different
         conclusion. What matters is whether the decision  under  appeal  is
         one that no reasonable judge could have reached.

    141. In any given case an evaluative exercise of this kind may admit  of
         more than one answer.  If so, provided all the appropriate  factors
         have been taken into  account,  the  decision  cannot  be  impugned
         unless it is perverse or irrational, in a sense of falling  outside
         the range of permissible decisions.  Mr Lewis did not seek to argue
         that the decision of the judge or her assessment  of  the  evidence
         (including the expert evidence) was either irrational or perverse.

    142. Consequently, it has not been demonstrated by the grounds as argued
         by the appellant that the decision of the FtTJ involved  making  of
         an error on a point of law.  It follows that the  decision  of  the
         FtTJ shall stand.





Notice of Decision



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or his family members.  This direction applies  both
to the Appellant and  to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed
                                Dated 6/12/20

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).


5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email

