
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01273/2019
                                                               HU/01275/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2021                           |On 1 July 2021                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

|                 |anjeela rana                          |First Appellant  |
|                 |ganesh bahadur rana                   |Second Appellant |


                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Moriarty, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing the appeal of the appellants against the decision of  the
       respondent on 14 December 2018 refusing  them  leave  to  enter  the
       United Kingdom as the adult dependants of their mother.

    2. The appellants are sister and brother and they are the children of a
       former Ghurkha who has since died.  Their mother is lawfully in  the
       United Kingdom.

    3. Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley  in
       response to renewal grounds drawn by Mr Darryl  Balroop  of  Counsel
       which are quite different from the grounds considered and refused by
       the First-tier Tribunal.

    4. Judge Lindsley's reasons for giving permission are mainly set out at
       paragraph 3 of her decision and I reproduce that below:

  "The grounds of appeal contend, in summary, as follows.  That the  First-
  tier Tribunal erred in properly assessing whether the evidence before  it
  shows family life between the appellants and  their  mother  because  the
  First-tier Tribunal did not acknowledge that the previous  determination,
  which was rightly a starting point under  Devaseelan,  had  been  decided
  prior to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Rai  v  ECO,  New  Delhi
  [2017] EWCA Civ 320, which  determined  how  Ghurkha  family  life  cases
  should properly be decided, and in which it was found that  there  was  a
  need only for  real,  effective  or  committed  support,  and  not  total
  dependency, and there were no need for exceptional circumstances.  As the
  previous determination found that the appellants lived in  the  sponsor's
  home and that she continually sent money to them that  suffices  to  meet
  the Rai test.  It is also argued that there is insufficient reasoning  in
  the current decision of the First-tier Tribunal".

    5. This led to a very vigorous response from the Secretary of State  in
       a letter dated 15 July 2020 that serves as a Rule 24  reply.   I  am
       satisfied from reading the letter that the position is not as simple
       as Judge Lindsley's grant might have suggested.

    6. According to that  notice  reliance  on  the  decision  in  Rai  "to
       undermine the first Tribunal's decision is utterly misplaced".

    7. The point is that the first Tribunal made reasoned findings.   These
       included a reasoned finding that the sponsoring mother in the United
       Kingdom was very short of funds and it was hard to see how she could
       be making any significant financial contribution to the  appellants.
       The First-tier Tribunal also noticed that documents  supporting  any
       kind of financial transfer  showed  that  the  first  appellant  was
       living at least for a time in Kathmandu rather than the village home
       owned by the sponsor and this was said to raise "further questions".

    8. The letter pointed out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  expressly
       directed himself to different cultural practices and  said  that  "I
       accept from a cultural perspective,  unmarried  children  in  Nepal,
       will typically continue to live in the family home".  The Judge then
       went  on  to  find   strands   of   the   evidence   unsatisfactory.
       Additionally, the Judge could not see how there could be any kind of
       emotional support given the skimpy contact  between  the  appellants
       and their mother.  These points were all set out in  a  Decision  of
       the Tribunal that was promulgated on 15  February  2017  and  relied
       upon extensively by the First-tier Tribunal  in  dealing  with  this
       appeal.

    9. Indeed, one of the complaints about the Decision is that  the  Judge
       of the First-tier  Tribunal  said  almost  nothing  until  the  last
       paragraph of his Decision (penultimate paragraph  of  the  Decision)
       that was analysis  rather  than  quotation.   The  judge  found  the
       appellant "unbelievable" and this was factored into  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's decision in 2019 and then the judge found nothing to lead
       him to a different conclusion and he dismissed the appeal.

   10. Mr Melvin's main point before me is that there were  clear  findings
       about the relationship in  the  first  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal in 2019  was  entitled  to  say
       there was nothing that  undermined  that  evidence  and  unless  the
       evidence establishes a relationship there is  really  no  Article  8
       claim to bring.  He submitted that if there was no  family  life  in
       2017 there was no family life for the purposes of the appeal.

   11. I disagree with Mr Melvin about that.  I do not accept  that  family
       life  cannot  be  re-established  although  the  fact  that  it  has
       disintegrated, if that is a fact, may go a long  way  to  suggesting
       that there is no current family life  or  perhaps  more  importantly
       that the proportionality assessment should  not  be  skewed  by  the
       desire to right an historical wrong if in fact the family life was a
       new consideration.

   12. However, I cannot see a way around Mr Moriarty's submission that the
       2017 "pre Rai" decision  based  its  conclusions  on  the  need  for
       significant financial support which is no longer sustainable or  why
       the equivocal findings or the  findings  of  dishonesty  necessarily
       undermined the claim that there was substantial contact by telephone
       and a continuing relationship in accordance with custom.  There  was
       really no consideration at all  of  the  evidence  in  the  form  of
       statements from the appellants and there should have been.   Clearly
       such evidence suffers the disadvantage of not being tested by cross-
       examination but I am satisfied that the culture shift in  Rai  which
       did not appear to be recognised by the First-tier Tribunal  in  2019
       makes the decision unsafe.

   13.  As  I  indicate  at  the  beginning,  I  found  this  a  much  less
       straightforward decision than it first seemed.  I do appreciate  the
       points that the Secretary of State makes but I am not satisfied that
       the adverse credibility finding deals with  the  issue.  It  is  not
       sufficient reason to reject the evidence that  the  appellants  live
       substantially in the former family  home  or  that  they  are  still
       dependent emotionally on their mother, especially as they  have  not
       established families of their own. The evidence of financial support
       may not establish significant financial dependency but it  could  be
       indicative of continuing emotional dependency. This possibility  has
       not been explored.

   14. First-tier Tribunal  Judges  rightly  seize  upon  Devaseelan  as  a
       starting point but it is not always the finishing point and for  the
       reasons given I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal have erred.

   15. I do not find the outcome of the  appeal  against  the  respondent's
       decision to be obvious and, for the reason that I have given, I find
       that the appellants' case has not been considered properly.

   16. I have decided in the circumstances it is right  to  set  aside  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal and direct  the  case  be  heard
       again in the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

   17. The First-tier Tribunal erred. I set aside its decisions and  direct
       that the appeals be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 June 2021                   |

