
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01857/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On February 5, 2019                          |On 25 February 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr GIBIN GEORGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Sobowale, Counsel instructed by Christon Francis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal brought by the Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department I shall hereafter refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    referred to in the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly, the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department will hereafter  be  referred  to  as  the
    respondent, albeit he is of course the  appellant  in  the  proceedings
    currently before me.

 2. On February 28, 2015 the appellant was granted  leave  to  enter  as  a
    spouse and that leave was valid until November 23, 2017.  He lodged  an
    application on October 25, 2017 to  extend  that  leave  but  this  was
    refused by the respondent on December 14, 2017.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal  on  January  3,  2018  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cox  on  April  12,
    2018 and in a decision promulgated on April 26, 2018 the Judge  allowed
    the appeal.

 4. The respondent appealed that decision on May 1, 2018 and permission was
    initially refused.  The grounds of appeal were  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and on November 29, 2018 Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan
    found there was an arguable error in law identifying a number of issues
    as raised in the grounds.  In particular,  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge noted that the Judge had effectively imposed an obligation on the
    respondent to provide a document that was not in their  possession  and
    it was arguable that the findings in paragraphs 44 and 45 were  flawed.



    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr McVeety adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that  the  Judge
    had failed to apply the guidance set out in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS  -
    evidence - burden  of  proof)  [2016]  UKUT  229.   He  submitted  that
    evidence that had been adduced to satisfy  the  burden  placed  on  the
    respondent in SM and Qadir.  He went on to argue  that  the  Judge  had
    failed  to  note  that  the  appellant  must  demonstrate  an  innocent
    explanation  which  the  respondent  must  rebut  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities.  He argued that the Judge did not  address  who  had  to
    prove what.  Significantly, he  argued  that  the  Judge  required  the
    respondent to provide a certificate (see paragraph 43)  where  in  fact
    this was not something that was in the possession of the respondent  or
    would be with the authorities who  conducted  the  test  in  the  first
    place.  The Judge made a reference at the end of paragraph 43 that  the
    failure to provide  the  certificate  was  a  "serious  omission".   Mr
    McVeety further submitted that the finding at the end of  paragraph  40
    that the respondent had not provided any  evidence  to  suggest  anyone
    from the college had been arrested, charged or convicted was  incorrect
    as there was no requirement  to  do  so.   The  significance  of  these
    failures was that when the  Judge  ultimately  had  to  carry  out  his
    Article 8 assessment the Judge was approaching the Article 8 assessment
    on the basis that there were no other factors outweighing  a  grant  to
    the appellant.  He accepted that if the  decision  was  set  aside  the
    outcome was not necessarily a rejection for the appellant but submitted
    that it should be a fair playing field.

 6. Mr Sobowale responded to those grounds and referred to  the  fact  that
    the ETS SELT source data  document  did  not  contain  the  appellant's
    passport number and this was something the Judge was  obliged  to  take
    into  account  when  considering  the  overall   reliability   of   the
    respondent's evidence.  There had been an issue raised in  evidence  as
    to when the appellant had taken the test, with the appellant stating he
    had taken it on June 12, 2012 (because he  needed  the  certificate  to
    make the application) and the respondent relying on  the  documentation
    which suggested the test was taken on June 27, 2012.  He suggested that
    the issue of the test certificate was relevant to the  extent  that  it
    may have cleared up the issue but  it  was  not  material.   The  Judge
    looked at the evidence and concluded, as he was entitled to,  that  the
    evidence did not satisfy the burden placed  upon  the  respondent.   He
    disagreed with Mr McVeety's submission that the Judge had  not  applied
    the principles of SM and Qadir.

 7. In conclusion, he submitted that the  proportionality  assessment  that
    was subsequently carried out from paragraph 51 of the decision was fair
    and open to the Judge.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.

    FINDINGS

 9. This was an application to extend leave on the basis of the appellant's
    marriage.  The appellant had originally been given leave to  enter  the
    UK as a spouse and this was  his  application  to  extend  that  leave.
    Since arriving in the United Kingdom, the respondent has  alleged  that
    the  English  language  test,  previously  taken  and  relied  on,  was
    fraudulently taken and that led to the decision to refuse  his  appeal.
    As was pointed out by the  appellant's  representative  ultimately  the
    issue was whether it would be disproportionate to require the appellant
    to leave the United  Kingdom,  bearing  in  mind  he  has  two  British
    children.

10. The issue relating to that assessment must  include  an  assessment  in
    relation to the ETS issue because otherwise the  Article  8  assessment
    will be flawed.  There is  a  difference  to  assessing  an  Article  8
    assessment where there is nothing adverse to outweigh  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife and two children to a situation where  there
    is something adverse in his   history.   I  find  that  the  Judge  was
    required to deal with the ETS matter and make findings which would then
    form part of that assessment.

11. I have therefore considered  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  have  been
    advanced and make the following findings.

12. The Judge at paragraph 36 of his decision acknowledged  the  principles
    that had to be applied.  Looking at paragraph 47 I  am  satisfied  that
    the Judge assessed whether the respondent satisfied the initial burden.
    The real issue in my view was whether the Judge correctly followed  the
    procedure in SM and Qadir.

13. There are a number of observations made by the  Judge  which  factually
    are either incorrect or irrelevant.

14. The first issue arose in paragraph 40  of  the  decision.   The  report
    produced relating to the college spoke as to what  percentage  of  test
    results were invalid over a particular  period.   The  Judge  commented
    that there was a staggering number of proxy test takers  identified  in
    159 of 166 speaking and writing sessions.  The Judge however went on to
    say or imply that the respondent should have provided some evidence  to
    suggest that someone had been arrested, charged or convicted.  That  is
    not a requirement of the assessment to be  carried  out  under  SM  and
    Qadir.

15. The second issue related to the absence  of  the  passport  number.   I
    accept this is a valid point advanced in this case but that  ultimately
    would form part of  the  assessment  which  the  Judge  would  have  to
    undertake when deciding  whether  the  respondent  had  discharged  the
    evidential burden.  The requirement at paragraph 43 in relation to  the
    test certificate is something that must have been on the  Judge's  mind
    because not only does he comment that the respondent has not provided a
    copy of the  test  certificate  (this  is  incorrect  as  there  is  no
    obligation to provide such a test certificate by the  respondent),  but
    he then went on to say that the  absence  of  that  certificate  was  a
    serious omission.  The argument advanced today that the Judge placed no
    real weight on that test certificate is not sustainable.

16. Thirdly, the Judge also made an observation that he found it surprising
    that the appellant had been granted entry  clearance  if  a  fraudulent
    test had been utilised.  There was no basis for this.

17. Ultimately,  the  Judge  had  to  decide  whether  the  respondent  had
    discharged the evidential burden of proving that  the  certificate  had
    been procured by dishonesty.   I  am  satisfied  that  in  making  that
    assessment the Judge has allowed  the  matters  referred  to  above  to
    affect the assessment.  In such circumstances, his conclusion that  the
    respondent had not discharged that burden is flawed.

18. As the finding on the ETS issue is flawed I find  that  the  article  8
    assessment is also flawed.  I therefore find there has been an error in
    law.

19. I have considered whether to retain jurisdiction in this matter  or  to
    remit the matter back to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Bearing  in  mind
    there are flawed findings, I find that this  matter  will  need  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal and  I  do  so  under  Section
    12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

20. I allow the appeal and set aside the decision and remit the matter back
    to the First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(1) of the Tribunals, Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.


Signed                              Date 21 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



