
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: HU/01673/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Rolls Building                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2018                          |On 22 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                    J G D
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms JF, sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  ("ECO")against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Majid promulgated on 20 March  2017  in
    which he allowed Ms JGD's appeal against the decision to  refuse  entry
    clearance to join her grandmother, Ms JF ("the sponsor"). That decision
    was taken under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The ECO refused the application  as  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent met the requirements of paragraph 297 (i)(f) which states:-
      297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite  leave
      to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a  parent,  parents  or  a
      relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement  in  the
      United Kingdom are that he:
      (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,  parents
      or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
         ...
           (f) one parent or a relative  is  present  and  settled  in  the
           United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for
           settlement and there are serious and compelling family or  other
           considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
           suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care; and

 3. The ECO reached that conclusion for the reasons set out in full in  the
    decision of 27 May 2015, but in summary, he was not satisfied that:

 a) The respondent was related to the sponsor as claimed;

 b) That the respondent and sponsor had ever met;

 c) The sponsor supported the respondent financially, noting no evidence of
    regular contact;

The ECO also found that the respondent still lives with her mother  who  has
    legal custody of her

 4. For these reasons the ECO concluded that the respondent had  not  shown
    that there are any serious, compelling family or  other  considerations
    which make her exclusion undesirable or that suitable arrangements  had
    been made for her care.  He also concluded that refusing to  grant  the
    respondent entry clearance would not  be  a  breach  of  her  right  to
    respect for her family and private life under article 8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

 5. It follows from this that there were a number of issues in dispute.  It
    was for the judge to make findings of fact and then apply  the  law  as
    set out in paragraph 297 (i)(f).

 6. The ECO submits that the judge did not do this, and that  his  decision
    is so incoherent that it cannot be discerned what  findings  the  judge
    made, or why he allowed the appeal.

 7. While I have no reason to doubt that Ms JF did  explain  to  the  judge
    what her relationship is with JGD, the difficulties she faces  and  why
    she should come to the United Kingdom where she could look  after  her,
    there is no real indication that the judge made any findings  based  on
    that evidence. It is particularly worrying that at paragraphs [12]  and
    [13] that the judge appeared to consider that JGD was in  fact  present
    in the United Kingdom.

 8. The judge did not set out the relevant law, and failed to make findings
    on the issues in dispute. He did not explain why  he  had  allowed  the
    appeal except at paragraph [32] by reference to paragraph  [12]   which
    refers  to  "special  arrangements"  where  by  a  person  of  Jamaican
    background can switch categories despite having come as a visitor. That
    is clearly not relevant here as JGD is not in the United Kingdom.

 9. There is no attempt to explain why JGD has met the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules or why, if not, the refusal to grant her leave  would
    be in breach of the Human Rights Act.

10. For all of these reasons,  I am satisfied that the  decision  of  Judge
    Majid involved the making of an error of law, and I set it  aside.   As
    the judge failed to make any proper findings, the only course of action
    properly open to me is to remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a

Notice of Decision


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

11. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
    on all issues.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
    granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 20 February 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

