

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01227/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 October 2017                         |On 10 January 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S G]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

For the Respondent:    Mr M Alison instructed by Owen Stevens Solicitors.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert, promulgated on 20 March 2017, in
        which the Judge allowed the appeal under both the Immigration Rules
        and ECHR, articles 3 and 8.



Background


     2. [SG] is a citizen of Jamaica born on [ ] 1989 who appealed  against
        a decision by the Secretary of State to  refuse  his  human  rights
        claim and to maintain an order for his deportation from the  United
        Kingdom signed on 28 January 2009.
     3. [SG] arrived in the United Kingdom on 17  July  1996  when  he  was
        granted 6 months leave to enter as a dependent of his  mother.   On
        29 August 2002, he was granted indefinite leave to remain.
     4. On 28 June 2008 [SG] was convicted at  Lewes  Crown  Court  on  two
        counts of possessing a Class A drugs with intent to  supply,  crack
        cocaine, two counts of possessing a Class A  drug  with  intent  to
        supply, heroin, and one count of possessing a  Class  C  controlled
        drug with intent  to  supply.  [SG]  was  sentenced  to  30  months
        imprisonment for each offence relating to the  Class  A  drugs  and
        five months  imprisonment  for  the  other  offence  to  be  served
        concurrently. A deportation order was made on 29 January 2009.
     5. The Judge  records  the  procedural  history  involving  subsequent
        decisions  and  judicial  review  proceedings  which  led  to   the
        Secretary of State, on 7  January  2016,  refusing  to  revoke  the
        deportation order and the subsequent appeal.
     6. The Judge, having reviewed the evidence, sets out findings of  fact
        from [100] of the decision under challenge. The Judge accepts  that
        the offending behaviour in 2008 was  very  serious  and  one  which
        applying the relevant law meant that deportation  under  paragraphs
        339 and 339A is in the public interest unless it can be  outweighed
        by other factors which are very compelling circumstances  over  and
        above those in paragraph 399 and 399A [100]. The Judge confirms  he
        has had regard to the decision of the Supreme Court in  Hesham  Ali
        [2016] UKSC 60 [101] and the social revulsion for drug offences and
        the clear public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals
        as their presence is not conducive to the public  good  [103].  The
        Judge also refers to section 117 of the 2002 Act.
     7. In relation to [SG]'s family circumstances; the Judge finds he  has
        established a significant family and private  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom and that he is married to a qualifying partner who is a  UK
        citizen and that he is culturally integrated into  United  Kingdom.
        [SG] is 28 years of age and the Judge  finds  it  would  be  unduly
        harsh given his mental vulnerability, lack of  family  or  cultural
        ties to Jamaica, and the absence of any employment or accommodation
        for his family to turn to, which made it unduly harsh  for  him  to
        return to Jamaica. The Judge finds very  significant  obstacles  to
        [SG]'s  reintegration  into  Jamaica  after   a   21-year   absence
        especially in light of his underlying serious mental illness [108 -
        109].
     8. The Judge finds that as a result of the vulnerability of [SG] he is
        at serious risk of suicide [113] before finding at [117] that  [SG]
        does have an extremely serious mental  health  condition  and  that
        although there are mental health services in Jamaica  the  question
        is whether he can possibly access those  services  in  Kingston  or
        elsewhere without relatives or friends to turn to for support.  The
        Judge finds [SG] does not have that safety net and that it would be
        completely  speculative  to  suggest  that  he  could  find  it  in
        sufficient time to prevent significant self-harm  or  suicide.  The
        Judge finds that there is a clear causal link between  the  act  or
        threatened act of removal or expulsion  and  treatment  that  would
        violate [SG]'s article 3 rights and that there is a high degree  of
        likelihood that [SG] would, as he has done already,  seek  to  take
        his own life and would do so  either  before  he  was  deported  to
        Jamaica or upon landing there [119].
     9. Having found a breach of article 3 the Judge went  on  to  consider
        article 8 ECHR by reference to the five-stage  test  formulated  in
        the case of Razgar. The Judge notes relevant factors at  [136]  but
        finds  that  even  bearing  in  the  mind  the  need  to   maintain
        immigration  control  and  the  strong  presumption  in  favour  of
        deportation of foreign criminals, the damage that will be inflicted
        upon [SG] and his wife by deportation will be  disproportionate  to
        the need to  maintain  immigration  control.  The  Judge  therefore
        allowed the appeal by reference to article 8 ECHR too.
    10. The Secretary of State appealed.  Permission to appeal was  granted
        by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable the Judge materially  erred  in  the  application  of  the
        decisions in Hesham  Ali  and  JZ  (Zambia)  and  did  not  resolve
        conflicts of evidence and speculated.



Error of law


    11. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mr  Bramble  indicated  he  was
        relying upon the grounds seeking permission to appeal only.
    12. Ground one asserts the Judge may have erred in  focusing  upon  the
        findings in SS (Congo) in light of  the  findings  of  the  Supreme
        Court and has  made  material  errors  of  law  when  applying  the
        guidance of the relevant authorities. Such a claim has no  arguable
        merit. The Judge noted  all  relevant  case  law  and  even  if  SS
        (Congo), in which it was stated that if the case  fails  under  the
        rules there are only a very limited number of  circumstances  where
        it can succeed outside the rules  under  article  8,  preceded  the
        decision of the Supreme Court it is clear the Judge  was  aware  of
        the need to undertake an assessment of the appeal by  reference  to
        article 8 ECHR.
    13. The Rules are still relevant to assessing  the  proportionality  of
        the decision as they set out the Secretary of States view  for  how
        the human rights aspects of a case should be  assessed.  The  Rules
        therefore form a proper starting point for any  assessment  of  the
        merits of an appeal. The Judge considered the Rules and found  [SG]
        was able to succeed thereunder, indicating  on  the  basis  of  the
        Secretary State's own interpretation of the weight to be given to a
        particular matter, the appellant was able to  succeed.  If  so,  it
        must be accepted the decision to deport is  not  proportionate  and
        that to do so would be a breach of article 8 ECHR.  The  Judge  did
        not, however, stop there but proceeded to consider the Razgar  test
        [134 - 142], factoring into  the  equation  those  matters  in  the
        appellant's favour. The Judge had referred to section  117  earlier
        in the decision and was clearly aware of the need to  consider  the
        same. No error of law material to the decision is made out on  this
        ground.
    14. Ground 2 asserts a failure to resolve conflict in the evidence  and
        asserts the Judge speculated in relation to certain aspects of  the
        decision. The grounds assert the Judge failed to give clear reasons
        why previous findings of fact should not  be  followed  and  it  is
        submitted that the previous finding should have been  the  starting
        point for the Judge and that in not taking  this  approach  he  has
        ignored the Devaseelan principles.
    15. The Judge was  aware  of  earlier  proceedings  and  make  specific
        reference to them at [19] of  the  decision  under  challenge.  The
        Judge reminds himself of the Devaseelan principle at [30] and  sets
        out the Secretary of State's  case  in  relation  to  the  previous
        decisions from [31 - 35] of the decision under challenge. The Judge
        was aware of the Secretary of State's view that there was no reason
        to overturn the original findings  First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal
        [40]. The Judge, however, did  not  agree  with  the  Secretary  of
        States view and at [139] states "Notwithstanding on the  particular
        facts of this case, I fundamentally disagree with the  findings  of
        fact of the First-tier Tribunal and to some extent with  the  Upper
        Tribunal. I have cogent reasons for doing so which I have attempted
        to set out. I have had the benefit of in-depth  new  evidence  that
        was simply not available from both the Appellant  and  Mrs  Johnson
        and the appellant's wife." The Judge was entitled  to  depart  from
        the previous findings if the evidence justified such  an  approach.
        The Judge concludes on the evidence he was asked to  consider  that
        the evidence did justify  a  different  conclusion.  No  procedural
        error or other error of law has been identified in relation to this
        aspect of challenge.
    16. Ground  3  asserts  the  Judge  failed  to  give  reasons  why  the
        requirement for medical treatment in Jamaica was not  satisfactory.
        The author the grounds asserts the failure to give  reasons  as  to
        how [SG] met the high threshold of article 3 is in error of law and
        that the Judge should not have  departed  from  previous  findings.
        This ground fails to identify any arguable error. The  Judge  gives
        adequate reasons for why he considered [SG]'s current circumstances
        would lead to a real risk of suicide as  a  result  of  his  mental
        health conditions sufficient to breach article 3. The ground is, in
        reality, no more than a disagreement with  findings  of  the  Judge
        which are  adequately  reasoned  and  within  the  range  of  those
        available to the Judge on the evidence.
    17. Ground 4 challenges the Judge's  findings  at  [136].  No  arguable
        error arises.  The  Judge  clearly  sets  out  the  nature  of  the
        protected rights relied upon, the factors in favour of [SG] and the
        Secretary of State before arriving at his conclusion. Article 3  is
        an absolute right and not a proportionate right and in light of the
        fact that no sustainable challenge to the  article  3  finding  has
        been made out it is arguable the article 8 aspects of the case  are
        arguably academic, for even if the Secretary  of  State  had  shown
        that the Judge had erred in relation to the article 8 assessment it
        would make no difference in light  of  the  sustainable  article  3
        finding.
    18. The assertion in the grounds that the Judge  does  not  give  clear
        reasons for why the appeal was allowed has no  arguable  merit  and
        amounts to no more than a disagreement with the findings made.  The
        Judge gives clear reasons for why [SG] was able  to  succeed  under
        the Immigration Rules and ECHR. Whilst the Secretary of  State  may
        not like the fact the appeal has been allowed that is not test.
    19. The Judge adopted a structured approach to assessing  the  evidence
        before him and it is not made out that the conclusions reached  are
        outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge on the
        evidence made available.
    20. It is the finding of this tribunal that the Secretary of State  has
        failed to discharge the burden of proof upon her  to  the  required
        standard to establish any error of law material to the decision  to
        allow the appeal.


Decision

    21. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 8th of January 2018












