
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01680/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Microsoft Teams from Field House |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3rd August 2021                         |On 16th September 2021          |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SOHAIL RAYF KHAN
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown, of Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10th January 1985.  He
       arrived in the UK on 16th  July  2007  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
       student. On 26th December 2019 he made a human  rights  claim.  This
       application was refused in a decision dated 15th January  2020.  His
       appeal against the decision was allowed on human rights  grounds  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge MR Oliver in a  determination  promulgated
       on the 25th November 2020. Permission to appeal was granted  to  the
       Secretary of State and I found for the reasons set out in  my  error
       of law decision at Annex A to  this  decision  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal but retained all findings bar  the  finding  that  the
       claimant had been lawfully present in the UK for a continuous period
       of ten years and so was entitled to settlement under paragraph  276B
       of the Immigration Rules. This I replaced with a  finding  that  the
       claimant was continuously lawfully present for nine years and  eight
       months from July 2007 to March 2017 only.

    2. The matter comes before me now to remake the appeal.   In  light  of
       the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19 and with
       regard to the overriding  object  set  out  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
       Procedure Rules this hearing  took  place  via  Microsoft  Teams,  a
       format to which  neither  party  raised  objection.  There  were  no
       significant issues of connectivity or audibility during the hearing.
       Ms Brown did not call  evidence  for  the  remaking  hearing  so  it
       proceeded on the basis of submissions only.

Submissions - Remaking

    3. In her skeleton argument and oral submissions Ms  Brown  argued,  in
       summary, as follows. Ms Brown accepted that  the  claimant  had  not
       been lawfully present for 10 years in the UK so could not succeed in
       an appeal by reference to the Immigration Rules at  paragraph  276B,
       but argued on a wider consideration under Article 8 ECHR that he was
       entitled to succeed for the following reasons.

    4. She argued that applying the decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (on
       the application of Waseem & Others) v SSHD (long residence policy  -
       interpretation) [2021] UKUT 0146 there was a residual discretion  of
       the respondent under s.3 of the Immigration Act 1971 to do what  was
       fair and just in the context of special circumstances, and that such
       circumstances exist in  this  case.  She  argued  that  the  special
       circumstances are as follows. The application made by  the  claimant
       on 29th March 2017 was made within 14 days  of  the  expiry  of  his
       leave so was in this sense in time as the amount of overstaying  was
       not such that it would have prohibited a future grant of leave under
       the Immigration Rules; this application was never determined by  the
       Secretary of State and was put  on  hold  as  a  result  of  an  ETS
       questionable marker for two and a half years; if the application had
       not been put on hold it would have been granted as  the  GCID  notes
       indicate that he would otherwise have been found  to  qualify  under
       paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules by having ten  years  lawful
       residence; the 2017 application was only not determined due  to  the
       making of the December 2019 application (the refusal of which led to
       this appeal) which  the  claimant  only  made  due  to  frustrations
       relating to the delay in decision-making;  the  Secretary  of  State
       should not be allowed to rely upon her own error in relation to  the
       ETS questionable marker hold decision or her own delays to deny  the
       claimant a positive outcome; the claimant has been in the UK for  14
       years and his wife has been here for 15 years and  they  have  mixed
       faith/nationality relationship which might lead  to  some  obstacles
       (if not very significant ones) or discrimination (if  not  harm)  if
       they were forced to relocate; the claimant and his wife have a child
       born in February 2018 whose best interests must be considered and it
       should be considered that any  difficulties  her  parents  may  have
       could negative impact on her if they were forced to leave the UK.

    5. Mr Tufan, for the Secretary of State, relied upon  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter dated 15th January 2020, the retained findings of the
       First-tier  Tribunal  and  argued  in  oral  submissions,  in  short
       summary, as follows.

    6. It is not accepted that the claimant can qualify to remain on family
       life grounds by reference to the Immigration Rules because his  wife
       is not a British citizen or settled in the UK, and because his child
       has not been present for seven years.  It is not  accepted  that  he
       qualifies to remain by reference to  the  private  life  Immigration
       Rules at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as it is not accepted he  can  show
       very significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan,  his  country
       of nationality, as he lived most of his life in Pakistan, he  has  a
       degree and has worked in the UK. It is  argued  that  there  are  no
       exceptional circumstances, which would result in unjustifiably harsh
       consequences for the claimant  or  his  family,  if  they  were  not
       allowed to remain in the UK and which would thus make it correct  to
       allow the appeal when considered  more  broadly  with  reference  to
       Article 8 ECHR.

    7. Mr Tufan argued that the 2017 application was properly superseded by
       the 2019 one. The claimant did not have ten years  lawful  residence
       as all accept. The GCID notes were not enough to constitute a  claim
       to remain based on this being a special  circumstance  necessitating
       the use of the respondent's discretion to grant leave under  s.3  of
       the Immigration Act 1971 to make a fair and just outcome.  The  GCID
       notes were not a decision but were just part  of  a  decision-making
       process which was never enacted. There was no  evidence,  given  the
       retained findings, that it  would  be  harsh  in  any  way  for  the
       claimant and his family to relocate to Pakistan or Mauritius and  so
       his removal was a proportionate interference with his Article 8 ECHR
       rights.

  Conclusions- Error of Law

    8. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal that  are  retained  are  as
       follows. The claimant has a genuine and enduring  relationship  with
       his wife and child but does not qualify  to  remain  on  this  basis
       under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as neither have any leave
       to remain. His wife is a Mauritian overstayer, and their child,  who
       is also without leave to remain, was born on 9th  February  2018  so
       has not been present in the UK for seven years. It was not  accepted
       that the appellant and his wife  would  face  any  harm  from  their
       families if they were to settle together in Pakistan  or  Mauritius,
       or would have very significant obstacles to  integration  in  either
       country, or that his wife would have any problems due to  her  being
       born a Hindu and now being an atheist if  they  were  to  settle  in
       Pakistan.

    9. It was not argued before me that the claimant could succeed in  this
       appeal by reference to any provision of the private life Immigration
       Rules. I find that he would not have very significant  obstacles  to
       integration  in  Pakistan,  and  cannot  succeed  by  reference   to
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. It is of course  a
       finding made at the error of law  hearing  that  he  had  only  been
       lawfully in the UK for nine years and eight  months,  and  that  his
       2017 application was made after his s.3C leave had expired and so he
       was a open ended overstayer as defined by Hoque, and  so  could  not
       succeed in  any  appeal  by  reference  to  paragraph  276B  of  the
       Immigration Rules. This was explicitly the  starting  point  for  Ms
       Brown.

   10. At the hearing neither representative was able to  explain  the  law
       relating  to  subsequent  valid  applications,  and  on  what  basis
       therefore the December 2019 application had cancelled out the  March
       2017 one, although both Mr Tufan and Ms Brown accepted that this was
       the normal Home Office practice. The law relating to this  issue  is
       in fact found in the Immigration Rules. Under paragraph  34BB(1)  of
       the Immigration Rules it is stated that an applicant may  only  have
       one outstanding application for leave to remain at a  time,  and  at
       paragraph 34BB(2) that an  application  submitted  in  circumstances
       where a previous application  for  leave  to  remain  has  not  been
       decided will be treated as a variation of the previous  application.
       This accords with what the claimant's legal representatives  say  in
       their cover letter (A1 of the respondents'  bundle)  and  also  with
       what the claimant says in his statement  (page  3  of  the  48  page
       bundle) about the matter: both say that  the  2017  application  was
       varied by the 2019 one. So whilst there  seems  to  have  been  some
       confusion by a caseworker at the Home Office  (in  their  letter  of
       15th January 2020 at page 6 of the 48 page bundle corrected in their
       letter of 24th January 2020 at page 12 of the 48 page bundle) I find
       that the application was varied and therefore expired on the  making
       of the valid application in December 2019. I find that this fact was
       known to the claimant who was legally represented by  solicitors  at
       the time he made his December 2019 application,  and  was  therefore
       what he and his legal representatives intended.

   11. The question that remains is whether what is said in the GCID  notes
       by  a  caseworker  for  the  Secretary  of  State  about  the   2017
       application being  grantable  on  the  basis  of  ten  years  lawful
       residence (which can only have been on the  basis  of  an  error  of
       understanding  or  the  exercise  of  residual  discretion  by   the
       Secretary of State as the claimant was not in a position to  acquire
       the necessary further lawful residence time to have ten years lawful
       residence as a result of his 2017 application on the  basis  of  the
       law as clarified in Hoque as he was an  open  ended  overstayer)  in
       September 2018 (see pages 55 -56 of the 94 page bundle) is a  factor
       which notwithstanding the abandonment of  that  application  by  the
       claimant in favour of one  made  in  December  2019  weighs  in  his
       favour. I find the submission to  be  essentially  that  it  appears
       unfair, particularly perhaps to a lay person, that if a decision had
       been made at that point in time in September 2018 that he would have
       been granted indefinite leave to  remain,  and  there  was  no  good
       reason why a decision was not made at that time  as  the  claimant's
       file had been put in a hold related to an "ETS questionable  marker"
       for an ETS interview but this was never pursued by the Secretary  of
       State. I find therefore that the submission is in  essence  that  to
       avoid the operation of the immigration  system  appearing  arbitrary
       some weight at least ought to be given in  favour  of  granting  the
       claimant that or at least some permission to remain now. I find that
       this is a factor that can be given some weight and that it  goes  to
       somewhat reduce the weight to be given to  the  public  interest  in
       maintaining immigration control  and  removing  the  claimant  as  a
       person who cannot fulfil the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

   12. What must be decided  now  is  whether  the  interference  with  the
       claimant's private life which removal represents  is  sufficient  to
       outweigh that somewhat reduced public interest in the maintenance of
       immigration control. I remind myself that only little weight can  be
       given to the claimant's private life ties with the UK as  they  have
       all been formed whilst  he  has  been  precariously  and  unlawfully
       present, applying s.117B(4) and (5) of the Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002. That his ability to speak English and financial
       self-sufficiency (as born out by his bank statements and job  offer)
       are neutral matters. I remind myself that there are  no  significant
       obstacles to relocation and no risk of harm for the claimant and his
       wife if they decide to live in Mauritius or Pakistan, as  these  are
       retained findings from the First-tier Tribunal. The  best  interests
       of their three year old child are a  primary  consideration,  but  I
       have no evidence which would lead  me  to  conclude  that  her  best
       interests go beyond being in the same country and in the care of her
       parents. Ultimately, weighing all  of  the  evidence,  although  the
       public interest in maintaining immigration control is reduced by the
       history of this matter as revealed in the GCID notes, I do not  find
       that the interference with the claimant's Article 8 ECHR rights that
       removal represents is disproportionate.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
      appeal on human rights grounds.

   3. I remake the appeal dismissing it on human rights grounds.




Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  4th August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


Annex A: Error of Law Decision:


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



     1. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 10th January 1985. He
        arrived in the UK on 16th July  2007  with  leave  to  enter  as  a
        student. On 26th December 2019 he applied for settlement under  the
        long residence provisions at  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
        Rules. This application  was  refused  in  a  decision  dated  15th
        January 2020. His appeal against the decision was allowed on  human
        rights  grounds  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  MR  Oliver  in  a
        determination promulgated on the 25th November 2020.

     2. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal JM Holmes on 14th December 2020 on the basis that  it  was
        arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law in  calculating
        whether the claimant had ten years continuous lawful residence,  as
        it was arguable the judge misunderstood the  caseworker  notes  and
        failed to apply the law as found by the Court of Appeal in Hoque  &
        Others v SSHD [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1357.  It  is  arguable  that  the
        claimant had a period of overstaying of more than 28  days  in  the
        period 2012 to 2015, and that there was a period of overstaying  of
        more than 28 days after the refusal  of  permission  to  appeal  in
        relation to the first application for indefinite leave to remain on
        16th March 2017 and thus the application which led to this refusal.



     3. The matter came before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had erred in law. In light of the need to take precautions
        against the spread of Covid-19 and with regard  to  the  overriding
        object set out in the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules  this  hearing
        took place via Skype for Business, a format to which neither  party
        raised objection. There were no significant issues of  connectivity
        or audibility during the hearing.

   Submissions - Error of Law

     4. Mr Tufan, for the Secretary of State,  argued  in  the  grounds  of
        appeal and in oral submissions that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
        erred in law in finding that the claimant  had  accrued  ten  years
        continuous lawful presence in the UK. Although subject access notes
        do record that the claimant had acquired ten years lawful residence
        that was not a concession and ultimately the claimant  was  refused
        as after anxious scrutiny it was concluded that this  was  not  the
        case. There is a lack of reasoning by the First-tier Tribunal as to
        how the claimant was continuously lawfully present  in  the  period
        2012 to 2015. The claimant succeeded in a limited way in his appeal
        on 28th July 2012 and as a result was granted 60  days  to  find  a
        further student sponsor, but he  failed  to  do  this  within  that
        period of time and only made a further application in  2015,  which
        in turn was ultimately unsuccessful. Further  the  claimant  became
        appeal rights exhausted on 16th March  2017  when  he  was  refused
        permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and had  another  period
        of 4 months overstaying from  this  time  up  until  the  ten  year
        anniversary of his entry on 16th July 2017.

     5. Ms Jones submitted for  the  claimant  that  there  was  sufficient
        reasoning in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  during
        the period July 2012 to March 2017 the  claimant  was  continuously
        lawful but she accepted that in accordance with the decision of the
        Court of Appeal in  Hoque & Others the claimant  was  not  lawfully
        present between 16th March 2017 and 16th July  2017  and  thus  the
        First-tier Tribunal erred in law in that decision. She  noted  that
        the appellants in Hoque & Others  had  applied  for  permission  to
        appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision of  the  Court  of
        Appeal, and asked that it be made clear that she  did  not  concede
        that the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  was  legally  correct,
        although she understood that the Upper Tribunal was bound  by  that
        decision.

     6. I indicated that I found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in
        law as it was agreed by the parties that  there  was  an  error  in
        failing to apply Hoque & Others to the period March 2017  and  July
        2017, and thus in failing to follow the decision of  the  Court  of
        Appeal and in finding that the claimant  was  lawfully  present  in
        this time, and as a result erroneously finding  that  the  claimant
        had ten years lawful presence in the UK. I therefore indicated that
        I would set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  allowing
        the appeal on this basis.

     7. I asked if the parties agreed  that  we  could  remake  the  appeal
        forthwith as there was no factual remaking to undertake. However Ms
        Jones said that she wanted to adjourn this hearing as she  believed
        that it was relevant that the Secretary of  State  had  delayed  in
        decision making as she had investigated whether  the  claimant  had
        committed deception by cheating in a TOEIC test,  and  although  it
        was agreed no allegation of TOEIC cheating  was  ever  put  to  the
        claimant she contended that this had some relevance to the remaking
        of the human rights appeal, and she  wished  to  draft  a  skeleton
        argument setting out her reasoning on this point.  As  the  hearing
        had been listed for an error of law hearing only I  agreed  to  the
        request although I could not understand the submission.

   Conclusions- Error of Law

     8. It is clear that the claimant had leave to remain as a student from
        16th July 2007 until 31st March 2009.

     9. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant made an application
        in time as he submitted his new application within 28 days  of  the
        expiry of his student leave on 31st March 2009, as this was done on
        15th April 2009, and because although the application  was  refused
        his appeal was  allowed  his  lawful  continuous  leave  to  remain
        continued  until  17th  August  2011.  The  claimant  made  a   new
        application on 14th August 2011, in time, which thus  extended  his
        leave again until the refusal of 21st March 2012.  This  leave  was
        extended under s.3C as the claimant successfully appealed again and
        was ultimately granted 60 days to find an alternative sponsor.

    10. The First-tier Tribunal found that the crucial period  to  consider
        was whether the claimant had leave to  remain  from  July  2012  to
        August 2015. The  immigration  history  of  the  claimant  is  very
        confusing in this time, however I find that the First-tier Tribunal
        has provided  sufficient  reasoning  and  not  made  an  irrational
        decision that the claimant was continuously lawfully present in the
        period 16th July 2007 to 16 March 2017. The immigration history  in
        the decision under  challenge  seems  to  indicate  that  when  the
        student application made in time in August 2011 was refused with  a
        right of appeal which was properly exercised  an  "application  was
        open for reconsideration", and the subject access notes set out  at
        paragraph 22 of the decision  indicate  that  this  reconsideration
        continued until August 2015, and so I find that it was open to  the
        First-tier Tribunal to conclude, as is done at paragraph 25 of  the
        decision, that the refusal of 17th June 2015 which was followed  by
        a series of in time appeals culminating in  the  claimant  becoming
        appeal rights exhausted on 16th March 2017, was to  be  seen  as  a
        period of continuous lawful residence.

    11. With respect to the period 16th March 2017 to 16th July  2017  (the
        final crucial period of 4 months up until the ten year  anniversary
        of the claimant's entry on 16th July 2017)  I find that the  First-
        tier Tribunal has erred in law however in finding that the claimant
        continued to be lawfully resident. The GCID  notes  conclude  three
        times that the claimant qualifies on the basis of 10  years  lawful
        residence, see the notes of 6th September 2018, 20th September 2018
        and 28th August 2019. It was entirely permissible  for  the  First-
        tier Tribunal to give weight to this evidence. However  the  First-
        tier Tribunal was obliged to apply the decision  of  the  Court  of
        Appeal in  Hoque  &  Others,  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
        clearly aware of and provided the parties an  opportunity  to  make
        post-hearing submissions upon, as it was determined within days  of
        the hearing as is set out at paragraphs 16 and 17 of the  decision,
        although ultimately neither assisted  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by
        doing so.

    12. I find that there was a  failure  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
        reason why it concluded that the period after 16th March  2017  was
        lawful when the next application was made on 29th March  2017,  and
        thus unequivocally when the claimant was an  overstayer,  his  s.3C
        leave having expired  on  16th  March  2017,  and  given  that  the
        judgement in Hoque & Others found that  the  period  of  ten  years
        lawful  residence  required  at  paragraph  276B(a)  could  not  be
        acquired  simply  by  making  a  further  application  following  a
        previous unsuccessful one after the expiry of  all  s.3C  leave  by
        virtue of this new application being made within the  grace  period
        of 14 days (provided  for  by  paragraph  39E  of  the  Immigration
        Rules). The facts of the appellants in Hoque & Others, i.e. that of
        open ended  rather  than  bookended  overstayers,  as  set  out  at
        paragraph 20 of the judgement, are materially entirely the same  as
        for this claimant. The judgement of the Court of  Appeal  is  clear
        that the fact of a  current  unsuccessful  application  being  made
        within 14 days of the previous expiry of s.3C leave does not enable
        the claimant to extend his lawful residence so as  to  acquire  ten
        years lawful residence and thus qualify under the Immigration Rules
        at paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

    13. I preserve all of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  bar  the
        finding that the claimant had been lawfully present in the UK for a
        continuous period of ten years and so was  entitled  to  settlement
        under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules.  This  is  replaced
        with a finding that the claimant was continuously lawfully  present
        for nine years and eight months from July 2007 to March 2017  only.
        There was  no  Rule  24  notice  or  cross-appeal  challenging  the
        legality of any of the other findings by the claimant so all  other
        findings stand.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
      appeal on human rights grounds.

   3. I adjourn the remaking of the appeal.

   Directions


     1. The claimant will file with the Upper Tribunal and serve on the
        Secretary of State a skeleton argument 10 days prior to the
        remaking hearing.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  13th April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

