
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01884/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 February 2020                            |On 26 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            Mr Shahzad Ahmed Mir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
Judge Nash ("the judge"), promulgated on 31 July 2019, by which she
dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 14
January 2019, refusing his human rights claim made on 20 September 2016.

The Appellant, a national of Pakistan born on 19 November 1982, had arrived
in the United Kingdom on 15 September 2006 and has remained in the United
Kingdom with leave.  Prior to the expiry of his final period of leave an in
time extension application was made and this application was subsequently
varied on the basis of his long residence in this country.  That varied
application was treated as a human rights claim by the Respondent.

In refusing that application, the Respondent relied upon earnings
discrepancies as between figures put forward to the Respondent in two
applications made in March 2012 and March 2013 respectively, and those put
forward to HMRC in the tax years 2010/2011 and 2012/2013.  The Respondent
concluded that the discrepancies were as a result of dishonesty on the
Appellant's part rather than merely carelessness.  In light of this
conclusion the Respondent applied paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules
and in turn concluded that the Appellant could not succeed under paragraph
276B or 276ADE of the Rules.  Article 8 was considered on a wider basis,
but it was concluded that the Appellant could not benefit from this.




The judge's decision and the grounds of appeal

In summary, the judge concluded that the Appellant had been dishonest in
respect of the earnings discrepancies.  In turn, she concluded that the
Appellant could not succeed under Article 8 with reference to any of the
Rules or otherwise.

Four grounds of appeal are put forward: first, that the judge had
misapplied the burden and standard of proof; second, that the judge failed
to consider the exercise of discretion for herself pursuant to paragraph
322(5) of the Rules; third, that the judge had erred in her consideration
of an expert medical report; fourth, that the judge had failed to address
the issue of the Appellant's risk of suicide in light of the medical
evidence.

Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 7
December 2019.



The hearing

At the hearing before me, Mr Malik relied on the four grounds.  In respect
of ground 1 and with reference to [26] of the judge's decision, he
submitted that there was a clear error, the judge having stated that the
burden of proof rested with the Appellant.  The last sentences of [33],
[34] and [39] all referred to an absence of evidence from the Appellant.
This supported the assertion that the judge had failed to apply the
appropriate three-stage approach to cases such as the present: that the
evidential burden rested with the Respondent; that if this was discharged,
it was for the Appellant to provide an explanation capable of belief; and
that if this was done, the legal burden rested with the Respondent to show
dishonesty.

Mr Malik submitted that in respect of ground 2 the judge was bound to have
considered the discretion on the issue under paragraph 322(5) of the Rules
because this was part and parcel of the assessment of whether the Appellant
could satisfy the Rules as a whole, which in turn went to the question of
whether he was able to succeed on Article 8 grounds.  Ground 3 was
predicated on the basis that the judge had been wrong to reject the report
of Dr Karim (a Consultant Psychiatrist) simply on the basis that it was
based upon an account provided by the Appellant.  Finally, in respect of
ground 4, the judge had simply failed to engage with the issue of the risk
of suicide despite the well-known case of J [2005] EWCA Civ 629, it having
been relied on.

Ms Isherwood submitted that there were no material errors in the judge's
decision when it was viewed holistically.  She submitted that [26] was a
standard paragraph and as a matter of substance the judge had approached
the issue of burden of proof correctly.  In respect of the medical
evidence, the judge had viewed this holistically, together with evidence
from the Appellant's GP.  [42] of the judge's decision contained other
reasons for rejecting that part of Dr Karim's report, not simply the fact
that it was based on the Appellant's own history.

In reply, Mr Malik urged me to be cautious in "reading in" reasons to the
judge's decision that were not there, particularly in relation to the
burden of proof issue.

At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision on the error of law issue.



Decision on error of law

I conclude that the judge has not materially erred in law.  I say this
having read the judge's decision holistically and acknowledging that there
are aspects of it which may have been expressed more clearly.  However, it
is not my task to seek perfection in a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
but to assess it sensibly and with an eye on substance over form.  I will
deal with the four grounds of appeal in turn.

Ground 1

At [26] the judge does clearly state that, "the burden is on the Appellant
and is on the balance of probabilities."  In the context to this case, that
was clearly wrong.  I turn to the substance of the judge's analysis and
reasoning to assess whether or not this misdirection was in reality on
account of a standard paragraph which had not been excised from the
decision rather than a material error in approach.

At [30] the judge refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673.  In the same paragraph, and with apparent
reference to that judgment, the judge states: "... there is no legal burden
on the Appellant to disprove dishonesty."  This statement is clearly
correct.  It is of some significance that it is contained in a paragraph
making reference to a relevant authority (albeit one concerning a judicial
review context rather than a statutory appeal).

In the next paragraph the judge goes on to state as follows: "I accordingly
go on to consider on the balance of probabilities whether the Appellant was
dishonest in relation to his tax affairs bearing in mind the very serious
consequences of such a finding, taken into account all the evidence before
me."  There is nothing legally objectionable in that.

At [44], having stated that a number of factors had been taken into account
together with an assessment of the evidence as a whole, the judge concludes
that: "I find on the balance of probabilities that the Appellant was able
to and did check his tax returns before they were filed and accordingly he
was dishonest either in his representations to the tax authorities or the
immigration authorities or both."

Taken together, the cumulative effect of these three references satisfies
me that the judge did in fact have in mind the correct location of the
legal burden of proof in this particular case, namely that it rested with
the Respondent.  Thus, the erroneous reference in [26] was, with respect,
careless on the judge's part but did not represent her substantive
consideration of the core issue in the case together with the evidence
pertaining thereto.  It is right that the judge did not state in terms that
the second stage of the three-stage approach is to determine whether the
individual had put forward an explanation capable of belief.  However,
reading the judge's decision holistically, I conclude that either she has
found that no such explanation was in fact offered up by the Appellant or
(and perhaps the better view) is that such an explanation was present but
that ultimately the Respondent has discharged the legal burden in light of
the applicable standard of proof.  For these reasons I reject ground 1.

Ground 2

I am not entirely convinced by Mr Malik's suggestion that a judge is bound
to consider the exercise of discretion under paragraph 322(5) in an appeal
in which dishonesty has been found.  The substitution of discretion is not
a matter that the First-tier Tribunal has a jurisdiction to consider
anymore.  However, he may be correct in the sense that the question forms
part and parcel of the question of whether an individual can satisfy the
Rules (in this case, there was no dispute that all other aspects of
paragraph 276B were met) because an ability to satisfy the Rules would be
highly relevant (if not determinative) of an Article 8 claim on appeal (see
for example TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109).  In any event, whilst the
judge did not specifically address this issue in her decision, there is
nothing of material relevance to the issue of discretion under paragraph
322(5) that she did not otherwise consider in respect of the wider Article
8 assessment (see [54] - [65] of the decision).

Further, the judge found, as she was entitled to, that in addition to the
two earnings discrepancies specifically relied on, the evidence indicated
that the Appellant had put forward a further earnings discrepancy for the
tax year 2011/2012, a fact that was described by the judge as representing
"a pattern" to the other discrepancies (see [36]).  Therefore, the failure
by the judge to specifically address the issue of discretion was not
material and I reject ground 2.

Ground 3

In a sense this linked to the first ground, as it goes to the issue of the
Appellant's explanation for the earnings discrepancies.  Mr Malik's
submission on the judge's treatment of the report of Dr Karim was, to a
limited extent, right in principle.  The fact that a suitably qualified
expert takes a history from an individual (in other words, that there is
self-reporting) is not usually in and of itself sufficient to justify a
rejection of the expert's opinion.  Having said that, it is of course for
the fact-finding tribunal to reach an overall assessment of the reliability
of an individual's account.

With reference to [40], the judge was entitled to take into account the
fact that the Appellant had not reported mental health problems to his GP
in the United Kingdom until 2017, notwithstanding some evidence that there
had been prescriptions relevant to mental health problems made in Pakistan
in 2010, 2012 and 2013.  The judge was entitled to take account of the
absence of a letter from a Pakistani doctor which had apparently been seen
by Dr Karim when preparing his report.

With respect to [42], the judge was not rejecting Dr Karim's evidence out
of hand solely on the basis that it was predicated upon an account provided
by the Appellant.  She had already taken account of other matters (see
above) and was also entitled to take account of what was said in the GP
records and the fact that at the material time the Appellant had been
working and earning a good income.  In addition, the judge was entitled to
rely on the fact that Dr Karim had not been the treating clinician for the
Appellant at the material time (these being the years relating to the
relevant tax returns).  There is no error in respect of ground 3.

Ground 4

It is very unclear as to whether the Article 3/suicide issue was in fact
argued before the judge.  [13] does not indicate any specific reliance
having been placed on it.  However, [22(iv)] and (vi) do make reference
both to a risk of suicide and the case of J.  J is referred to once again
in [60], although the judge states in terms that there was no Article 3
claim before her.  I am not satisfied that the Article 3/suicide claim was
properly put to the judge as a discrete issue.

However, even if I was wrong about that, the judge clearly had the issue in
mind and had been referred to the leading case on the issue.  At [59] she
found that there was insufficient evidence that the Appellant would be
unable to access relevant medical treatment in Pakistan.  She rejected Dr
Karim's assertion that there would be no such treatment available on the
sustainable basis that he had not practised as a psychiatrist in Pakistan
since 2000 and his opinion on the facilities in that country could not
carry relevant weight.  In light of the unchallenged conclusion on the
potential availability of relevant treatment in Pakistan and the high
threshold in suicide cases (as recently re-emphasised in AXB (Article 3
health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019] UKUT 00397 (IAC)) the judge's
failure to have addressed this issue in greater detail was immaterial.  The
Appellant could not have succeeded on this basis.  There is no material
error in respect of ground 4.

In light of the foregoing, the judge's decision contains no material errors
of law, the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed and
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain material errors  of
law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   [pic]         Date: 11 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



