
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01092/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2019                          |On 25th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   joy [o]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  5th  May  1950.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history dating back to 26th June
    2009 when she arrived in the UK on a valid visit visa.  The  appeal  in
    question follows an application lodged on 1st February  2016  when  the
    Appellant made a human rights claim for leave to remain in  the  UK  on
    the basis of her private life.  That application was refused by  Notice
    of Refusal dated 6th December 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Keith sitting at Taylor House on 9th  July  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  23rd  July  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on 2nd August 2018.
     Those grounds contended:-

    (1)   That  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   had   failed   to   give
         consideration to the psychiatric medical report of Dr Mohamed  when
         reaching the decision to dismiss the appeal.

    (2)  That the judge had failed to give  consideration  to  the  witness
         statement of the Appellant's daughter Miss [LA].

    (3)  That the judge had made findings of fact which were insurmountable
         upon the information before him.

 4.  On  12th  October  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer   refused
    permission to appeal.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were  lodged  on  25th
    October  2018.   Those  grounds  are  identical  to  those  that   were
    originally submitted.

 5. On 2nd January 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Grubb considered that it was arguable that the judge had
    erred in law by failing to take into account,  on  the  basis  that  no
    reference was made to it, a psychiatric  report  from  Dr  Mahmood  and
    written evidence from the Appellant's daughter in the UK.  Judge  Grubb
    considered that Ground 3 had less merits standing  alone  and  that  he
    would have been hesitant in granting permission on it but  nevertheless
    did so as it was part of the overall issue raised in the grounds as  to
    whether the judge had properly considered all the evidence in  reaching
    his adverse findings.

 6. On 1st February 2019 the Secretary of State lodged a Rule  24  response
    to the Grounds of Appeal.  It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes
    before me to determine whether or not there is a material error of  law
    in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Georget.  The Secretary  of  State
    appears by his Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Melvin.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Georget starts by commenting that it is accepted by the Secretary of
    State that there is no specific reference to the  psychiatric  evidence
    of Dr Mahmood and submits that the question  thereafter  arises  as  to
    whether that omission per se is material.  He submits that it  is.   He
    comments that the judge has dealt extensively with  the  other  medical
    evidence at paragraphs 29 to 32 but that  Dr  Mohamed's  report  is  of
    vital evidence on the basis that he reports on the Appellant's reliance
    on her family and the  impact  that  this  has  on  her  recovery.   He
    acknowledges that had the Appellant been a fit healthy person  that  he
    might have difficulty in  making  the  submissions  that  he  does  but
    contends that this case is fact specific and refers to the  Appellant's
    previous  physical  and  mental  history  pointing  out  that  she  has
    previously been vulnerable and targeted by kidnappers in  Nigeria.   He
    submits that the family over here provide support and  that  the  judge
    should have found that it was disproportionate to remove her  from  the
    UK.  He specifically asked me to give due consideration  to  paragraphs
    26, 29 and 30 of the judge's decision and he  takes  me  to  them.   He
    points out that therein in particular at  paragraph  30,  reference  is
    made in detail to the report of Dr  Duggal  and  as  to  the  medicines
    prescribed to the Appellant.

 8. He submits that the judge has not considered the report of  Dr  Mohamed
    and as a result understates her difficulties and her need  for  support
    and dependency.  He submits that this becomes  relevant  when  findings
    are made that there is no family life beyond normal emotional ties.

 9. He addresses briefly the other aspects.  In particular he refers to the
    witness statement provided by the Appellant's daughter and ask  that  I
    read this carefully.  He  sets  out  that  the  judge  thereafter  gave
    consideration to  whether  or  not  networks  would  or  would  not  be
    available to the Appellant in Nigeria and the judge  found  that  there
    was a network available but he submits that that  does  not  take  into
    account properly the evidence of the Appellant's daughter  in  the  UK.
    Overall, he submits that the judge has failed to provide  full  anxious
    scrutiny to the issues herein and he asks me to  find  that  there  are
    material errors of law and to remit the matter back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

10. Mr Melvin's response is to  take  me  as  his  starting  point  to  his
    detailed Rule 24 response and submits that  the  judge  considered  the
    medical evidence submitted for  the  hearing  and  that  it  was  noted
    specifically at paragraph 26 of the determination that the judge states
    that he has "considered all of the evidence presented to me, whether  I
    refer to it specifically or not."  Thereafter the judge  considers  the
    medical  evidence  from  paragraphs  29  to  34  of  the  determination
    addressing the June 2018 report from Sandmere Medical Practice and  the
    report of Dr Duggal.  The judge also makes reference to the orthopaedic
    report of Mr Bansal.  The judge he submits concludes that with  support
    from the family in the UK and  the  country  information  showing  that
    medical facilities  are  available  in  Nigeria  then  the  Appellant's
    medical needs to be catered for in her home country  can  be  provided.
    He submits that the medical evidence has  been  properly  assessed  and
    that the judge has given due diligence to his analysis.

11. Further Mr Melvin points out that the report allegedly  not  considered
    is one that is now some two and a half to three years old and  it  does
    not take the issues any further.  He submits that even  if  it  is  not
    specifically referred to any failure to do so is not material.

12. So far as the evidence of the Sponsor  is  concerned  he  takes  me  to
    paragraph 19 of the decision pointing out that the judge therein  notes
    the evidence that is given by Miss [A] and that it is clear he  submits
    that this is an Appellant who prefers to live in the UK  and  that  the
    judge was perfectly  entitled  to  make  findings  that  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances.  He reminds me that there was  a  four  year
    gap for the Appellant living in Nigeria after the death of her  husband
    prior to her coming to the UK  and  that  she  had  been  supported  by
    different relatives out there and the concerns expressed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge were ones that the  judge  was  entitled  to  make.
    Finally, he contends that the third ground is misleading  in  that  the
    judge at page 28 had made adverse inferences in the evidence of  events
    between 2005 and 2009 when the Sponsor's evidence revealed  that  other
    family members had been supporting her during that period and would  be
    able to support her again on her return.  He takes me to paragraphs  32
    and 33 of the decision pointing out that the judge's  findings  therein
    were ones that the judge was entitled to make.  He  asked  me  to  find
    that there are no material errors of law and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. The first thrust made by the Appellant's legal representatives  relates
    to the specific failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to  make
    reference to the report of Mr Mohamed.   I  accept  that  there  is  no
    direct reference to that report.  However, I do not find that creates a
    material error of law.  The failure to make specific reference  has  to
    be looked at in context.  Firstly, at paragraph 26 the judge  has  made
    it absolutely clear that he has looked at all the evidence  whether  he
    refers to it specifically  in  these  findings  or  not.   Secondly  at
    paragraph 29 he states,

         "I considered the medical evidence with which I was provided."

    He then proceeds to give a very detailed  analysis  of  all  the  other
    medical evidence.  I accept that he does not  specifically  mention  Mr
    Mohamed's report but I agree with  the  view  expressed  by  Mr  Melvin
    firstly, that whilst it is some two and a  half  to  three  years  old,
    nothing  has  subsequently  changed  and  secondly  the  other  medical
    evidence adequately addresses the current position  of  the  Appellant.
    The report of Mr Mohamed does not add a great deal to this  appeal  and
    certainly does not in my view constitute a material  error  in  law  by
    failing to make reference to it.

16. This is a judge  who  has  given  detailed  findings  in  reaching  his
    conclusions.  Again, whilst he has not made reference  to  the  witness
    statement of the Appellant's daughter he  has  considered  the  witness
    evidence that was before him in detail and has made  findings  that  he
    was entitled to.  As Mr Melvin has submitted in his Rule 24 response it
    is unclear if the Appellant's daughter was called to give  evidence  or
    even if she attended the hearing and importantly that witness statement
    gives very little insight into what happened in  Nigeria  in  the  four
    years between the Appellant's husband's death  and  her  arrival  on  a
    visit visa or as to why the Appellant is dependent upon  beyond  normal
    emotional ties.

17. For all the above reasons I do not find any failure to  make  reference
    to it could in any way be considered material.  The important  fact  is
    that the judge has considered the evidence and  has  made  findings  at
    paragraph 34 that the Appellant's close family relationships in the  UK
    do not  extend  beyond  normal  emotional  ties.   These  are  reasoned
    conclusions and ones the judge was entitled to make.

18. As Mr Melvin submits looking at this appeal holistically and given  the
    offer of support from the UK, I agree  with  the  submission  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  clearly  sustainable  in
    law.  This is a judge who has  carried  out  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
    facts, looked at the evidence  that  was  before  him  and  made  clear
    findings which are sustainable.  Even if as I have stated  above  there
    is no specific reference to Mr Mohamed's report, it is clear  that  the
    judge has had note of all the evidence that was before him in  reaching
    his conclusion.   In  such  circumstances  the  decision  discloses  no
    material error of law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
