
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU013782015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28th July 2017                        |On 10th August 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                            MOHAMMAD JAHED HOSSAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen, Paul John & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The is the Respondent's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain, promulgated on 5th October 2016,  in  which
    he allowed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  to
    refuse to grant leave to remain on the basis of the Appellant's  family
    life in the UK.  The Respondent's decision was dated 25th June 2015.

 2. The Respondent has sought to  appeal  against  that  decision  for  the
    reasons set out within both the original and  the  renewed  Grounds  of
    Appeal, which I have fully taken account of in  reaching  my  decision.
    These are a matter of record and are therefore not  repeated  in  their
    entirety here. However, in summary it is argued that the judge erred in
    allowing the appeal  with  consideration  to  paragraph  EX.1.  of  the
    Immigration Rules, in respect of whether there would be  insurmountable
    obstacles to  family  life  with  the  Appellant's  partner  continuing
    outside of the United Kingdom.  It is  said  that  the  judge  had  not
    addressed the then Court of Appeal decision of Agyarko  and  Others,  R
    (on the application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440 as to the meaning of insurmountable obstacles,  and
    the fact that the Court of Appeal  at  paragraph  25  of  the  judgment
    stated that the mere fact that Mr Benette in that  case  is  a  British
    citizen, had lived all his life in the United Kingdom  and  had  a  job
    here and hence might find  it  difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to
    relocate to Ghana and continue  their  family  life  there,  could  not
    constitute insurmountable obstacles to so.

 3. It is argued that the judge  treated  inconveniences  and  difficulties
    such as employment and  reluctance  as  being  determinative.   It  was
    further argued that the judge found that there was a very high risk  of
    terrorism  in  Bangladesh  at  [32],  but  it  said  that  the  current
    international threat of terrorism level in the UK is severe. It is also
    argued that the Sponsor herself has two siblings in the  UK  who  could
    help look after her parents, with the aid of Social  Security  help  if
    needed.

 4. It was said that there is no engagement by  the  judge  as  to  whether
    exceptional circumstances for the Appellant not to seek entry clearance
    from abroad following the case of R (on  the  application  of  Chen)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Appendix  FM  Chikwamba  -
    temporary separation - proportionality) (IJR) [2015] UKUT 00189.

 5. Within the renewed Grounds of Appeal reference is  made  again  to  the
    case of Agyarko and again it is contended  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly  take  account  of  that  case  in  finding  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles in this case.

 6.  Permission to appeal was originally  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly on 2nd May 2017, but was then subsequently granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Gleeson on 19th June 2017 who found it was arguable that
    the First-tier Tribunal did not properly address the  Court  of  Appeal
    case of Agyarko and the guidance given therein on  what  she  said  may
    well have been considered to be very similar to facts to  this  appeal.
    In the Supreme Court decision in Agyarko and Ikugu v Secretary of State
    for the Department [2017] UKSC 11 the Court upheld the Court of  Appeal
    decision.

 7. I have also considered and fully taken account of the  Claimant's  Rule
    24 reply in this case prepared by Ms Allen in which  she  sets  out  in
    some detail what she says the differences are between  the  Appellant's
    case and Sponsor's case in this appeal and the decision in Agyarko.   I
    am also grateful to the  submissions  from  both  the  representatives,
    which I have fully take account of and which are fully recorded  within
    the Record of Proceedings.

 8. Having carefully considered the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chamberlain  it  is  clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   at
    paragraphs 12 and 13 properly set  out  the  criteria  under  paragraph
    EX.1. and the definition of insurmountable obstacles at paragraph EX.2.
    that had to be met by the Appellant and the partner in terms  of  there
    being very significant difficulties to  them  continuing  their  family
    life together outside of the UK and which  could  not  be  overcome  or
    would entail very serious hardship for the Applicant or her partner.

 9. I find that the  judge  has  addressed  that  issue  and  given  clear,
    adequate and sufficient findings for it.

10. Although it was suggested by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  that  the
    decision in this case is very similar to the decision in  the  case  of
    Agyarko in which both the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court refused
    to interfere with the consideration, in that  case  it  was  said  that
    there would not be very significant obstacles.

11. The factors in Agyarko were set out in  paragraph  21  of  the  Supreme
    Court decision, in which it was noted  that  Mrs  Agyarko's  case  fell
    outside the Rules and that her case was that she was a British  citizen
    who was settled in the UK and had developed strong social ties  in  the
    UK and that her family ties in  Ghana  had  been  weakened  by  a  long
    absence and most of her friends had moved abroad.  In that case it  was
    said that there would be consideration given to the separation from her
    husband in delaying obtaining entry clearance.

12. It is noted within the Supreme Court  decision  at  paragraph  23  that
    within the refusal notice it  is  said  that  she  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a British  partner.   The  question  there
    that was considered by the Supreme Court, and by the  Court  of  Appeal
    previously, was as stated at  paragraph  25  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Agyarko that the  mere  fact  that  someone  is  a  British
    citizen, and lived all his life in the United Kingdom  and  has  a  job
    here, hence might find it difficult and might be reluctant to  relocate
    and continue life abroad, could not constitute insurmountable obstacles
    to his doing so.

13. The linked case that was considered by the Supreme Court in Ikugu was a
    case where the Appellant was going for fertility  treatment  and  there
    was consideration given to that and the husband's employment, but again
    those were not found to match insurmountable obstacles.

14. But the point in Agyarko was in terms of the  Court  of  Appeal  making
    clear that just being a British citizen and living all your life in the
    UK and having a job here does not in itself  amount  to  insurmountable
    obstacles.  However, as Ms Allen properly points out  within  both  the
    Rule 24 reply and in all the submissions today the  position  found  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain  in  this  case  was  actually
    somewhat different.

15. Judge Chamberlain, when considering whether or not there will  be  very
    significant difficulties faced by the Sponsor in continuing her  family
    life with the Appellant outside the UK, which  cannot  be  overcome  or
    would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the  Applicant  or  for  the
    partner, made specific findings at paragraphs 17 through  to  paragraph
    21 in terms of the particular difficulties that the Sponsor would  face
    in this particular case in terms of actually  residing  in  Bangladesh.
    For example at paragraph 17, he referred to  the  Operational  Guidance
    Notes from the Respondent and the Country Information and  Guidance  in
    Bangladesh and particularly the Country  Information  and  Guidance  on
    Women from December 2014.

16. He found at paragraph 18 that at paragraph 2.4.5  on  page  43  of  the
    Respondent's  own  guidance  it  was  stated  that  the  government  in
    Bangladesh is permitted to require foreigners to reside  in  particular
    places and to impose 'any restrictions' on their movements and that  at
    paragraph 2.4.1 the restriction on freedom of movements  for  women  is
    said to be usually to restrict them to the vicinity of their homes  and
    local neighbourhoods.  The Judge  went  on  to  note  that  the  report
    further stated that the Islamic practice of purdah  may  further  limit
    their participation in activities outside the home, such as  education,
    employment and social engagements.

17. At paragraph 19 the Judge further quoted from the  Country  Information
    and Guidance from the Home Office at paragraph 2.4.2  which  said  that
    "many  women  in  Bangladesh  face  multiple  intersecting   forms   of
    discrimination.   Women's  enjoyment  of  human  rights  is   generally
    impacted by the  social  and  cultural  constructions  of  gender.   In
    Bangladesh women's roles and status are marked by duties as  homemakers
    and more specifically as mothers.  These stereotypes place  them  in  a
    disadvantage and prevent women from fully enjoying their rights".

18. At paragraph 20 the Judge referred to how within the  guidance  it  was
    said that traditionally women are often discouraged from  participating
    in public life and were mainly recognised for their  reproductive  role
    and that in the case of employment the employers  in  Bangladesh  still
    tend to employ men rather than women.

19. At Paragraph 21 the Judge went  on  to  refer  to  the  problems  which
    couples may face in terms of inter-religious marriage in Bangladesh and
    how, particularly when the couple  was  not  economically  independent,
    that may put them in a precarious position  because  of  the  religious
    disapproval of such a marriage.

20. The Judge found that Mrs Hossan herself had lived in the UK all of  her
    life and had no connection with Bangladesh apart from the  relationship
    with the Appellant and that she did not speak  Bengali  and  had  never
    been to Bangladesh.  He also took account of the fact that  she  had  a
    mother who  was  suffering  from  severe  mental  health  and  dementia
    problems at paragraph 23.

21. But in terms of the findings at paragraph 30 the judge went on to  find
    that if she were to move to a country which she has  limited  knowledge
    and to which she has  not  been  and  where  she  does  not  speak  the
    language, where it is said to be very  culturally  different  from  the
    United Kingdom, with very different views  on  the  role  of  women  in
    society, as was evidenced by the Respondent's own  guidance,  he  found
    that she would face very significant difficulties  which  would  entail
    serious hardship for her in Bangladesh  in  terms  of  the  significant
    restrictions in her rights and freedoms.  He found that  she  would  be
    severely restricted in her ability to go  out  and  about  without  her
    husband and that she would be unlikely to secure employment, let  alone
    in her chosen field, given the attitude towards women  and  employment.
    She  would  be,  he  found,  entirely  reliant   upon   the   Appellant
    financially.

22.  Although the judge has not specifically mentioned the case of  Agyarko
    the judge is not required to specifically mention every single possible
    case that may apply providing they have applied properly the principles
    set out within the relevant cases.

23. Judge Chamberlain in this case found that it was not simply a  fact  of
    the Sponsor was a British citizen,  but  he  actually  had  given  very
    clear, adequate and sufficient reasons which were open to  him  on  the
    evidence, to find that she will be severely restricted in  her  ability
    to find employment and to go out without her husband within Bangladesh,
    which would be a restriction on her rights and ability to  move  around
    freely.  Judge Chamberlain clearly considered that  was  a  significant
    restriction on her right to a private and family  life  and  that  that
    would be a very  significant  difficulty  which  either  could  not  be
    overcome or would entail very serious hardship for  the  Applicant  and
    their partner.  Given the fact that they are the cultural  difficulties
    that the Sponsor as a female who has had a career in the UK would  face
    in Bangladesh, I find that those were findings open to the judge on the
    particular facts of this case in light of the  findings  that  he  made
    regarding the difficulties that she  would  face  as  a  woman  in  the
    specific circumstances in Bangladesh, not simply as a  British  citizen
    never having lived abroad.

24. In respect of the other Ground of Appeal which was mentioned within the
    original Grounds of Appeal that the Judge had not engaged with  whether
    there were any exceptional circumstances for the Appellant not to  seek
    entry clearance from Bangladesh, as has been properly  conceded  by  Mr
    Tarlow, that was not actually part of  the  original  decision,  nor  a
    factor  raised  before  the   original   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge.
    Therefore, it was not a matter that the Judge was required to consider.
     It cannot be an error of law for the Judge not to deal with  something
    which is not in dispute before him and which did not form part  of  the
    Respondent's case.

25. Therefore,  having  considered  all  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the
    submissions, both in the original and the renewed  grounds,  I  do  not
    consider that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain
    does contain a material error of law, although other  judges  may  have
    found differently on the facts, it was a finding which was open to  him
    on the facts that he  found.   I  therefore  dismiss  the  Respondent's
    appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 5th August 2017

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
