
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01141/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ABU DHABI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  BELAL [H]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, instructed by OTS Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Egypt  born
    on 18 March 1994 who applied under paragraph 352D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules for entry clearance to join  his  father  who  had  been  granted
    asylum in the UK.

 2. The application was refused  because  the  claimant  was  over  18  and
    paragraph 352D(ii) stipulates that an applicant  under  this  route  to
    entry clearance must be under 18. The claimant appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 20 May 2016,  Judge  Callow
    allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration  Rules.
    The appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of State") now  appeals  that
    decision.

Factual background

 3. Judge Callow made the following findings of fact:

      a. On 19  September  2014  the  claimant's  father,  who  had  been  a
         supporter of former president of Egypt Mohamed Morsi,  was  granted
         asylum in the UK.

      b. On 14 February 2015 the claimant's mother and younger sister joined
         his father in the UK, having been  granted  entry  clearance  under
         paragraphs 352A and 352D of the Immigration Rules.  The  claimant's
         sister who made a successful application under paragraph  352D  was
         under 18.

      c. The claimant is a student at Alexandra University who continues  to
         live in the family home. His older sister, who  is  married,  lives
         nearby. His father supports him financially.

 4. The claimant claims that his family home has been attacked  on  several
    occasions, most recently in January 2015, and that  he  fears  for  his
    safety. He claims the police are looking for him and as a result he has
    to stay in different locations, creating a very difficult and stressful
    location. The judge did not accept this evidence, describing it  as  an
    exaggeration. He stated at paragraph 12  that  "if  the  appellant  was
    genuinely of interest to the police they  would  have  located  him  at
    university or by way of enquiry of his married sister who lives in  the
    next door flat".

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. As the claimant, because of his age, could not meet the requirements of
    paragraph 352D, the judge considered the appeal outside the Rules under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 6. He found that there is family life, within the meaning of Article 8(1),
    between the claimant and his family in the UK on  the  basis  that  the
    claimant is a young adult who has not established an independent  life,
    who lives in his parents' home  and  is  economically  and  emotionally
    dependent on them.

 7. Having found Article  8  was  engaged,  the  judge  considered  whether
    refusing the claimant's application would be disproportionate and found
    that it would. The judge's reasoning for so finding is not clear, but a
    review of the decision as a whole indicates  that  the  judge  attached
    weight to the fact that the claimant's mother and sister  were  granted
    entry clearance and that as a  victim  of  persecution  the  claimant's
    father would be unable to return to Egypt.  He  considered  that  these
    factors were sufficient to outweigh the  public  policy  considerations
    under section 117B of the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act  2002
    ("the 2002 Act"). The judge also argued that the  underlying  principle
    of the Rules addressing family  members  "is  one  of  unification  not
    division" and the weight to be accorded to  "financial  impact  on  the
    public purse is diminished bearing in mind that under the  Rules  there
    are no maintenance and integration requirements for family reunion".

Grounds of appeal and submissions

 8. Mr Norton, relying on the grounds, argued  that  the  judge  failed  to
    identify compelling or exceptional circumstances to  allow  the  appeal
    outside the Rules.

 9. Ms Shaw argued that the  judge  adopted  the  correct  approach  to  an
    Article 8 assessment. Consideration was given to the factors stipulated
    in Section 117B of the 2002 Act. She  maintained  that  the  judge  had
    properly analysed the Rules concerning family reunification  and  found
    that there is no provision for an adult child of a refugee  even  where
    there is family life.

10. In a response to a direct question from me about whether there  are  in
    fact compelling circumstances, Ms Shaw referred to the  claimed  danger
    faced by the claimant and his need to hide from the police.

11. Ms Shaw referred to Home Office Guidance on Family reunion for refugees
    dated 29 July 2016 and cited  the  example  therein,  at  page  20,  of
    circumstances that may lead to a grant of leave outside the Rules.  The
    example she referred to is of an applicant who cannot qualify  to  join
    his parents because he is over  18  where  (a)  his  immediate  family,
    including siblings under 18, qualify for family reunion and are in  (or
    are coming to) the UK; (b) he would be left alone in a conflict zone or
    dangerous situation; (c) he is dependent on  immediate  family  in  the
    country of origin and is not leading an independent life; and (d) there
    are no other relatives to turn to and he would therefore have no  means
    of support and would likely become destitute on his own.

Consideration

12. The Court of Appeal has made clear that where someone applying to enter
    the UK is unable to succeed under the Rules, in order to prevail  under
    Article  8  outside  the  Rules  they   must   show   that   compelling
    circumstances exist which are not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Rules. See SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

13. Ms Shaw argued that the difficult and dangerous circumstances faced  by
    the claimant, when mean that he is unable to stay in  his  family  home
    and is effectively in hiding, give rise  to  compelling  circumstances.
    She referred to the Secretary of State's Family Reunion Guidance  which
    refers to people left without relatives or financial support  that  are
    in a conflict zone or dangerous situation.

14. The judge's findings of fact, however, do not characterise the claimant
    as being someone in danger who is without financial or family  support.
    On the contrary, the judge's findings are that the claimant  is  living
    in his family home which is  near  to  his  sister,  that  he  receives
    financial support from his parents  in  the  UK  and  that  he  attends
    University. The claim that he is in  danger  and  of  interest  to  the
    police was not accepted by the judge.

15. Absent from the decision is any consideration  of  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances that would warrant allowing the appeal outside
    the Rules. This is an error of law. The error is material as there  was
    nothing in the factual matrix as found by the judge that could  justify
    the conclusion that there were, in fact, compelling circumstances.

16. Ms Shaw advised that new evidence has recently been  obtained  that  is
    relevant to the risk faced by the claimant in Egypt. Both parties  were
    of the view that I should not proceed to remake the  decision  as  this
    new evidence, which includes statements from friends of  the  claimant,
    would need to be given consideration (and the Secretary of State  would
    need sufficient time to analyse it).

17. Having regard to Section 7.2(b) of the President's Practice  Statement,
    I consider that this  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. In  order  for  the  appeal  to  be  remade,  the  claimant's
    circumstances in Egypt, including (but not limited to)  the  danger  he
    faces and support he receives from his sister, will  require  extensive
    judicial fact finding, and therefore the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the
    appropriate forum.



Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside in its  entirety  and  the  appeal
    heard afresh.

19. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a judge other than First tier Tribunal Judge Callow.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 6 November 2016               |

