
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01524/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 18 April 2018                      |On: 19 April 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Karim, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant in this determination identified as MS.

 1. I have made an anonymity order because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    circumstances of the two children of the respondent ('MS').  His  step-
    child was born in 2011 and his biological child was born in 2016.  They
    are both British citizens and reside with their mother  and  MS,  as  a
    family unit.  MS married their mother in a  religious  ceremony  on  31
    July 2015, when he had leave to remain as a student, and this  marriage
    was registered on 21 January 2017.

Immigration history

 2. MS entered the United Kingdom ('UK') in 2010 as a student.  He remained
    as a student lawfully until a further application to extend  his  leave
    was refused on 25 January 2016.  However, as the letter refusing  leave
    makes clear, he continued to benefit from leave until 4 June  2016.  On
    25 May 2016 he applied (in time) for leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    his family life.  This was refused in a decision dated 9 January 2017.

Appeal proceedings

 3. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dated 24 August 2017 in which it allowed MS's  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision  turned  upon  a
    single issue, which rests on the application of section 117B(6), of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act') - whether
    or not it would be reasonable to expect the British citizen children to
    leave the United Kingdom ('UK').

 4. The SSHD was granted permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hodkinson in a decision dated 13 February 2018,  on  a  limited  basis.
    Judge Hodgkinson observed that it to be arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning is inadequate in relation to the  section  117B(6)
    question, "it being confined to [45] of [the]  decision".   The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not grant permission to rely upon the ground alleging
    that the reasoning on the use  of  deception  on  the  part  of  MS  is
    inadequate.  There has been no application to renew the application for
    permission regarding the ground of appeal dealing with deception before
    the Upper Tribunal, and Ms  Aboni  confirmed  that  it  was  not  being
    pursued.  I therefore need say no more about it.

Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me, Ms Aboni relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal
    and submitted that the reasoning in relation  to  the  section  117B(6)
    question is simply inadequate.  She invited me to find that there was a
    failure to consider the Immigration Rules, a failure to consider why MS
    should not be expected to  obtain  entry  clearance  and  no  balancing
    exercise.


 6. Mr Karim submitted that the decision was adequately reasoned, when read
    as a whole.  He directed me  to  the  wording  of  section  117B(6)  to
    support the submission that the question was whether  the  child  could
    reasonably be expected to reside in Pakistan and  the  issue  of  entry
    clearance therefore did not arise.  He also  relied  upon  EX1  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and submitted that on  the  findings  of  fact,  the
    appeal was  bound  to  succeed.   Ms  Aboni  did  not  reply  to  these
    submissions.


 7. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Legal framework


 8. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act states:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child; and


         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom."

 9. Both parties accepted that the correct approach to  the  reasonableness
    test in section 117B(6) is set out in MA (Pakistan) V SSHD [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705 (7 July 2016), as recently applied in MT and ET  (child's  best
    interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088(IAC) at [27]  to
    [34].  In MA the Court of Appeal somewhat  reluctantly  found  at  [45]
    that the correct approach is not to consider  reasonableness  from  the
    child's perspective alone but to consider this together  with  all  the
    relevant public interest considerations.

Error of law discussion

10. I do not accept the submission that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
    balance the relevant public interest and countervailing  considerations
    when assessing reasonableness for the purposes of section 117B(6).  The
    decision must be read as a whole.  When it is, the First-tier Tribunal:


              i)  properly  directed   itself   to   the   public   interest
                 considerations at  [32] to [34];
             ii) made clear findings of fact to support the conclusion  that
                 MS had not used deception at [40] to [43];
            iii) noted that the substantive requirements of the  Immigration
                 Rules could not be met at [45];
             iv) properly attached, in accordance with MA Pakistan  and  the
                 SSHD's  applicable  policy,  significant  weight   to   the
                 children's British citizenship;
              v) found that the  best  interests  of  the  children  clearly
                 required them to remain in the UK;
             vi) concluded at  [46]  that  "in  all  the  circumstances"  MS
                 satisfies section 117B(6);
            vii)  and  in  any  event,  also  concluded   that   the   grave
                 interference   with   MS's    family    life    would    be
                 disproportionate in all the  circumstances,  including  the
                 absence of any deception in earlier applications.


11. The decision  could  have  been  more  detailed  and  weighed  up  MS's
    immigration history, and  the  option  open  to  him  to  obtain  entry
    clearance as a spouse, in more comprehensive terms.  However, given the
    finding that there was no deception, there  were  no  "strong  reasons"
    militating against leave, and  the  SSHD's  own  policy  supported  the
    decision reached.  The nature and extent of the reasons  provided  must
    be seen in that light.  Indeed, Ms Aboni did not submit that there were
    any such "strong reasons", and acknowledged that MS has remained in the
    UK lawfully, first as a student and then  whilst  pursuing  an  in-time
    application based on family life and his statutory appeal rights.

12. When the decision is read as  a  whole,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    adequately reasoned its decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and is not set aside.



Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 19 April 2018
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
