
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01719/2020 (V)
                                                               HU/01716/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video means)  |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 19th July 2021                             |On 19th August 2021          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                Manpreet kaur
                                mandeep singh
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Malik of Counsel, instructed by Connaught Law
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using  Teams.  There
    were no audio or visual difficulties during the course of the  hearing.
    A face to face hearing was not held to  take  precautions  against  the
    spread of Covid-19 and as all issues  could  be  determined  by  remote
    means.  The file contained all of the papers in hard copy.

 2. The Appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Dineen promulgated on 7 February 2021, in which the
    Appellants' appeals against the decision to refuse their  human  rights
    claims dated 15 and 16 January 2020 were dismissed.

 3. The Appellants are  nationals  of  India,  born  respectively  on  26th
    November 1986 and 7 April 1987.  The Appellants are husband  and  wife,
    the Second Appellant's appeal being entirely dependent on  the  outcome
    of the First Appellant's appeal.

 4. The First Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 11 December 2010 with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) student with leave to  remain  to
    28 February 2013; extended to 11 July 2016.  The Second  Appellant  was
    granted leave in line  as  a  dependent.   On  2  September  2014,  the
    Appellants were served with notice that they  were  liable  to  removal
    from the United Kingdom on the basis that the First Appellant had  used
    deception in relying on a  false  English  language  test  certificate.
    That decision carried with it an out of country right of  appeal  which
    was not exercised (an attempt to appeal in country was struck out).  On
    19  September  2014,  the  First  Appellant  was  encountered   working
    illegally and from November 2014 the  Appellants  ceased  reporting  as
    required (which resumed in 2019 as a condition  of  immigration  bail).
    On 30 August 2018, the Appellant's made further representations by  way
    of a human rights claim.

 5.  The  Respondent  refused  the  applications  the  basis  that  neither
    Appellant  could  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of family life in the United Kingdom and
    neither  satisfied  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules in relation to private life as  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to their reintegration on return  to  India.   In
    addition, the First Appellant failed to meet the  suitability  criteria
    for a grant of leave to remain because of the previous use of deception
    in her English language test.

 6. Judge Dineen dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
    February 2021 on human rights grounds.  In summary, it was  found  that
    although the First Appellant had rebutted the initial evidential burden
    in relation to deception such that she did not fall to  be  refused  on
    suitability grounds; there would be  no  disproportionate  interference
    with the Appellants' right to respect for private and  family  life  if
    removed to India.  In particular, the tribunal referred to there  being
    no significant obstacles to reintegration on  return;  the  significant
    and unexplained  delay  since  2014  in  challenging  the  Respondent's
    original decision based on the use of deception and that in  accordance
    with section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,
    little weight was to be attached to the Appellants' private life.

The appeal

 7. The Appellants appeal on two grounds as follows.  First, that following
    the finding that the First Appellant had  not  used  deception  in  her
    earlier application, the First-tier Tribunal erred in not allowing  the
    appeal on human rights grounds and directing the Respondent to grant  a
    period of leave to remain in accordance with her own  policy  contained
    in the 'Educational Testing Service (ETS): casework  instructions'  v.4
    dated 18 November 2020.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to adequately consider the appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights given the evidence that the Appellants would
    have no support in India and would have to start from scratch on return
    there.

 8. At the hearing, on behalf of the Respondent, Ms Isherwood accepted that
    in accordance with the Respondent's policy, the First  Appellant  would
    be entitled to six months' leave to remain following the  finding  that
    she had not previously used deception.  However, it was submitted  that
    the substantive findings on human  rights  grounds  were  open  to  the
    Tribunal,  particularly  in  relation  to  whether  there   were   very
    significant obstacles to reintegration on return.  This was in  essence
    a very weak Article 8 claim.

 9. In a skeleton argument on behalf of the Appellants, Mr Malik  submitted
    that the principal  issue  in  this  case  was  whether  there  was  an
    'historical injustice' against the First Appellant  in  2014  with  the
    Respondent's decision that  she  had  used  deception  in  her  English
    language test.  It was suggested that the Appellants had both  suffered
    from this incorrect decision since and but  for  that  decision,  would
    have secured successive leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    failure of the First-tier Tribunal to recognise this and factor  it  in
    to the proportionality balancing exercise was an error of law.

10. At the hearing, Mr Malik agreed that the simpler issue in  relation  to
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision was that in circumstances where  the
    Respondent's policy to grant six months' leave to remain to those who a
    Tribunal found had not used deception meant that there  was  no  public
    interest in removal for the  purposes  of  Article  8.   The  remaining
    arguments which  had  been  put,  which  focused  on  an  argument  for
    restitution were not pursued as Mr Malik accepted that these could only
    be material to the question of what  period  of  leave  the  Appellants
    should be granted and not whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    contained a material error of law; nor were they relevant to whether or
    not the appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.

11. In all of the circumstances, the parties  agreed  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in  failing   to   consider   the
    Respondent's policy in relation  to  the  finding  that  there  was  no
    deception which meant there was a failure to  properly  assess  whether
    there was any public interest in removal.  For those reasons, the First-
    tier Tribunal decision must be set aside.  The parties  further  agreed
    that the appeals should  be  remade  to  allow  them  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Findings and reasons

 1. The Respondent's position at the hearing in relation to  whether  there
    was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  was
    entirely proper and appropriate and  I  find  that  there  was  such  a
    material error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    whether the Appellants' removal from the  United  Kingdom  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with their right to respect  for  private
    and family life   for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.   This  is  because  when  undertaking  the
    proportionality balancing exercise, there was a failure to consider the
    Respondent's policy to grant leave to the First Appellant following the
    finding that she had not used  deception  in  relation  to  an  earlier
    English language test.  Despite the unassailable  findings  of  a  very
    weak human rights claim on the Appellants' side of the  proportionality
    assessment; there was a failure to consider that there was  in  essence
    no public interest in removal in circumstances where a person was to be
    granted leave to remain.  Mr Malik appropriately  did  not  pursue  any
    other argument on behalf of the Appellants  further  than  this  simple
    point.

 2. In  these  circumstances,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved  a  material  error  of  law  and  must  be  set  aside.   For
    essentially the same reasons and as agreed by the parties,  the  appeal
    is remade to be allowed on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  it  as
follows:

The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   G Jackson                               Date 1st August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

