
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01368/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 13 September 2016                          |On 15 September 2016         |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SYED ALI KASHIF NAQVI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr Murphy, counsel
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 5 March 2016,  in
    which the FTTJ allowed the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal  of
    his application for leave to remain on the grounds  of  long  residence
    under paragraph 276B the Immigration Rules.


 2. For ease of  reference  and  continuity,  throughout  this  decision  I
    maintain the descriptions of the parties as appellant  and  respondent,
    as set out in the FTTJ's decision, although  it  is  the  Secretary  of
    State who pursues this appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and none was
    requested before me. I therefore make no such direction.

Background

 4. The appellant entered the UK as a student in June 2005.  His  leave  to
    remain was extended. For various reasons  subsequent  applications  for
    further leave were rejected. However, on 10 July 2009 the appellant was
    granted further leave to remain as a student  until  November  2009.  A
    subsequent application was  refused  but  reconsidered  and  leave  was
    granted from February 2010 until  February  2012.  Again  a  subsequent
    application was refused but granted on reconsideration.  On 11  January
    2012 the appellant applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    general migrant; leave  was  granted  from  7  February  2014  until  7
    February 2017.  On 22 June 2015 the appellant made an  application  for
    indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long  residence.  That
    application was refused and the appellant appealed successfully against
    that refusal.


 5. The respondent was granted permission to appeal to this tribunal in the
    following terms:


         "...


         2. The judge made an arguable error of law  and  arguably  did  not
         direct  himself  correctly.  By   reference   to   the   applicable
         jurisprudence contained in the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 261 the first  question
         which the judge should have addressed and arguably did not  address
         was whether Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention was engaged at
         all. A careful perusal of the judge's decision  did  not  establish
         that the judge had answered the question and the judge arguably did
         not have jurisdiction to embark upon an assessment of the  decision
         under appeal under the Immigration Rules which might otherwise have
         applied. The judge also made  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  not
         considering or applying to the appeal before him  Section  117B  of
         the Immigration Act 2014 [sic]. An assessment of Section  117B  was
         intrinsic to an assessment of the proportionality of  the  decision
         under appeal upon which the judge embarked at paragraph 38  of  his
         decision.


         3. The grounds disclosed arguable errors of law but for  which  the
         outcome of the appeal might have been  different.  The  application
         for permission is granted."


 6. Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 7. Both parties' representatives agreed that the FTTJ's  jurisdiction  had
    been limited to deciding the appeal on human rights grounds.   That  is
    correct, for the reasons set out in the FTTJ's decision.


 8. Mr Avery, for the respondent,  submitted  that,  the  appellant  having
    extant leave until February 2017, the decision not to grant  indefinite
    leave to remain (ILR) had not interfered with his protected rights.  It
    was accepted that the long residence provisions in  paragraph  276B  of
    the Rules encompassed the applicant's right  to  a  private  life  but,
    nonetheless, it was for the appellant to demonstrate that Article 8 was
    engaged by the respondent's decision. Only if it were engaged would  it
    be appropriate  to  go  on  to  consider  the  proportionality  of  the
    interference in the context of the Rules. The  refusal  to  change  the
    appellant's immigration status did not engage Article 8. The  appellant
    had the option of making a further application. He  submitted  that  if
    the FTTJ had considered whether or not Article 8 was engaged, he  would
    have found it was not. There  should  have  been  no  consideration  of
    proportionality and, therefore, no consideration of the extent to which
    the appellant fulfilled the criteria  in  paragraph  276B.  As  regards
    s117B, Mr Avery submitted the approach of the FTTJ had been  "odd";  he
    had not given the public interest factors due consideration. He  should
    have found little weight could be  given  to  the  appellant's  private
    life,  per  s117B(5)  because  it  had  been  established   while   the
    appellant's status was precarious. Nor was it clear the  appellant  was
    financially independent in the UK.


 9. Mr Murphy, for the appellant, relied on  the  Rule  24  reply  which  I
    summarise as follows.  The FTTJ had decided the  appellant  did,  as  a
    matter of fact, meet the criteria in paragraph 276B and  this  was  not
    challenged by the respondent in this appeal.  Thus  the  appellant  was
    entitled to remain in the UK on the basis of his  long  residence.   In
    any event, whilst not explicit from the decision and  reasons,  it  was
    implicit that the FTTJ had considered whether  Article  8  was  engaged
    and, having found  this  was  so,  went  on  to  decide  the  issue  of
    proportionality by reference to paragraph 276B.  The FTTJ  had  had  in
    mind that the appeal was limited  to  human  rights  grounds.   It  was
    submitted that Adjei and Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 112 (IAC) had no bearing on  the  FTTJ's  decision-making  because
    those were entry clearance cases.  It was accepted  the  appellant  had
    leave to remain in the UK until February 2017 and that  he  could  make
    another  application  for  further  leave  to  remain  but   this   was
    irrelevant: the impact of the refusal was to  deny  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to apply for British  citizenship  earlier  than  he  could
    otherwise have done. It had given rise  to  an  interference  with  his
    right to a private  life.  A  failure  to  grant  leave  to  remain  in
    accordance with Parliament's intentions was inappropriate.  As  regards
    s117B, the  claimed  error  of  law  was  misconceived:  the  FTTJ  had
    considered the relevant public interest factors and borne in  mind  the
    appropriate definition of precarious immigration status insofar as  the
    appellant's established private life was concerned. S117B(5) was not  a
    bar to the grant of leave. The respondent had not raised the  issue  of
    financial dependence either in the refusal  letter  or  at  the  appeal
    before the FTTJ; she should not be permitted to do so now.

Discussion and Findings

10. As Mr Murphy notes,  Mostafa  and  Adjei  are  entry  clearance  cases.
    However, the principles in those cases are relevant to this matter  for
    the following reasons.  In this appellant's case, he  had  applied  for
    leave to remain on the grounds of long residence, not on the grounds of
    his family and private life in the UK.  His application was  considered
    appropriately by reference to paragraph 276B. It was also considered by
    reference to Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276ADE.  The  FTTJ  notes  in
    paragraph 17 that "it appears to be common ground  that  the  appellant
    cannot satisfy any of  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE".  Thus  it  was  accepted  by  both  parties  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE could have no application in  the  appeal  before  the
    FTTJ.  In such a case the  FTTJ's  starting  point  should  have  been,
    pursuant to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, consideration of whether  Article  8
    was engaged outside the Rules.


11. It was highly relevant for  the  FTTJ  that  this  was  not  an  appeal
    resulting from a removal decision. Nor did the appellant face voluntary
    departure from the UK because he had extant leave which was not due  to
    expire until  February  2017.  There  was  ample  opportunity  for  the
    appellant to make a fresh application, as Mr Murphy conceded. This was,
    in practice, an attempt by the  appellant  to  change  his  immigration
    status to one which was more favourable, namely ILR.  That is an option
    which still remained open to him notwithstanding  the  refusal  of  his
    application under paragraph 276B.


12. I am invited by Mr Murphy to find that it is implicit from the decision
    that the FTTJ found Article 8 to be engaged. However, the FTTJ has  not
    set  out  his  analysis  or  any  finding  as  to  the  impact  of  the
    respondent's decision on the appellant. There is no  reference,  either
    implicitly or explicitly to the guidance in Razgar which  requires  the
    FTTJ to consider whether the consequences are of  such  gravity  as  to
    engage Article 8.  He simply  did  not  consider  the  issue  but  went
    straight into  an  analysis  of  proportionality.   I  acknowledge  the
    threshold for engagement is not particularly high (VW (Uganda)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 5).  However, in the present case the appellant was not
    at risk of removal; he has leave to remain until February 2017 and  the
    impact of the refusal decision is very limited. It was  submitted  that
    he had lost the opportunity to apply for British citizenship but  I  do
    not consider that this is a matter of sufficient gravity as  to  engage
    Article 8; it is an opportunity which is not lost but postponed  (given
    the submissions made on his behalf).  It was accepted by Mr Murphy that
    the appellant could make a fresh application either on the  grounds  of
    long residence or on human rights grounds notwithstanding  the  refusal
    of his long residence applcidation.


13. For these reasons I find that the FTTJ made a material error of law  in
    failing to consider, as a preliminary  issue,  whether  Article  8  was
    engaged. Had he done so, he would have found that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged, even taking into account  the  relatively  low  threshold  for
    engagement. Thus given that the appeal was based only on  human  rights
    grounds, the appeal should have been dismissed at  that  stage  of  the
    analysis.

14. It was submitted that I  should  preserve  the  findings  of  the  FTTJ
    insofar as paragraph 276B is concerned. I am unable  to  do  so,  given
    there  was  no  necessity  or  requirement  for  a   consideration   of
    proportionality for the purposes  of  his  human  rights  appeal.   The
    FTTJ's findings in that regard are otiose, albeit unchallenged  by  the
    respondent in the proceedings before me.

15. Given my findings, there is no need for me to consider whether the FTTJ
    erred in law in failing to apply the public interest considerations  in
    s117A-D of the 2002 Act. Any potential error of law in that  regard  is
    immaterial to the outcome.

Decision

16. The making of the FTTJ's decision did involve a material error  of  law
    as set out above.


17. I set aside the FTTJ's decision  in  its  entirety  and  remake  it  by
    dismissing it.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  14 September 2016


Fee Award

The FTTJ made a fee award. I set that award  aside:  the  appellant  is  not
entitled to a fee award, the appeal having been dismissed.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated: 14 September 2016

