
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01174/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 June 2019 & 4 December 2019    |On 7 October 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                               SULTAN MAHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by Kalam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 A. Introduction

 1. Both members of the panel have contributed to this decision.

 2. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Courtney ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 14 December 2018
    by which the appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent to
    refuse him leave to remain in this country on human rights (article  8)
    grounds was refused.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal by means of a decision dated 11 March 2019.

 4. The Judge did not issue an anonymity direction and the parties did  not
    seek one before us.

 B. The appellant

 5. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh who was born in 1979  and  is
    presently aged 41. He asserts that he arrived  in  this  country  as  a
    visitor in 1994. He was encountered  by  immigration  officers  at  his
    place of work in 1996 and subsequently claimed asylum.  The  respondent
    refused the application by way of a decision dated 11  June  1996.  The
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision was dismissed  and
    he became appeal rights exhausted in February 1997.

 6. Whilst in this country the appellant contends that he worked in various
    restaurants having falsely adopted the identity of a  British  citizen,
    'Rezaul Karim', who was born in 1976. In securing employment,  he  used
    Mr. Karim's National Insurance number ('NI number').

 7. On 29 July 2009 the appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain
    ('ILR'). The respondent refused the application by a decision  dated  4
    February 2010 and the appellant enjoyed no attendant right of appeal.

 8. The appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights  (article  8)
    grounds on 19 June 2014 and the respondent refused the  application  by
    means of a decision dated  26  June  2014,  detailing  the  appellant's
    failure   to   meet   the   eligibility   requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii)-(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  ('the  Rules').   The
    respondent observed that previously submitted tax documents were not in
    the appellant's name and that the NI number  relied  upon  belonged  to
    another person but expressly accepted at para. 7 of the  decision  that
    the  appellant  met  the  relevant  suitability  requirements   to   be
    considered under Appendix FM.

 9. The appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and his appeal was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Macdonald. By his decision of 14 January  2016,  the  Judge  noted,  at
    [52]:

         '52. It is accepted by the respondent that the requirements  of  S-
             LTR in Appendix FM are met ... '

10. JFtT Macdonald found at [49] of his decision that the earliest date the
    appellant could establish his presence in the  United  Kingdom  was  19
    January 1996 and in the same paragraph accepted that  it  was  unlikely
    that the appellant had left this country since his entry.

11.  By  means  of  further  submissions  prepared  by  his  current  legal
    representatives, dated 8 September 2016, the appellant sought leave  to
    remain on human rights (article 8) grounds,  relying  upon  his  having
    been present in this country for over 20 years. Under cover of a letter
    from his legal representatives dated 5  December  2017,  the  appellant
    confirmed that he had been residing with his uncle in Wales since  1995
    and relied upon documentation in his false identity to  establish  that
    he had been employed since 1997 and thereafter secured  access  to  the
    NHS.

12. The respondent accepted that the further representations constituted  a
    fresh human rights claim under paragraph 353 of the Rules  but  refused
    the application by a decision dated 14 December 2017. She accepted that
    the appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18 December 1994  and  that
    he remained in this country until 1997.  However,  she  noted  that  no
    satisfactory evidence had been provided confirming that  the  appellant
    had resided in this country after the conclusion of his appeal in  1997
    and his application for  settlement  in  2009.  She  decided  that  the
    appellant was  unable  to  provide  evidence  of  continuous  residence
    between  those  years  and  concluded  that  he  failed  to  meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Rules.

13. Further, the respondent  observed  as  to  suitability  that  when  the
    appellant applied for ILR on 29 July 2009, he submitted documents which
    were verified as not being genuine, namely eleven P60 forms dated  from
    1998  to  2009.  The  respondent  detailed  HM   Revenue   &   Customs'
    confirmation that the documents submitted did not match  their  records
    and that the NI number used was not issued  in  the  appellant's  name.
    Consequently, the appellant was  found  to  have  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements  for  leave  to  remain  under  paragraphs  S-
    LTR.1.6. and S-LTR.4.2. of Appendix FM applied.

 C. Relevant legislative provisions

14.  The  following  paragraphs  of  the  Rules   are   relevant   to   our
    consideration:

 a. Paragraph 276ADE

15. Paragraph 276ADE  was  inserted  into  the  Rules  from  9  July  2014:
    Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules  (HC  194).  It  incorporates
    protected article 8 private life rights considerations into the  Rules.
    Paragraph 276ADE(1) details requirements to be met by an applicant  for
    leave to remain on the grounds of private life:

         '(1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the  date
             of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
                  Section S-LTR 1.1 to  S-LTR  2.2.  and  S-LTR.3.1.  to  S-
                  LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
                  grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
                  in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period  of
                  imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
                  applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and  under  25  years  and  has
                  spent at least half of his life living continuously in the
                  UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
                  has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20  years
                  (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would
                  be  very  significant   obstacles   to   the   applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK.'

 b. Section S-LTR

16. Section S-LTR of Appendix FM details the suitability requirements to be
    met in a leave to remain application made by those seeking to remain in
    the United Kingdom.

17. Paragraph S-LTR.1.1. details:

         'S-LTR.1.1.   The applicant will be refused limited leave to remain
                  on grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs  S-LTR.1.2.
                  to 1.8. apply.'

18. Paragraph S-LTR.1.6.:

         'S-LTR.1.6.   The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
                  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  their   conduct
                  (including convictions which do not fall within paragraphs
                  S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other
                  reasons, make it undesirable to allow them  to  remain  in
                  the UK.'

19. Both provisions apply to applications made on or after 9 July 2012  (HC
    194). Paragraph S-LTR.1.6. has not been amended since its  introduction
    to the Rules, whilst paragraph S-LTR.1.1. has  been  amended  to  bring
    into its scope the insertion of paragraph S-LTR.1.8. into the Rules  on
    24 November 2016. Such amendment is  not  relevant  to  the  Tribunal's
    considerations in this matter.

20. Paragraph S-LTR.2.1.:

         'S-LTR.2.1.   The applicant will normally be refused on grounds  of
                  suitability  if  any  of  paragraphs  S-LTR.2.2.  to  2.5.
                  apply.'

21. Paragraph S-LTR.2.2.:

         'S-LTR.2.2.   Whether or not to the appellant's knowledge -

                   a) false information, representation or  documents  have
                      been  submitted  in  relation  to   the   application
                      (including false information submitted to any  person
                      to  obtain  a  document  used  in  support   of   the
                      application); or

                   b) there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts
                      in relation to the application.'

22. Paragraph S-LTR.4.1.:

         'S-LTR.4.1.    The  applicant  may  be  refused   on   grounds   of
                  suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.4.2. to  S-LTR.4.5.
                  apply.'

23. Paragraph S-LTR.4.2:

         'S-LTR.4.2.   The  applicant  has  made  false  representations  or
                  failed  to  disclose  any  material  fact  in  a  previous
                  application for entry clearance, leave to enter, leave  to
                  remain or a variation of leave, or  in  a  previous  human
                  rights claim; or did  so  in  order  to  obtain  from  the
                  Secretary of State or a third party a document required to
                  support such an application or claim (whether or  not  the
                  application or claim was successful).'

24. Paragraph S-LTR.4.2. was inserted into Section S-LTR from 6 April  2016
    (HC 877) and substituted in its present form from 24 November 2016  for
    applications decided on or after that date (HC 667).

 c. Paragraph S-EC

25. Section S-EC of Appendix FM details the suitability requirements to  be
    met for entry clearance.

26. Paragraph S-EC.1.1. details:

         'S-EC.1.1.    The applicant will  be  refused  entry  clearance  on
                  grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs  S-EC.1.2.  to
                  1.9. apply.'

27. Paragraph S-EC.1.5.:

         'S-EC.1.6.    The  exclusion  of  the  applicant  from  the  UK  is
                  conducive to the public good  because,  for  example,  the
                  applicant's conduct (including convictions  which  do  not
                  fall within paragraph S-EC.1.4.), character, associations,
                  or other reasons, make it undesirable to grant them  entry
                  clearance.'

28. Paragraph S-EC.2.1.:

         'S-EC.2.1.    The applicant will normally be refused on grounds  of
                  suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.2.2. to 2.5. apply.'

29. Paragraph S-EC.2.2.:

         'S-EC.2.2.    Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

                   a) false information, representations or documents  have
                      been  submitted  in  relation  to   the   application
                      (including false information submitted to any  person
                      to  obtain  a  document  used  in  support   of   the
                      application); or

                   b) there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts
                      in relation to the application.'

 d. Paragraph S-ILR

30. Section S-ILR of Appendix FM details the suitability  requirements  for
    indefinite leave to remain.

31. Paragraph S-ILR.1.1. details:

         'S-ILR.1.1.   The applicant will be  refused  indefinite  leave  to
                  remain on grounds of suitability if any of  paragraphs  S-
                  ILR.1.2. to 1.10. apply.'

32. Paragraph S-ILR.1.8.:

         'S-ILR.1.8.   The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
                  conducive  to  the  public  good  because  their   conduct
                  (including convictions which do not fall within paragraphs
                  S-ILR.1.3. to  1.6.)  character,  associations,  or  other
                  reasons, make it undesirable to allow them  to  remain  in
                  the UK.'

33. Paragraph S-ILR.2.1.:

         'S-ILR.2.1.   The applicant will normally be refused on grounds  of
                  suitability  if  any  of  paragraphs  S-ILR.2.2.  to  2.4.
                  apply.'

34. Paragraph S-ILR.2.2.:

          'S-ILR.2.2.  Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

                   a) false information, representations or documents  have
                      been  submitted  in  relation  to   the   application
                      (including false information submitted to any  person
                      to  obtain  a  document  used  in  support   of   the
                      application); or

                   b) there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts
                      in relation to the application.'

 e. Paragraph A320

35. Paragraph A320 was inserted into the Rules from 9 July  2012  (HC  194)
    and amended from 6 September 2012 (HC 565). It includes, inter alia,  a
    specific restriction upon the application of paragraph 322  to  private
    life claims:

         'A320 Paragraphs 320 (except subparagraphs (3), (10) and (11))  and
         322 do not apply to an application for entry  clearance,  leave  to
         enter or leave to remain as a Family Member under Appendix FM,  and
         Part  9  (except  for  paragraph  322(1))  does  not  apply  to  an
         application for leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  private  life
         under paragraphs 276ADE-276DH.'

 f. Paragraph 320(7B)

36. Paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules:

         'Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused.

         320(7B)  where the  applicant  has  previously  breached  the  UK's
                  immigration laws (and was 18 or over at the  time  of  his
                  most recent breach) by:

                  (d)   using  deception  in  an   application   for   entry
                      clearance, leave to enter or remain, or in  order  to
                      obtain documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a
                      third party required in support  of  the  application
                      (whether successful or not)



 g. Paragraph 322(1), (1A)

37. Paragraph 322(1) of the Rules:

         'Grounds on which leave to remain and variations of leave to  enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused.

         322(1)   the fact that variation of leave to  enter  or  remain  is
                  being sought for a purpose not covered by these Rules.'

38. Paragraph 322(1A) was inserted into the Rules from 27 November 2008 (HC
    1113), with amendment from 6 April 2012 (HC 1888):

         322(1A)  where  false  representations  have  been  made  or  false
                  documents or information have been submitted  (whether  or
                  not material to the application, and whether or not to the
                  applicant's knowledge), or material facts  have  not  been
                  disclosed, in relation to the application or in  order  to
                  obtain documents from the Secretary of State  or  a  third
                  party required in support of the application.'

 h. Paragraph 322(2) and (5)

39. Paragraph 322 of the Rules:

         'Grounds on which leave to remain and variations of leave to  enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused.

         (2)  the making of false representations or the failure to disclose
             any material facts for the purpose of obtaining leave to enter
             or a previous  variation  of  leave  or  in  order  to  obtain
             documents from  the  Secretary  of  State  or  a  third  party
             required in support of the application for leave to enter or a
             previous variation of leave.

         (5)  the undesirability  of  permitting  the  person  concerned  to
             remain in the United Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct
             (including convictions which  do  not  fall  within  paragraph
             322(1C)), character  or  associations  or  the  fact  that  he
             represents a threat to national security.'

 D. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

40. The appellant's appeal was heard by the Judge sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    on 26 November 2018. The appellant attended and gave oral evidence.  By
    her decision dated 14 December 2018 the Judge noted,  at  [14]  of  her
    decision, the appellant's acknowledgment that he had used  Mr.  Karim's
    identity in order to obtain employment and medical  services  and  that
    during the course of an  earlier  application  for  settlement  he  had
    produced P60s in Mr. Karim's name.

41. As to the deception, the Judge found that the respondent had discharged
    the  evidential  burden  of  proving  that  the   appellant   practised
    dishonesty or deception in his application for ILR in July 2009 and  so
    the burden shifted to the appellant to  provide  a  plausible  innocent
    explanation. The Judge proceeded to conclude, at [16], that the use  of
    Mr. Karim's NI number, said by the appellant to  be  solely  to  secure
    'work to survive, pay the tax and insurance only' did not constitute an
    innocent  explanation  and  so,  on  balance,  the  appellant  had  not
    dispelled the prima facie case of deception established against him.

42. Upon considering the appellant's explanation that the appellant had not
    attempted to deceive the  respondent  in  his  settlement  application,
    having openly declared that he had been using Mr. Karim's name  and  NI
    number in order to work, the Judge found, at [17]

         "17. ... The fact that the appellant made his 2009  application  in
             the name of Sultan Mahmood and openly admitted that  the  P60s
             were in a false identity, relying upon them not as evidence of
             identity but as proof of residence, does not  in  my  judgment
             deprive them of their innate character as documents containing
             false representations (even assuming  that  they  are  genuine
             P60s, which  is  unclear).  Falsity  carries  the  meaning  of
             deliberately dishonest: see A v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773.  The
             P60s contain a statement made to HMRC which Mr.  Mahmood  knew
             to be untrue, namely that he was a man named Rezaul Karim  who
             was entitled to work in the UK."

43. The  Judge's  reasoning  as  to  the  application  of  the  suitability
    requirements is addressed at [20]-[22] of her decision.  She  concluded
    that the appellant had not simply used the alias  of  Rezaul  Karim  in
    order to obtain work but also to access NHS services, visiting  his  GP
    on a regular basis since 2001  and  having  been  referred  on  several
    occasions for hospital investigations. She  therefore  found  that  the
    appellant had engaged in sustained deceit over the course of more  than
    a decade. The Judge concluded that the documents  relied  upon  arising
    from employment, such as the P60s, possessed  an  innate  character  as
    documents containing false representations.  She  determined  that  the
    appellant's  personal  history   including   character,   conduct   and
    employment history made it undesirable to allow him to remain  in  this
    country and  so  his  application  fell  for  refusal  under  both  the
    mandatory suitability ground established paragraph S-LTR.1.6.  and  the
    discretionary ground of paragraph S-LTR.4.2.

44. Consequently, the Judge found that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements of  the  Rules  and  so  could  not  meet  the
    requirements for leave to remain on the grounds of private life in  the
    UK set out in paragraph 276ADE.

 E. Grounds of appeal

45. The appellant raised six grounds of complaint by way of his grounds  of
    appeal to this Tribunal. The grounds were drafted by counsel,  but  the
    Tribunal acknowledges that they were not drafted by Mr. Mustafa nor  by
    the appellant's representative at the hearing  before  the  Judge,  Mr.
    Hasan. In granting permission to appeal, the focus of  UTJ  McWilliam's
    reasoning was directed at grounds 1 and 3.

46. At the hearing before us on 20 June  2019  Mr.  Mustafa  accepted  that
    ground 2 was not arguable and, on instruction, he withdrew grounds 4 to
    6. The Tribunal is therefore only required to consider grounds 1 and 3.



47. Ground 1 is rooted in the principle that when approaching the  findings
    of fact  made  by  a  Tribunal  in  earlier  proceedings,  the  earlier
    determination stands as an assessment of the claim the  appellant  made
    at the time of the first decision and so is a 'starting point' for  the
    purposes of the later fact-finding exercise: Devaseelan (Second Appeals
    - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri  Lanka  *  [2002]  UKIAT  00702;
    [2003] Imm AR 1.  The  appellant  relies  upon  the  respondent  having
    accepted that he met the relevant suitability requirements in 2014, and
    before JFtT Macdonald in 2016, submitting '[t]hat previous  stance  and
    concession/acceptance ... should have  been  a  strong  factor  in  the
    instant appeal.'

48. Ground 3 contains two separate challenges. The first contends that both
    paragraph S-LTR.1.6. and  paragraph  S-LTR.4.2.  are  discretionary  in
    nature and so require a balancing assessment, which was not  undertaken
    by the Judge. The second contention is the  Judge  failed  to  lawfully
    engage with  there  being  no  deception  in  respect  of  the  present
    application. Paragraph 6 of the grounds of appeal details:

         "6.   The  FTJ  does  not  engage  with  what  the  apparent  false
             representation is made [sic] in the previous application (i.e.
             the present or  previous  application).  Indeed,  reliance  on
             documents in someone else's name to obtain employment is not a
             false representation made to the respondent in an application,
             especially given that the appellant accepted he had done  this
             (see [32] of Judge Macdonald's  determination)  and  had  been
             forthcoming about it. The FTJ has  not  assessed  whether  the
             representations were false within the meaning of AA  (Nigeria)
             v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA  Civ
             773."

49. At the conclusion of the hearing on 20 June 2019, following  a  request
    by the parties, the Tribunal permitted the filing  of  further  written
    submissions, which were subsequently received from Mr. Jarvis, dated 25
    June 2019, and from Mr. Mustafa, dated 26 June 2019.  Upon  considering
    the written submissions, the Tribunal concluded that it would be  aided
    by further oral argument and a further hearing took place on 4 December
    2019. At the conclusion of the hearing the  parties  were  directed  to
    file and serve further written submissions and we  received  them  from
    Mr. Jarvis, dated 17 January 2020, and Mr. Mustafa,  dated  5  February
    2020.

 F. Decision

 a. Paragraph S-LTR.1.6

i.   Mandatory requirement

50. At the outset and observing that it was not pursued by Mr. Mustafa with
    vigour before us, the Tribunal rejects the contention advanced  by  the
    grounds of appeal that paragraph S-LTR.1.6. is discretionary in nature.
    The  appellant's  submission  places  misconceived  reliance  upon  the
    requirement as to the establishment of conduct making presence in  this
    country 'undesirable' as being capable, by  itself,  of  introducing  a
    balancing exercise into the assessment. However, we are satisfied  that
    this submission fails to engage with the clear stricture of paragraph S-
    LTR.1.1. that a mandatory refusal will result if one or more  of  seven
    discrete factual circumstances are established and paragraph S-LTR.1.6.
    identifies one such circumstance.

ii.  Scope

51. The wording of the provision is general in its terms,  confirming  that
    an applicant's presence in this country is 'not conducive to the public
    good' because their 'conduct', 'character',  'associations'  or  'other
    reasons' make it 'undesirable' to allow them to remain in this country.

52. We have reminded ourselves that the Rules should be read  sensibly  and
    are mindful of the function which they serve in the  administration  of
    immigration policy. We observe Lord Brown's confirmation  in  Mahad  v.
    Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16, [2010] 1 W.L.R. 48, at [10], in
    a judgment approved by the other members  of  the  Court,  that  '[t]he
    Rules are not to be construed with all the strictness applicable to the
    construction of a statute  or  a  statutory  instrument  but,  instead,
    sensibly according to the natural and ordinary  meaning  of  the  words
    used, recognising that they are statements of the Secretary of  State's
    administrative policy.'

53. It is appropriate at this juncture to identify the approach adopted  by
    the respondent over time as to the employment and tax documents secured
    through the appellant's adoption of Mr. Karim's identity. By  means  of
    the decision of 4 February 2010 the respondent detailed, inter alia:

         'HM Revenue & Customs have confirmed  that  the  eleven  P60  forms
         dated 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004,  2005,  2006,  2008
         and 2009 submitted with your application do not match their records
         and that the National Insurance  number  used  was  not  issued  to
         anyone by your name, the Secretary of State is satisfied that false
         representations have been made or false  documents  or  information
         have been submitted (whether or not material  to  the  application,
         and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or material facts
         have not been disclosed, in relation to the application.'

54. We note that the decision of February 2010 was a consideration  of  the
    requirements under paragraph 276B(i)(b)  of  the  Rules  as  they  then
    stood, to which the mandatory ground of refusal under paragraph 322(1A)
    was applicable where false representations  have  been  made  or  false
    documents  have  been  submitted,  whether  or  not  material  to   the
    application, and whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's  knowledge,  in
    relation to the application.

55. In  respect  of  the  appellant's  employment  and  tax  documents  the
    respondent's decision of 26 June 2014 details:

         "'14.    ... The earliest record  of  your  client  in  the  United
             Kingdom is when he was encountered working  without  authority
             and claimed asylum on 19 January 1996,  however,  satisfactory
             evidence has not yet been provided to show that he  has  lived
             continuously in  the  United  Kingdom  since  that  date.  Tax
             documents have previously been provided, however, as stated in
             previous refusal letters, the P60s are not  in  your  client's
             name and HMRC confirmed that the National Insurance number  is
             that of a British citizen born in 1976."

56. By  her  decision  of  14  December  2017,  the  respondent  considered
    suitability under Appendix FM and as to paragraph S-LTR.1.6. reasoned:

         "For the reasons given below, your application falls for refusal on
         the grounds  of  suitability  in  Section  S-LTR  under  paragraphs
         276ADE(1)(I) of the Immigration Rules because:

         When you applied for indefinite leave to remain on 29 July 2009 you
         submitted a number of documents which were verified  as  not  being
         genuine. HM Revenue & Customs confirmed that the eleven  P60  forms
         dated 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004,  2005,  2006,  2008
         and 2009 submitted  with  that  application  did  not  match  their
         records and that the National Insurance number used was not  issued
         to anyone by your name.

         Given the above your presence in the UK is  not  conducive  to  the
         public good as your conduct and character make  it  undesirable  to
         grant leave to remain. Your therefore fail to meet the requirements
         for leave to remain because paragraph S-LTR.1.6. of Appendix FM  of
         the Immigration Rules applies."

57. Initially  before  us  the  respondent's  position  was  that  she  was
    permitted to rely upon paragraph S-LTR.1.6. and  the  hearing  in  June
    2019 therefore focused, in part, upon whether the respondent had made a
    concession as to suitability by her June 2014 decision. The  respondent
    contended that as the decision in 2014 did not expressly establish that
    there had been a material investigation  as  to  the  use  of  the  P60
    documents in a  different  name  it  was  not  possible  to  justify  a
    conclusion that she had, in substance,  conceded  her  position  as  to
    deception.

58. At the resumed hearing in December 2019 the focus of discussion  before
    the Tribunal concerned paragraph S-LTR.4.2. We  observe  that  as  this
    matter progressed over the  two  hearings  Mr.  Jarvis  placed  greater
    reliance upon paragraph S-LTR.4.2. and after the second hearing he very
    helpfully clarified by means of his  further  written  submissions  the
    respondent's position as being that it was not open to her to rely upon
    paragraph S-LTR.1.6 either when making her decision in 2014 or  in  the
    present matter. This is so, according to the  respondent,  because  the
    provision was not intended to cover the use of deception/dishonesty  in
    a previous application for immigration status. He relied  upon  several
    strands in seeking to establish that such interpretation was consistent
    with the Rule.

59. Firstly, he relied upon the respondent's guidance detailed in  'General
    grounds for refusal - section 1 of  5:  about  this  guidance,  general
    grounds for refusal and checks' (version 16.0) 30 April  2014,  and  in
    particular drew our attention to the section entitled 'What  the  rules
    require'.

         'The Immigration rules define  fraud  and  forgery  as  a  form  of
         deception.

         If a person submits a document or information with  an  application
         which is independently verified as being forged or not genuine, you
         may consider refusing entry or  leave  to  remain.  When  you  have
         evidence that a person has done  this,  either  as  part  of  their
         current or previous application, the Immigration Rules  state  that
         you should refuse the application unless the  particular  paragraph
         of the rules allows you to use discretion.

         A false document includes:

           . genuine document which has been altered or tampered with

           . counterfeit document (one that is completely false)

           . genuine document that is being used by an imposter

           . genuine document  which  had  been  fraudulently  obtained  or
             issued, and/or

           . genuine document which contains  a  falsified  or  counterfeit
             visa or endorsement.'

         For entry clearance

           . When you refuse because fraud and forgery has been used  in  a
             current application, paragraph 320(7A)  of  the  rules  apply.
             Where there is evidence they have contrived in  a  significant
             way to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the  rules,  paragraph
             320(11) applies.

           . When you refuse on fraud and forgery  grounds  in  a  previous
             application, paragraph 320(7B) applies.

           . When you refuse because forged counterfeit passport  has  been
             used, paragraphs 320(3) and 320(19) apply.

           . When you refuse for false employment documentation,  paragraph
             320(15) and 320(19) apply

           . When you  refuse  for  other  deceptive  documents,  paragraph
             320(19) applies.

         For leave to remain

           . When you refuse because of fraud and forgery  in  the  current
             application, paragraph 322(1A) of the rules applies.

           . When you refuse because of fraud and  forgery  in  a  previous
             application, paragraph 322(2) of the rules applies.

           . If an applicant has used fraud and forgery  in  a  current  or
             previous application to get a document from the  Secretary  of
             State to show that they have a right to reside in the UK,  you
             must refuse the application under  paragraph  322(2A)  of  the
             Immigration Rules.'

60. As to this document Mr. Jarvis relied upon there being no reference  to
    false representations also being considered under paragraph  S-LTR.1.6.
    We observe the Court of Appeal's confirmation  in  ZH  (Bangladesh)  v.
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  8,  [2009]
    Imm. A.R. 450, at [32], that  the  respondent's  instructions,  and  by
    analogy her guidance, are not an aid to the construction of  the  Rules
    notwithstanding that their author is in law the author  of  the  Rules.
    They do not have, and cannot be treated as if possessing, the force  of
    law. This is consistent with Lord  Brown's  observation  in  Mahad,  at
    [11], that instructions issued by the respondent have on occasion  been
    issued inconsistently with the Rules  as  interpreted  by  the  courts.
    Further, we agree that having considered the document we are not  aided
    by it because it expressly confirms on page 2 that  it  'explains  each
    part of paragraph 322 and identifies which are mandatory  refusals  and
    which are discretionary'. Its limited scope precludes consideration  of
    the suitability requirements under Appendix FM.

61. Mr. Jarvis next submitted that paragraph A320, which was inserted  into
    the Rules on 9 July 2012, was relevant as to the decision of June  2014
    because it establishes that paragraph 322, save for  paragraph  322(1),
    does not apply to applications for  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph
    276ADE and Appendix FM. Paragraph 322(1A),  which  is  concerned  with,
    inter alia, utilising false representations and false documents  in  an
    application and  paragraph  322(2)  which  addresses  their  use  in  a
    previous application for leave to  remain  are  thereby  excluded  from
    consideration and application.

62. We are  satisfied  that  whilst  the  introduction  of  paragraph  A320
    expressly precludes the respondent from  utilising  paragraphs  322(1A)
    and 322(2) in identified circumstances, it does not by itself aid us in
    establishing the scope of paragraph S-LTR.1.6. We note that the  latter
    was introduced  as  part  of  the  structured  approach  to  article  8
    established by Appendix FM in July 2012, such approach setting  out  in
    detail the requirements to be met in securing leave to enter or  remain
    on article 8 grounds under the Rules and the requirement to  meet  this
    suitability  requirement  was  incorporated  from  the  outset   within
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(i).

63. Mr. Jarvis further relied upon the Explanatory Memorandum to  Statement
    of Changes to the Immigration Rules (HC 877) which introduced paragraph
    S-LTR.4.2. into the Rules from 6 April 2016.  He  submitted  before  us
    that such introduction was predicated upon an express  policy  decision
    to allow for the previous use of false  representation  grounds  to  be
    deployed  in  decision-making  on  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE
    applications or claims where previously there  had  been  no  available
    ground of refusal. He drew our  attention  to  paragraph  7.41  of  the
    Explanatory Memorandum:

         '7.41.   The following changes and clarifications are being made to
             the Immigration Rules relating to family and private life:

             .    To enable an application to  be  refused  on  grounds  of
                  suitability if false representations have been  submitted,
                  or there has been a failure to disclose  materials  facts,
                  in  a  previous  immigration  application;  or  where  the
                  applicant has failed to pay litigation  costs  awarded  to
                  the Home Office ...'

64. From June 2004 onwards explanatory memoranda must be  provided  by  the
    relevant  government  department  with  all  instruments   subject   to
    Parliamentary procedure. Their purpose is to provide the public with an
    easy-to-understand  explanation  of  the   delegated,   or   secondary,
    legislation's intent and purpose in a manner akin to explanatory  notes
    which are documents which explain the purpose of all  Government  Bills
    and some Private Members' Bills. They provide a  clear  explanation  of
    what part of the law the delegated legislation  is  changing  and  why.
    However, they do not form part of the delegated  legislation,  are  not
    endorsed by Parliament and cannot be amended by  Parliament.  They  are
    intended to be neutral in political tone and their aim  is  to  explain
    the effect of the  text,  not  to  justify  it.  We  observe  that  the
    Explanatory Memorandum was presented to Parliament  with  Statement  of
    Changes (HC 877) on 11 March 2016.

65. Lord Steyn confirmed in R (Westminster City Council) v. National Asylum
    Support Service [2002] UKHL 38, [2002] 4  All  ER  654,  at  [5],  that
    explanatory notes may be a useful aid to construction in so far as they
    'cast light on the objective setting or contextual scene of the statute
    and the mischief at which it is aimed,  such  materials  are  therefore
    always admissible aids to construction.'

66. Brook LJ held in Flora v. Wakom (Heathrow) Ltd [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1103;
    [2007] 1 WLR 482, at [16], that 'the text of an Act does not have to be
    ambiguous before a court may be  permitted  to  take  into  account  an
    explanatory note in order to understand the contextual scene  in  which
    the Act is set.' This is subject to the caveat that  if  the  statutory
    language is unambiguous a court or tribunal is not free to  rewrite  it
    by reference to the explanatory notes: R (RD) v. Secretary of State for
    Justice [2010] EWCA Civ 18, [2010] 1 WLR  1782,  per  Carnwath  LJ,  at
    [45].

67. We observe Brook LJ's confirmation in Flora, at [16], that  'the  value
    of ... explanatory notes as an aid to construction ...  is  that  [they
    identify] the contextual scene ... That is all.' A  court  or  tribunal
    must therefore resist attempts to elevate explanatory notes to a status
    where they supplant the language of the legislation  itself:  Aspinalls
    Club Ltd v. Revenue and Customs [2013] EWCA Civ 1464,  [2015]  Ch.  79,
    per Moses LJ, at [22].

68. We agree that the  strong  similarity  between  explanatory  notes  and
    explanatory memoranda as to their provenance and their purpose is  such
    that the same interpretative principles apply to explanatory memoranda.



69. In this matter, we are satisfied that the use of the word  'enable'  at
    paragraph 7.41 of the explanatory memorandum  identifies  the  mischief
    that paragraph S-LTR.4.2. was intended to address. Giving the word  its
    usual and ordinary meaning, to  give  the  authority  or  means  to  do
    something, we are satisfied that the context  of  the  introduction  of
    paragraph S-LTR.4.2. was to give authority to the respondent to  refuse
    an application on grounds of suitability if false representations  have
    been submitted, or there has  been  a  failure  to  disclose  materials
    facts, in a previous immigration application.  We  are  satisfied  that
    this authority was given because such power did  not  previously  exist
    within the  suitability  requirements  established  by  Section  S-LTR,
    including paragraph S-LTR.1.6., in respect of an application for  leave
    to remain.

70.  Our  decision  is  reinforced  upon  considering  the  Rules,  and  in
    particular Appendix FM, in the round. Under Part 9 of the  Rules  there
    is a mandatory requirement under  paragraph  322(1A)  to  refuse  where
    false representations or  false  documents  or  information  have  been
    submitted in relation to  the  application.  The  respondent  enjoys  a
    discretionary power under paragraph 322(2) to refuse  leave  to  remain
    consequent to the making of false representations, or  the  failure  to
    disclose any material fact for the purpose of obtaining leave to  enter
    or a previous variation of leave. From 6 April 2012 the power to refuse
    was extended to the making of false representations in order to  obtain
    documents from the respondent or a third party required in  support  of
    the application for leave to enter or a previous  variation  of  leave:
    (HC 1888). Thus, by means of paragraph  322(2)  the  respondent  enjoys
    power to refuse an application where there has been fraud or forgery in
    a previous application.

71. We note that in entry clearance and leave to enter matters  refusal  is
    mandatory,  not  discretionary,  where  an  applicant  has   previously
    breached the United Kingdom's immigration laws, when aged 18 or over at
    the time of  their  most  recent  breach,  by  using  deception  in  an
    application for entry clearance, leave to enter or remain or  in  order
    to obtain documents from the respondent or a third  party  required  in
    support of the application, whether successful or not, unless they meet
    an identified exception: paragraph 320(7B)(d).

72. As observed above, paragraph A320 of the Rules was  inserted  into  the
    Rules on 9 July 2012 and prohibits the application of  both  paragraphs
    322(1A) and 322(2) to  considerations  of  applications  for  leave  to
    remain made under Appendix FM. The suitability requirements in Appendix
    FM mirror, to a certain extent, the general grounds for  refusal  which
    are set out in the Rules. However, it was Parliament's  intention  that
    the suitability requirements in Appendix FM did not adopt  all  of  the
    requirements established by Part 9 of the Rules.

73. Instead, paragraphs S-EC.1.5, S-LTR.1.6 and S-ILR.1.8. adopt a  similar
    approach in entry clearance, leave to remain and  indefinite  leave  to
    remain applications as to conduct, character and association.  Separate
    discretionary power to refuse  applications  where  false  information,
    representations or documents have been submitted  in  relation  to  the
    present application, whether or not  the  applicant  had  knowledge  of
    their submission is established by paragraphs S-EC.2.2., S-LTR.2.2. and
    S-ILR.2.2.

74. We agree that the absence of a suitability requirement  addressing  the
    previous use of false representations or  a  failure  to  disclose  any
    material fact, as provided for by paragraph 322(2) of the  Rules,  when
    Appendix  FM  was  inserted  into  the  Rules   was   consistent   with
    Parliament's then intention. We therefore agree that the  insertion  of
    paragraph S-LTR.4.2. which mirrors, in part, paragraph  322(2)  was  to
    address  a  failure  of   the   suitability   requirements   previously
    established under Section S-LTR in not  permitting  the  respondent  to
    adversely rely upon the  previous  use  of  false  representations  and
    related concerns. In such circumstances,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    scope of paragraph S-LTR.1.6. is not sufficiently wide to  capture  the
    use of false representations in an  application  for  leave  to  remain
    before the respondent or in a previous application for leave  to  enter
    or remain.

75. We conclude the paragraph S-LTR.1.6., a mandatory  ground  of  refusal,
    does not cover the  use  of  false  representations  or  a  failure  to
    disclose material facts in an application for leave to remain or  in  a
    previous application for immigration status.

76. Consequently, the Judge materially erred in law  in  finding  that  the
    respondent could refuse  the  appellant's  application  on  suitability
    grounds under paragraph S-LTR.1.6. of Appendix FM.



 b. Paragraph S-LTR.4.2

i)   Disjunctive nature

77. The exercise of refusal on suitability grounds under this paragraph  is
    discretionary in nature by application of paragraph S-LTR.4.1.

78. Paragraph S-LTR.4.2. is specific as to its scope of application and the
    combination of a semicolon with 'or' establishes an exclusive sense  to
    the rule by which two independent clauses are joined,  so  establishing
    the paragraph's disjunctive nature. Mr. Jarvis accepted  on  behalf  of
    the  respondent  that  consequent  to  such  disjunctive  nature,   the
    respondent is obliged to explain why the applicable discretion  has  or
    has not been exercised in respect to this Rule.

79.  The  two  separate  basis  upon  which  the  respondent  may  exercise
    discretion to  refuse  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  can  be
    summarised as i) the use of  false  representations  or  a  failure  to
    disclose any material fact in a previous application and ii) the use of
    false representations in order to obtain a document required to support
    such an  application.  Consequent  to  their  independent  nature,  the
    Tribunal is satisfied that reliance upon one or both  of  the  elements
    must be specifically pleaded and reasoned  by  the  respondent  in  her
    decision letter, or if upon becoming aware of further  information  the
    respondent seeks to exercise her discretion during the  course  of  the
    subsequent appeal process it should be by means of an addendum decision
    providing reasons with an appellant  being  given  sufficient  time  to
    counter the serious nature of the underlying allegation as to conduct.

ii)  'The applicant has made false representations  or  failed  to  disclose
    any material fact in a previous application for entry clearance,  leave
    to enter, leave to remain or a variation of leave,  or  in  a  previous
    human rights claim'

80. By her decision of 14 December 2017, the  respondent  relied  upon  the
    first independent clause of paragraph  S-LTR.4.2.  concerned  with  the
    applicant having made false representations in a  previous  application
    for leave to remain or a variation of leave, or  in  a  previous  human
    rights claim.

81. Mr. Jarvis did not seek to persuade us  that  a  broad  reading  should
    properly  be  applied  to  this  clause  so  as  to  permit  any  false
    representation arising in an earlier application, regardless of whether
    it was made in support of the application and regardless of whether the
    falsity was drawn to the respondent's attention, as being sufficient to
    enable the refusal of an application. We  agree  that  Mr.  Jarvis  was
    correct not to because  such  approach  would  clearly  go  beyond  the
    natural meaning of the words used in this clause of the paragraph.  The
    use of the first 'or' in the sentence is inclusive,  bringing  together
    two separate elements namely the making of  false  representations  and
    the failure to disclose any material fact, which relate to a  'previous
    application'. If the intention had been to adopt the broader  approach,
    the word 'any' would have been used in  the  first  element,  concerned
    with false representations, as well as in the  second,  concerned  with
    failure to disclose material. Further, the plain meaning of  'has  made
    false representations ... in a previous application ...'  is  that  the
    false representation is made in relation  to  a  previous  application.
    There is no counter-indication that any false representation  not  made
    in support of the application, should be read into this clause.

82. In this matter the appellant has consistently informed  the  respondent
    that whilst he dishonestly assumed an  identity  and  a  NI  number  to
    secure employment, and used the identity as a British citizen to secure
    access to the NHS, he was open and honest to the respondent as  to  the
    employment and tax documents accompanying the application  having  been
    secured through the use of the false identity. We consider it important
    that the P60 forms, genuinely issued but the product of  dishonesty  as
    to identity, were peripheral to the application for leave to remain  on
    long  residence  grounds.  Their  purpose  was  to   demonstrate   long
    residence, but it was not a requirement of the relevant rule  that  the
    appellant provide P60s. They were  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  to
    establish his long residence, a task they were capable  of  satisfying,
    and not to establish that the appellant was the person named upon them.
    Nor did the documents establish that the appellant enjoyed a  right  to
    work lawfully in this country or  to  meet  any  financial  requirement
    established  by  any  relevant  paragraph  of  the  Rules.  The   false
    representation in this matter was in providing various employers with a
    dishonesty assumed identity and NI number  to  secure  employment.  The
    employment and tax documents were produced consequent to the  appellant
    having secured employment in his false identity. Having openly informed
    the respondent from the outset as to his actions, there were  no  false
    representations made on the appellant's behalf in his application  that
    he was a British citizen called Rezaul Karim  who  was  born  in  1976,
    possessed a particular NI number, was lawfully  entitled  to  work  and
    through the course of lawful employment had earned the sums detailed by
    the eleven P60 forms.

83. Upon considering [17] of the decision we are satisfied that  the  Judge
    materially erred in adopting the broader interpretation  of  the  first
    independent clause of paragraph S-LTR.4.2. Whilst  observing  that  the
    appellant had openly declared that he assumed the identity of Mr. Karim
    to secure employment, the Judge considered the innate characteristic of
    the  documents  are  containing  'false  representations'  through  the
    deliberate  dishonesty  employed  to  secure  them.  Such  an  approach
    uncoupled the requirement that the false representation be made  'in  a
    previous  application'  and  instead  broadened  the  use  of  a  false
    representation to the securing of any document  used  in  the  previous
    application, even if there were clear and adequate  admissions  to  the
    respondent from the  outset  as  to  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    documents were obtained.

84.  We  conclude  that  paragraph  S-LTR.4.2.  is  disjunctive  with   two
    independent clauses. The respondent is consequently  obliged  to  plead
    and reason her exercise of discretion  to  refuse  an  application  for
    leave to remain based on one or both of those clauses. By her  decision
    of 14 December 2017, the respondent only relied upon the first  clause.
    The natural meaning  of  the  first  clause  requires  that  the  false
    representation or the failure to disclose any material fact  must  have
    been made in support of a previous application and not be peripheral to
    that application. The  reliance  upon  employment  and  tax  documents,
    openly confirmed to have been secured through the long-time  use  of  a
    false identity, was peripheral to the previous application for leave to
    remain on private life grounds under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) and  also
    peripheral to  the  earlier  application  for  ILR  on  long  residence
    grounds. The Judge therefore  materially  erred  in  finding  that  the
    suitability requirement established by the first clause of paragraph S-
    LTR.4.2. was applicable to the appellant.

 G. Remaking the decision

85. Mr. Jarvis informed us at the hearing that though  the  respondent  did
    not rely upon the second clause of paragraph S-LTR.4.2., namely the use
    of false representations in order to  obtain  a  document  required  to
    support such an application, either in her 2017 decision or before  the
    Judge in 2018, and so it could not be considered at the  error  of  law
    hearing, she would now wish to rely upon it at the remaking  stage.  He
    accepted that the reasons for the exercise of discretion would have  to
    be conveyed to the appellant in writing.

86. When considering whether to permit the  respondent  time  to  issue  an
    addendum decision we have considered her case under the  second  clause
    of paragraph S-LTR.4.2 at its highest and we conclude  that  she  could
    not, on any view, meet the requirements of the  second  clause  on  the
    facts of this case.

87. The use of false representations is clearly  linked  to  the  obtaining
    'from the Secretary of State or a third party a  document  required  to
    support such an application or claim'. Mr. Jarvis  accepted  before  us
    that, in principle, the deception should relate to the act of obtaining
    the document for the purposes of supporting an application or claim  to
    remain in the United Kingdom. This is consistent with the  use  of  the
    words 'required to support' which confirms a compulsory element to  the
    use of the document(s) within the application or  claim  process.  Such
    compulsion is identified by the relevant Rules or guidance.

88. We therefore conclude that the use of the words 'required  to  support'
    in the second clause of  paragraph  S-LTR.4.2.  confirms  a  compulsory
    element to the use of  document(s)  within  the  application  or  claim
    process, and the obtaining of the document(s) must be for the  purposes
    of the immigration application or claim.

89. We observe that the appellant has relied upon  documents  arising  from
    his employment, such as the P60s,  in  long  residence  and  article  8
    (private  life)  applications  alone  and  not,  for  example,  in   an
    application where he was required to establish his earnings. He  always
    confirmed by means of his applications that the documents were  secured
    with  the  adoption   of   another   person's   identity.   The   false
    representation was to his employer(s), namely that  he  was  a  British
    citizen called Rezaul Karim who was born in 1976, possessed  a  certain
    NI  number  and  was   lawfully   permitted   to   work.   Such   false
    representations were not made to obtain a document for the  purpose  of
    supporting an application for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The documents were solely generated consequent to the appellant  having
    secured employment. We are satisfied that upon a natural reading of the
    second clause the securing of the employment documents relied  upon  by
    the  appellant  in  this  matter  were  not   secured   through   false
    representations to support an application for leave to remain.  In  any
    event we observe  that  such  employment  and  tax  documents  are  not
    required for  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii). Consequently, even taking the respondent's case at  her
    highest under the second clause of paragraph S-LTR.4.2. she  could  not
    succeed.

90. We find that the appellant does  not  fall  to  be  refused  under  the
    suitability requirements detailed at paragraph 276ADE(1)(i). Noting the
    unchallenged finding of JFtT Macdonald  that  the  appellant  has  been
    present in this country since 19 January 1996 and upon considering  the
    evidence before us  we  are  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  been
    continuously present in this country since that date, a period of  over
    20 years. We therefore find that the appellant meets  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) and allow his appeal on article  8  private
    life grounds.

 H. Notice of decision

91. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and we set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on
    14 December 2018 pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007.

92. Upon remaking the decision, the  appeal  is  allowed  on  human  rights
    (article 8) grounds.




Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 7 October 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

 1. The respondent accepts that her reliance upon paragraph S-LTR.1.4.  and
    the first clause of paragraph S-LTR.4.2. in her decision of 14 December
    2017 was erroneous. No other ground was  identified  for  refusing  the
    appellant's application under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

93. We make a fee award in favour of the appellant in the sum of 140.




Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 7 October 2020

