
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/01375/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th December 2017                |On 17th January 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     F N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Abbas (Counsel, instructed by Imperium Group
                    Immigration Specialists)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision  to  avoid  confusion  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision the term Appellant will be used to refer to FN and  Respondent
    will refer to the Secretary of State. The  Appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Housego at Hatton Cross on the 30th of March 2017 and allowed  in
    a decision promulgated on the 10th of April 2017.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history was set out in paragraph 2  of  the
    decision. Substantive consideration of the Appellant's  case  began  at
    paragraph 22 on page 11 of the decision  with  the  discussion  of  the
    circumstances from paragraph 55. The Judge allowed the appeal and  that
    is now contested by the Secretary of State.

 3. The Appellant's credibility was not in dispute and the facts that  were
    found are set out at paragraphs 40 to 53. The  Appellant  had  suffered
    with a brain tumour and following treatment in the UK developed a palsy
    that was not transient,  headaches,  became  deaf  in  her  right  ear,
    eyesight  and   balance   problems.   Although   well   qualified   the
    discrimination suffered by the Appellant in  Pakistan  meant  that  she
    could not work and she had lived as recluse between 2006 and 2011.  The
    discrimination suffered extends to her own family and friends.

 4. In the discussion and conclusion at paragraph 55 to 69 the Judge  found
    that the balance in this appeal lay with the Appellant and not with the
    Secretary of  State  when  considering  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    against the public interest in  immigration  control.  The  Appellant's
    circumstances would not pass the threshold for article 3, paragraph  70
    and the Appellant was not assisted by the delay.

 5. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal  in  grounds  of
    application of the 18th of April 2017. It was argued that the Judge had
    misapplied the reintegration test from paragraph 276ADE,  the  evidence
    did not show that if returned the Appellant would be in  any  different
    position now than she had been in the past. With regard  to  article  8
    the Judge had not considered the Appellant's precarious status  in  the
    UK and had not compared her situation against that which she would face
    in Pakistan. In losing direct contact with family in the UK  she  would
    return to her family in Pakistan. It was only in respect of  employment
    prospects that the situation would be  significantly  different.  there
    was no basis for finding that  the  obstacles  were  insurmountable  or
    exceptional.

 6. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  the
    11th of October 2017. She stated that it was arguable  that  the  Judge
    had failed to take into account the Appellant's precarious position  in
    the UK and her ties to family in Pakistan.

 7. At the hearing both representatives made submissions in line with their
    respective positions, these are set  out  in  full  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and referred to where relevant below.

 8. The essential difference between the Appellant's circumstances  in  the
    UK and in Pakistan is that in Pakistan  the  Appellant,  as  the  Judge
    found, would live as a recluse for the reasons given. The  Judge  found
    that the Appellant could not be expected to wear a Niqab  never  having
    done so before  which  is  essentially  a  point  arising  out  of  the
    reasoning in HJ (Iran) [2009] EWCA Civ 172.

 9. Despite the extensive recitation of law  the  Judge  did  not  say  the
    obvious point that this case is about the physical and moral  integrity
    of the Appellant. In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25  (IAC)
    the headnote reads as follows: "The judgments of the Supreme  Court  in
    Patel and Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
    UKSC 72 serve to re-focus  attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR and, in particular, to recognise  that  Article's
    limited utility in private life cases that are  far  removed  from  the
    protection of an individual's moral and physical integrity."

10. The difference between the Appellant's circumstances in Pakistan, where
    it is not challenged she lived, and would in future would  live,  as  a
    recluse compared to the open life she lives in the  UK  have  not  been
    challenged. Those are fundamental matters that go to her  physical  and
    moral integrity and are directly  related  to  the  medical  conditions
    which are not in dispute. The facts of this case can properly  be  said
    to be unique and the decision of Judge Housego cannot be taken  to  lay
    down any general principle. On the facts which were  not  disputed  the
    Judge was entitled to find that the public interest in the  Appellant's
    removal was outweighed  by  the  Appellant's  own  highly  unusual  and
    distressing personal circumstances. Whilst the decision could have been
    better expressed, and I have made some further observations  below,  it
    was open to the Judge for the reasons given.

11. There is guidance from the Court of Appeal on the approach of reviewing
    courts to the approach to be taken but which also contains observations
    on First-tier Tribunal decisions. Burnett LJ in EA v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 10 at paragraph 27 gave made the following observations: "Decisions
    of tribunals should  not  become  formulaic  and  rarely  benefit  from
    copious citation of authority. Arguments that reduce to the proposition
    that the F-tT has failed to mention dicta from a series of cases in the
    Court of Appeal or elsewhere will rarely prosper.  Similarly,  as  Lord
    Hoffmann said in  Piglowska  v  Piglowski  [1999]  1  WLR  1360,  1372,
    "reasons  should  be  read  on  the  assumption  that,  unless  he  has
    demonstrated the contrary, the judge knew how  he  should  perform  his
    functions and which matters he should take into account". He added that
    an "appellate  court  should  resist  the  temptation  to  subvert  the
    principle that they should not substitute their own discretion for that
    of the judge by a narrow textual analysis which enables them  to  claim
    that he misdirected himself". Moreover, some principles are  so  firmly
    embedded in judicial thinking that they do not need to be recited.  For
    example, it would be surprising  to  see  in  every  civil  judgment  a
    paragraph dealing with the burden and standard of proof;  or  in  every
    running  down  action  a  treatise,  however  short,  on  the  law   of
    negligence. That said, the reader of  any  judicial  decision  must  be
    reassured from its content that the court or tribunal has  applied  the
    correct legal test to any question it is deciding."

12. Albeit not material  to  the  decision  itself  paragraphs  12  to  19,
    covering pages 4 to 11 fall foul of the  first  line  of  the  guidance
    cited above and the further quotes in paragraphs 63 and 64 do  not  add
    to the decision. Given that credibility was not in issue in  this  case
    the effective part the decision started only at paragraph 40 on age 16.
    The decision would have benefitted from a robust summary of the salient
    facts followed by a discussion applying  the  balancing  exercise.  The
    Judge also did not make clear  that  this  was  a  physical  and  moral
    integrity case although that is the only  basis  on  which  the  appeal
    could succeed. As I have indicated the decision was open to  the  Judge
    for the reasons given but the decision was flawed in ways that did  not
    assist its being understood.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

I make no fee award, this was an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  and  so
question of a fee award does not arise.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 15th January 2018

