
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01500/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th January 2019                   |On 13th February 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                        Mr SAMSON ADESEUN MAFIMISEBI
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Adebayo, Solicitor instructed by David & Vine
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria whose  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross in a decision promulgated on  14th  June
    2018.

 2. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt who said that it was arguable that the judge took a
    wrong approach in the assessment of whether it was reasonable  for  the
    oldest child to leave the UK -  reference  was  made  to  KO  (Nigeria)
    [2018] UKSC 53.  All the grounds were said to be arguable.

 3. Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.

 4. For the Appellant Mr Adebayo relied on his grounds.  The judge had done
    very little to address the best interests of the  Appellant's  children
    and had determined the fate of the children by reference  only  to  the
    Appellant's conduct which was wrong in law.  In  particular,  reference
    was made to well-known case law, namely ZH (Tanzania) and  Zoumbas  and
    it was said the judge did not carry out any form of assessment  of  the
    children's best interests.  There was no well-rounded assessment  using
    all the factors that were relevant to the welfare and  wellbeing  of  a
    child including their emotional stability.  The  judge  had  taken  the
    wrong approach by failing to ask himself any question relating  to  the
    children's' best interests.

 5. Mr Adebayo stated to me that given what was said in KO (Nigeria) it was
    clear that the judge was wrong to blame the parent for refusal  of  the
    appeal.  The judgment should be set aside and a fresh decision made  in
    favour of the Appellant.  If that proposition was not to be successful,
    then his secondary position was that the decision should be  set  aside
    and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  rehearing.   It
    was pointed out that the eldest child was now a British citizen.

 6. For the Secretary of State Ms Jones referred to KO (Nigeria)  and  said
    that the judge had done what was required of him.  He had  referred  to
    the best interests of the children.  He had recognised and had said  in
    paragraph 17 (final sentence) that it was  well  established  that  the
    children should not be blamed for  the  immigration  transgressions  of
    their parents.  In paragraph 18 he had  taken  account  of  the  school
    reports relating to the children.   In  these  circumstances  Ms  Jones
    argued that the decision should stand.

 7. I reserved my position.

Conclusions

 8. It should be said that the decision of  Judge  Ross  is  set  out  very
    clearly and  generally  correctly  and  is  straightforward  enough  to
    follow.  It is true, as Ms Jones pointed out, that the judge recognised
    that as was pointed out in Zoumbas the child should not be  blamed  for
    the conduct of  its  parents.   The  judge  also  recognised  that  the
    children were doing well at school.

 9. Unfortunately, what the judge did not address is  what  were  the  best
    interests of the children as at the date of  the  hearing.   The  judge
    noted the argument (paragraph 19) that it was certainly in  their  best
    interests to remain in the UK but the judge does not  deal  with  that.
    The judge went on to come back to the question as to what were the best
    interests of the children  (paragraph  22)  but  considered  that  this
    question should be answered based  on  whether  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the United  Kingdom  together  with  their
    mother.  The judge accepted that it would not be in the children's best
    interests for their father to leave the UK without them.

10. The judge concluded (paragraph 23) that the Respondent had proved  that
    it was reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

11. For some reason the judge avoids the central  question  in  this  case,
    namely what was in the best  interests  of  the  children  although  he
    recognised that this was a primary consideration.   However,  that  was
    the question that he was due to answer and he failed to deal with  that
    central issue and as such, there is a material error  of  law  in  this
    decision.

12. In my view further fact-finding is necessary because it is important to
    have clear factual findings on what  are  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  This question needs to be answered before a decision is made
    on whether to dismiss or allow the appeal.  As it happens  one  of  the
    children (I was told by Mr Adebayo) is  now  a  British  citizen  which
    would grant weight to the Appellant's case that he should be allowed to
    remain here.  However, given that there is a material error of  law  in
    the judge's decision I think the sensible way forward  is  to  set  the
    decision aside and remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing.

13. The matter will therefore have to be  heard  again  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the decision of Judge Ross is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be re-made is such that it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision.

16. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 5th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

