
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01562/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                           ENIOLA ABOSEDE ADEMOLA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                 DIRECTIONS

1.    At paragraph 24 of my Decision and Reasons in  this  case,  I  invited
    the representatives to make submissions as to the proper forum for  the
    reconsideration of the Article 8 claim, an error of law in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's' decision having been found.

2.    The Respondent in an email of 6 April 2017 is essentially  neutral  on
    the point. The  Appellant  has  made  submissions  on  the  substantive
    issues, having apparently misunderstood paragraph 24.

3.    I have  concluded  that  the  appropriate  forum  for  addressing  the
    Article 8 claim, in the context  of  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter
    living in Ireland, is for that issue to be considered by Judge  Callow,
    who heard the appeal in the First-tier, at  Taylor  House,  bearing  in
    mind in particular paragraph 23 of my Decision and Reasons.

Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen   Dated: 27/4/2017

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01562/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2017                          |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Eniola Abosede Ademola
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Peterson, instructed by DF Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Secretary of State appeals with permission  against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Judge who allowed on human rights grounds the  appeal
    of Ms Ademola against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against her and  refusing  her  human  rights  claim.
    Hereafter I shall  refer  to  Ms  Ademola  as  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent, as they were before the judge.

2.    The appellant is a Nigerian national.  She  travelled  to  Ireland  in
    2001 to join her then husband, an Irish national.  Her daughter  T  was
    born in Ireland on 15 August 2002  and  thereafter  received  an  Irish
    passport.  The appellant's relationship with her  husband  subsequently
    broke down and she came to the United Kingdom with T in March 2003  and
    has stayed ever since.  She applied unsuccessfully for the issue of  an
    EEA registration card, founded on her relationship with  her  daughter.
    However, her daughter's appeal against the decision to refuse her  with
    a registration certificate was allowed on human rights grounds and  she
    was given discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom until  15
    September 2014.

3.    The appellant entered into a relationship in the United  Kingdom  with
    a man who ill-treated her.  She was a victim of domestic  violence  and
    sexual and physical abuse by this man and her  daughter  was  made  the
    subject of a child protection plan  under  the  category  of  physical,
    emotional and sexual abuse, with effect from 15 October 2012.

4.    On 29 March 2013 the appellant pleaded guilty  to  a  count  of  theft
    which took place in circumstances where she stole money from an elderly
    lady whose carer she was.  She had a previous conviction from May  2008
    for  possession  or  control  of  a  false   or   improperly   obtained
    identification document or apparatus for making  identification  cards.
    On conviction for the theft offence she was  sentenced  to  30  months'
    imprisonment.

5.    The judge concluded that the appellant was a  "foreign  criminal"  for
    the purposes of section 32(1) of the UK Borders Act  2007.   The  judge
    went on to consider whether an Article 8 claim was made  out.   He  set
    out the relevant provisions of the 2002 Act and the  Immigration  Rules
    and also considered in some detail the relevant case law.  He found the
    appellant's evidence generally to be credible.  He also  bore  in  mind
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with T who is under the age of 18 and has lived in the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for at least seven  years.   He  addressed  the  issue  of
    "undue hardship", the relevant criterion under paragraph  399(a)(ii)(a)
    and (b).  He also noted the appellant had been assessed as being at low
    risk of reoffending.  In assessing whether or not it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for T to live in Nigeria with the appellant or to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without the appellant, the  judge  considered  her  best
    interests, again referring to the relevant authorities.   He  concluded
    that it was in her best interests to remain with the  appellant.   They
    have a genuine and subsisting relationship and T has  no  contact  with
    her father.  The judge considered that while T might well  have  rights
    to dual citizenship, Nigeria was to all intents and purposes a  foreign
    country to her.  She had never visited Nigeria and had  no  links  with
    the country and her cultural norms had been established in  the  United
    Kingdom.

6.    The judge also considered that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  T
    to remain in the United Kingdom without the  appellant.   By  remaining
    she would continue with her education but the judge commented  that  in
    the appellant's absence it was problematical what  progress  she  would
    make.  He noted that the evidence of among others Ms  Dixon  who  cared
    for T when her mother was in prison, that the absence of her mother had
    a detrimental impact on T's emotional and educational  wellbeing.   The
    judge had also noted and taken into account the fact that the appellant
    had been convicted of a particularly serious offence and had abused the
    degree of trust invested in her in caring  for  an  elderly  vulnerable
    person.  The judge took guidance from what  had  been  decided  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in KMO [2015] UKUT 543 (IAC) where it  was  regarded  as
    right to take into  account  the  offences  committed  by  the  foreign
    criminal and the public interest considerations that come into play  in
    assessing whether the impact on the child of the foreign criminal being
    deported was inordinately or excessively harsh.

7.    The judge then went on to consider the situation under Community  law.
     He noted this was not fully addressed at the hearing, but in light  of
    Counsel's brief submissions it was necessary to address the issue.   He
    examined relevant Regulations and case law and concluded that a  person
    who would ordinarily have a derivative right of residence  pursuant  to
    the decision in Zambrano would be denied that right  where  deportation
    would be "conducive to the public good".  This  arose  from  Regulation
    20A of the EEA Regulations.  The judge noted that the case  of  CS  was
    being referred to the CJEU to be heard at the same time as a  reference
    from the Spanish Administrative Tribunal in Rendon  Marin.   The  judge
    concluded that in light of the referral to the CJEU and  the  questions
    posed by the Upper Tribunal in CS, the respondent's decision  that  the
    appellant should be denied a derivative right of residence because  her
    deportation from the United Kingdom was conducive to  the  public  good
    was not in accordance with the law.  He concluded that the appeal  fell
    to be allowed under exception 3 at section 33(4) of the UK Borders  Act
    2007 that deportation would breach the appellant's rights as a  foreign
    criminal under community treaties.   The  appeal  was  allowed  to  the
    extent that it awaited the lawful decision of the respondent.

8.    The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to appeal  on
    the basis first that the judge had failed to resolve a conflict of fact
    or opinion and that he was required to decide the  case  in  accordance
    with the law as it stood under EU law rather than by reference to cases
    yet to be decided; that there was a procedural error  in  dealing  with
    the issue when he had not been fully addressed on  it  and  only  heard
    brief submissions by the appellant's representative; that he had  erred
    in finding that it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant's  daughter
    to accompany her to Nigeria, arguing that it was wrong to  say  that  T
    had no links with Nigeria since she would be accompanied by her  mother
    who was born and bred there, and no negative findings had been made  as
    to the prospects  of  the  appellant  integrating  back  into  Nigerian
    society; and finally, that the credibility finding was flawed  in  that
    the judge had  failed  to  take  into  consideration  the  evidence  of
    witnesses at the hearing and apparent discrepancies as recorded by  the
    Presenting Officer between their evidence regarding the  alleged  death
    of  the  appellant's  mother  and  the  apparent  emigration   of   the
    appellant's two sons.  It was also argued that it was an error for  the
    judge to say that the appellant had, with the assistance of her church,
    generally been financially independent  in  considering  section  117B,
    bearing in mind the fundamental basis of her deportation was the  theft
    of nearly �6,000 from a vulnerable lady aged 78.

9.    Directions were made by Judge Jordan at a hearing on 21 December  2016
    requiring the Secretary of State to file and serve submissions  setting
    out her case within 28 days in relation to the impact and effect on the
    child who as an Irish citizen and a Union citizen  and  having  accrued
    rights under Article 8 having lived in the United Kingdom  since  March
    2003, and also as to the impact and effect on  the  appellant  as  sole
    carer of T as an Irish citizen, as a Union citizen and as the mother of
    a child with accrued Article 8 rights.

10.   The Secretary of State did not comply  with  these  directions.   This
    clearly caused difficulty for the appellant who had to try and  respond
    to what the answer might have been by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The
    Secretary of State sought  and  was  refused  an  adjournment  and  the
    hearing proceeded.

11.   Mr Tufan argued that though the decision of CS was now  available,  it
    had no bearing on this case.  He argued that  the  case  needed  to  be
    considered via  established  case  law.   The  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Badewa [2015] UKUT 329 (IAC) set out the proper approach in
    a case where sections 117A to D of the 2002 Act were to  be  considered
    in the context of an EEA removal decision.  The judge had not  followed
    that approach, which required an assessment initially of  the  position
    under the Regulations and  thereafter  Article  8  but  had  considered
    Article 8 first.  The decision had to be read  via  the  Directive  and
    Articles 20 and 21 of the TFEU, this being  the  Zambrano  issue.   The
    decision in CS was concerned with whether or not  a  child  who  was  a
    national of the country he was living in, i.e. the  United  Kingdom  in
    this case, would be compelled to leave the European Union and that  did
    not apply to this case.  As regards the Rendon Marin decision, it was a
    question of whether the child would be compelled to leave the  EU,  and
    the child in this case was of Irish nationality and it was  a  question
    of whether her mother had the right to live in Ireland  under  Zambrano
    principles.

12.   The judge had therefore quite clearly erred in failing to look at  the
    ability of the child and the appellant to reside in Ireland.  The judge
    could and should have considered whether the appellant is  subjectively
    or objectively compelled to go to Ireland and that was  a  matter  that
    needed to be explored.  He founded this argument on what had been  said
    in Harrison [2012] EWCA Civ 1736.  There  was  nothing  to  compel  the
    child to leave the European Union.  Ireland was essentially similar  to
    the United Kingdom and if the question was asked the  answer  would  be
    that there was no compulsion for either of them to  leave  the  EU  and
    that was an essential point that should have been  considered  and  had
    not been.

13.   Mr Tufan argued that the section 117B factors needed to be  considered
    in full, including the paragraph 117C factors.  The crime that had been
    committed was a very serious  one.   The  judge  had  to  consider  the
    appellant's precarious status and the fact that it had always been  the
    case.  The judge seemed to treat speaking English as being  a  positive
    factor, whereas it was clear from cases such as AM (Malawi) and Ruppiah
    that it was at most a neutral factor.

14.    The  judge  was  clearly  wrong  in  what  he  said  about  financial
    independence and where he had concluded that when at liberty  and  with
    the  assistance  of  her  church  the  appellant  had  generally   been
    financially independent.  The fact that the church might  assist  could
    not possibly mean she was independent.  This was a negative factor  and
    had to be treated as such.  The MAB and KMO debate have been settled in
    MM (Uganda) and it was clear that all factors had to be looked at.   In
    both MAB and KMO it had been concluded that undue harshness set a  very
    high test.  Ms Peterson would argue that the child had  no  links  with
    Ireland and could not go there, but she was a citizen of  that  country
    and there  could  not  be  a  greater  link  than  that.   The  judge's
    consideration of the EEA matters was brief.  It was clear, for example,
    from paragraph 6 in NA (Pakistan) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  140  that  if  the
    appellant and her daughter were to move to Ireland the  appellant,  who
    is the parent with sole care, would have a derived right  of  residence
    in Ireland applying Zambrano principles.  There was  a  requirement  of
    independent means under Article 7 and that was not the case  here,  and
    certainly no comprehensive sickness insurance, so the  requirements  of
    the Article were not satisfied.  There was no EEA right for  the  child
    in the United Kingdom.

15.   Ms Peterson addressed the  grounds  upon  which  permission  had  been
    granted.  With regard to ground 1, the judge dealt with the seriousness
    of the offence including referring to the sentencing remarks.   He  had
    also referred to the low risk of offending as  assessed  in  the  OASyS
    evaluation.  That report dealt with  all  the  relevant  circumstances.
    The matter had been analysed by the judge outside  the  EU  Regulations
    and these matters had been set out  before  him  in  the  skeleton  and
    submissions.  If there were an error of law in respect of CS as regards
    an undetermined issue before the CJEU then it  was  immaterial  to  the
    judge's findings.

16.   With regard to the procedural unfairness argument  in  ground  2,  the
    Presenting Officer had had the skeleton argument before him  and  could
    have made any submissions he wished to.

17.   Ground 3 was more central and was concerned with  the  best  interests
    of the child.  The findings in  this  regard  were  adequate.   It  was
    always a very delicate balancing exercise and the judge had made  clear
    findings on the point given all the history and the suffering  of  both
    the appellant and her daughter, both of whom had  been  abused  by  the
    appellant's former  partner.   They  had  experienced  a  very  painful
    separation and had been reunited and the child's circumstances now were
    stable.  The judge had taken full account of the evidence  and  of  the
    skeleton argument.

18.   As regards ground 4, the discrepancies had  been  alluded  to  in  the
    grounds but had not been produced and were  not  specified  as  to  the
    effect they had on the issues.  As regards the  financial  independence
    point that Mr Tufan had referred to, the appellant had  not  relied  on
    her criminal activity and nor had the judge.  There had been paid  work
    and the judge had heard evidence as to the likelihood of that.

19.   It was unclear why the daughter  had  only  been  given  discretionary
    leave in accordance with Zambrano.  Her self-sufficiency was irrelevant
    and her parents' status as a supporter  of  her.   The  argument  about
    section 117B should be treated with caution as  regards  precariousness
    when the appellant was a Zambrano carer.   She  did  not  have  settled
    leave but had an EU citizen child and removal of support for the  child
    should be looked at in light of  that.   The  judge's  findings  as  to
    whether or not Nigeria was  in  focus  was  not  in  the  child's  best
    interests.  Mr Tufan had argued that with respect to Marin  and  CS  he
    could not transpose the best interests findings  to  Ireland.   If  the
    Tribunal were to find an  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  failure  to
    consider Ireland, then it was urged to find that on  all  the  evidence
    which had been before the judge, given the history and  the  fact  that
    the child was now thriving  in  secondary  school,  that  they  had  no
    connection beyond the child's nationality to Ireland, but a significant
    connection to the United Kingdom with community support, including  the
    fact that people  had  attended  hearings  including  today's  hearing.
    After an appalling lengthy history of ill-treatment  under  which  both
    had been abused, they were removed to a place of safety and  the  OASyS
    Report was very lengthy and positive.  It considered the bad  influence
    of the appellant's former partner on her and on the  child.   It  would
    not be in the child's best interests  to  further  destabilise  her  by
    removing her to Ireland and the further  submissions  Ms  Peterson  had
    made were relevant to that.  The best interests findings could  equally
    be applied to Ireland in  all  the  circumstances.   The  child's  best
    interests were to live in the United Kingdom  where  she  was  socially
    integrated and she was at a critical point  in  her  education,  having
    begun her  GCSE  studies,  and  she  was  thriving.   She  had  a  good
    relationship with her mother and that  sustained  her  stability  here.
    Her best interests had been properly considered with regards  to  going
    to Nigeria.  Article 8 had been fully argued before  the  judge.   With
    regard to the EU matters it  was  clear  that  the  appellant  did  not
    represent a present, genuine and sufficiently  serious  threat  to  the
    fundamental interests of society.  All the circumstances were  required
    to be taken into account.

20.   By way of reply Mr Tufan argued that the authority  in  NA  (Pakistan)
    was the most recent delineation of the proper approach.  The finding of
    the  child's  best  interests  did  not  mean  that  removal  would  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.  Also the child had lived with the family
    from when the appellant was in prison.  The issue of any  threat  posed
    by the appellant was not relevant as it  was  not  a  question  of  the
    appellant being compelled to leave the United Kingdom.  There had to be
    a compulsion as set out in Harrison.

21.   I reserved my decision.

22.   It is clear from the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Badewa  that
    the correct approach in a case such as this is first to decide  if  the
    person will satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, in which context section 117A to D has
    no application; and secondly, where a person has raised Article 8 as  a
    ground of appeal, section  117A  to  D  applies.   However,  I  see  no
    materiality in the  judge's  failure  to  follow  this  approach.   The
    essential issue is that of the substance of the  judge's  reasoning  on
    the relevant issues and whether those show  an  error  of  law  in  his
    decision.  As regards the specific grounds, ground 2 can be disposed of
    fairly briefly in that, as Ms Peterson argued, the Secretary of State's
    representative heard her submissions at  the  hearing  and  could  have
    addressed the point she made and did not do  so.   I  do  not  consider
    there was any procedural or other irregularity affecting  the  fairness
    of the proceedings.  Nor do I consider ground 4 to be made out.  As  Ms
    Peterson argued, the minute of the  Presenting  Officer  has  not  been
    produced and it has not been specified what the impact of  this  matter
    was on the issues.  On the essential points in issue credibility is not
    a matter of materiality.  Nor do I consider that the judge can be  said
    to have erred in finding that the appellant was financially independent
    with the  assistance  of  her  church.   As  Ms  Peterson  argued,  the
    appellant has worked in the past, and the judge in no sense can be said
    to have based his findings on the appellant supporting herself  by  the
    proceeds of her theft from the elderly lady.

23.   The essential difficulty I think with  the  judge's  decision  is  the
    failure to address the fact of the Irish nationality of the appellant's
    child and the ability of the  two  to  move  to  Ireland  and  for  the
    appellant to act as her daughter's carer there.  It is, I think,  clear
    that, bearing in mind T's Irish nationality, since the appellant is her
    mother with sole care she will have a derived  right  of  residence  in
    Ireland, applying Zambrano principles.  This has clear relevance to the
    Article 8 issue in this case.  The judge's evaluation of Article  8  is
    in many ways a very careful and thorough one.  But I do not think  that
    those findings can in essence be transposed, as Ms Peterson argued,  to
    the situation of removal to  Ireland.   The  parent/child  relationship
    would of course be continued there, and although  they  would  be  away
    from the support that they have in the United Kingdom and would have to
    make a fresh start, there is no question of them being required  to  go
    to Nigeria, and in  that  regard  I  can  see  faults  in  the  judge's
    conclusions as to the best interests of the child in the context of the
    relevant legal tests.  But the Article 8 issue  in  this  case,  in  my
    judgement, has to be evaluated in the context of the appellant and  her
    daughter living in Ireland, and to that  extent  the  decision  of  the
    judge in failing to deal with that point is an  error  of  law.   As  a
    consequence the Article 8 issue will have to be  reconsidered  with  an
    evaluation of this matter factored into it.

24.   I invite the parties' representations  as  to  the  proper  forum  for
    this.  It may well be that the best outcome is for  the  matter  to  go
    back to the same judge who decided the case earlier for him  to  factor
    into his reasoning the Ireland issue as one  might  call  it.   I  will
    decide that point after giving the parties fourteen days from the  date
    on which the decision is  sent  out  to  make  representations  on  the
    matter.

25.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

