
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01683/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (Remotely)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8 June 2021                      |On 23 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MUHAMMAD FURQAN BAIG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jones, counsel instructed by Britannia
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  SJ
    Clarke, promulgated on 5 January 2021. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 1 February 2021.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The respondent entered the United Kingdom on 27 January 2010 with entry
    clearance as a student and has resided here ever  since.  Subsequently,
    he has had applications to extend his leave refused,  granted  and  his
    leave curtailed on occasion. On 4 January 2020, the respondent  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds  of
    10 years' long residence. That application was refused  on  13  January
    2020 and it is this decision which is the subject of this  appeal.  The
    principal reason for refusal was that there was, between  25  September
    2012 and 24 February 2014, a gap of 517 days in the respondent's lawful
    leave to remain which meant that he had not  had  10  years  continuous
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom. The respondent did not meet any
    of the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1) and there  said  to  be  no
    exceptional circumstances.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The Secretary of State did not provide a representative for the hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The  judge  accepted  the  respondent's
    account that he lodged an appeal, in time, against the decision  letter
    dated 25 September 2012 and that he did not withdraw this appeal  until
    2014. Consequently, the judge decided that the respondent's  leave  was
    extended under section 3C of the 1971 Act and that  he  had  10  years'
    continuous leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

The grounds of appeal

 5. There was a sole ground of appeal, that the judge made a mistake as  to
    a material fact regarding the issues of  timeliness  and  the  date  of
    service of the decision letter dated 25 September 2012.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 7. A detailed Rule 24 response was received. In  essence,  the  respondent
    did not accept that there was any material error in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal and the suggested mistake of fact  referred  to  in
    the grounds was said to be unintelligible. With  regard  to  the  claim
    that the respondent appealed out of time in  2021,  the  grounds  argue
    that extensive reasons were given for finding that it was made in time.

Procedural matters

 8. On 8 February 2021, the parties were  sent  directions  inviting  their
    views as to whether this matter could proceed without a hearing.  Ms  A
    Jones of counsel replied on behalf of the respondent,  stating  that  a
    hearing was necessary given the complexity of his immigration  history.
    No response was received from the Secretary of State.

The hearing

 9. Mr Melvin relied on the second paragraph  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    recognising that the first paragraph  was  unintelligible.  He  further
    relied upon his skeleton argument and  a  screenshot  relating  to  the
    respondent's Home Office database entry. Mr Melvin  proceeded  to  make
    the following points. The First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in  law
    in relying on the notices of hearing on the multiple party  hearing  as
    evidence that the respondent's appeal  was  in  time.   The  judge  was
    required to look at the 10-year period prior  to  the  ILR  application
    made in 2020 and was wrong to  admonish  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    failing to raise out of time  issue  at  an  earlier  date.  Inadequate
    reasons were given for accepting that the respondent's claim was timely
    There was evidence available to show that the decision letter was  sent
    on 25 September 2012.  Ms Jones  had  attempted  to  muddy  the  waters
    before the First-tier Tribunal as to the date the letter was  sent.  No
    evidence of correspondence between  the  previous  solicitors  and  the
    respondent had been provided and neither  had  the  current  solicitors
    made a Subject Access Request. Mr Melvin invited me to find a  material
    error of law and remake the appeal on the basis  of  the  new  evidence
    provided by the Secretary of State.

10. Ms Jones took issue  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  reliance  on  a
    document which was never before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  further
    argued that the reasons given by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  were
    intelligible and supported by evidence.

11. At the end of the hearing, I indicated that the reasons  given  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for  concluding  that  the  appellant  had
    appealed in time in 2012  were  adequate  and  that  the  decision  was
    upheld.

Decision on error of law

12.  As  indicated  above,  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  provide  a
    representative for the hearing at the First-tier Tribunal and  nor  was
    any evidence produced to support the claim made in the decision  letter
    that the 2012 appeal was made out of time. A judge cannot be criticised
    for not considering evidence nor submissions which  were  never  before
    her. The respondent addressed the Secretary of State's  assertion  that
    his appeal was made out of time in a detailed witness  statement  which
    was provided in  his  bundle  of  evidence  served  on  the  Presenting
    Officers Unit and the First-tier Tribunal on 27 April 2020. The  appeal
    was not heard until 9 December 2020 and it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    Secretary of State had insufficient time to provide evidence to support
    her assertions.

13. The judge provided a series of  adequate  reasons  for  preferring  the
    respondent's account to that of the Secretary of State.  Those  reasons
    included that the Secretary  of  State  had  provided  no  evidence  of
    service [6]; the Secretary of State's assertions  as  to  the  date  of
    service was inconsistent in that the dates 15  September  2012  and  25
    September 2012 are given in the decision under appeal [6]; neither  the
    Secretary of State nor the Tribunal had raised the issue of  timeliness
    of  the  appeal  lodged  in  2012  and  withdrawn  in  2014  [7];   the
    respondent's recollection  of  events  was  preferred  because  he  had
    attended the hearing to be cross-examined on the point and had provided
    contemporaneous evidence as to the events of 2012 [8]  and  furthermore
    an additional date of 27 September 2012 on the 2012  decision  provided
    further confusion as to the date of service. [8].

14. Given the foregoing, the judge  was  fully  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that it was more  likely  than  not  that  the  respondent's
    appeal was lodged in time and that  he  satisfied  the  requirement  of
    having ten years' continuous lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and the decision is upheld.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date 10 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

