
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/01617/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2019                          |  On 16 July 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                Mrs Feng Lin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H. Kannangara, Counsel, instructed by Lisa's Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Fen Lin, is a citizen of China, born 20  November  1990.
    She appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke
    promulgated on 24 April 2019 dismissing her appeal against  a  decision
    of the respondent dated 16 November 2018 to  refuse  her  human  rights
    application.


Factual background

 2. The appellant is the wife of a naturalised British citizen  of  Chinese
    descent, Tom Zi Lin ("the sponsor"). Together they have  two  children,
    E, who was a born on 5 November 2013, and a second child  born  shortly
    before the hearing.  E is a British citizen, as is their second  child.
    The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2007  with  a  visa
    valid for six months. She did not leave, and  during  her  time  as  an
    overstayer, met and married the sponsor, and gave birth to E.  In April
    2014, she made an application for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds, which was granted from June 2015  to  December  2017.  Shortly
    before the expiration of that visa, she applied for  further  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  That application was refused,  and  it
    is that refusal decision which was challenged before Judge O'Rourke.

 3. The application was refused on suitability grounds, on  account  of  an
    English-language test certificate which had been fraudulently  obtained
    by the appellant.  An additional ground of refusal, not pursued by  the
    respondent before the First-tier Tribunal, was  that  the  relationship
    between the appellant and the sponsor was not genuine  and  subsisting.
    As noted at [8] of Judge O'Rourke's decision, that issue was no  longer
    in dispute before First-tier  Tribunal.  The  refusal  letter  did  not
    consider the impact of section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

 4. Judge O'Rourke accepted the respondent's evidence  that  the  appellant
    had used deception  to  obtain  an  English-language  certificate  from
    Queensway College, London. It was common ground that the appellant  had
    not sat the test; her evidence was that she attended the test  premises
    expecting to do so, but was dismissed shortly afterwards. Her solicitor
    had arranged the process,  and  although  she  was  surprised  by  what
    happened, she trusted her solicitor and chose  not  to  pursue  matters
    further. Judge O'Rourke rejected this innocent  explanation,  at  [19],
    and there is no challenge to that finding.

 5. Judge O'Rourke considered the impact of section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act.  The judge noted that, pursuant to MA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,  the  immigration
    misconduct  of  the  appellant  was  a  factor  which   went   to   the
    "reasonableness" of expecting E to leave the United Kingdom.  At  [26],
    Judge O'Rourke considered the public  interest  factors  militating  in
    favour of the removal of the appellant, noting  at  [26(iv)]  that  the
    appellant's poor immigration history, her "flouting" of the immigration
    rules, and the minimal weight which could be  attached  to  her  family
    life in this country were all factors which were capable of outweighing
    the best interests of E, to the extent  they  were  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

Permission to appeal

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nightingale of the First-tier
    Tribunal, on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  erred  in
    holding the immigration misconduct of the sponsor against  E,  for  the
    purposes of assessing whether it would be reasonable to expect  him  to
    leave the United Kingdom. Further, Judge Nightingale noted  that  Judge
    O'Rourke had not referred at all to the leading Supreme Court authority
    of KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2018]
    UKSC 53, and, as such, had failed to have regard to  the  "real  world"
    context in which the question of reasonableness should be assessed.

Legal framework

 7. This appeal was brought under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The essential issue for the  judge's  consideration  was
    whether it would be proportionate under the terms of  Article  8(2)  of
    the Convention for the appellant to be removed, in  the  light  of  the
    family and private life she claims  to  have  established  here.   This
    issue is to be addressed primarily through the lens of the respondent's
    Immigration Rules and by reference to the  requirements  of  Article  8
    directly, see Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at [17].

 8. In addition, a number of statutory public interest  considerations  are
    set out in part 5A of the 2002 Act, to which regard must be  had.    Of
    significance for present purposes is section 117B(6):

           "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

 9. As a British citizen child, E is a "qualifying child" (section 117D(1),
    2002 Act).

10. It is settled law that the best interests of the child  are  a  primary
    consideration when considering whether removal of  an  appellant  under
    Article 8 would be proportionate, see ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4  and
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74  at
    [10] per Lord Hodge.

Discussion

11. Judge O'Rourke  correctly  approached  his  analysis  by  reference  to
    whether removal of the appellant would have  entailed  an  interference
    with her Article 8 ECHR rights, such that Article 8  will  be  engaged:
    see [22].  The judge answered the remaining questions pertaining to the
    lawfulness of removal under Article 8 in the affirmative (see [23]  and
    [24]). The judge then rightly identified that the remaining question is
    whether the appellant's removal would be  proportionate.   That  was  a
    question to be answered by reference to Part 5A of the 2002 Act.

12. Judge O'Rourke correctly noted that section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was
    engaged,  and  that  it  would  be  potentially  dispositive   of   the
    proceedings.   As  the  appellant  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with E, a "qualifying child", the  public  interest  would
    not require her removal from if it would not be reasonable to expect  E
    to leave the  United  Kingdom.   As  the  judge  correctly  identified,
    therefore,  everything  turned  on  what  was  "reasonable"  for  these
    purposes.

13. It was common ground at the hearing that Judge O'Rourke  had  erred  by
    initially  directing  himself  that  it  was  necessary  to  treat  the
    immigration misconduct of the appellant as a factor  which  contributed
    to the assessment of the "reasonableness" of expecting E to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  While that was a correct application of  the  previous
    leading authority,  MA  (Pakistan)  (upon  which  the  judge  initially
    relied), the judge erred in law by not following  the  Supreme  Court's
    approach in KO (Nigeria).  In KO,  the  Supreme  Court  held  that  the
    assessment of "reasonableness" is not to be conducted by  reference  to
    the (mis)conduct of the parents of the child.  At [15], Lord  Carnwath,
    with whom the other justices agreed, stated the provisions in  Part  5A
    of the 2002 Act,

         "...are intended to  be  consistent  with  the  general  principles
         relating  to  the  'best  interests'  of  children,  including  the
         principle that 'a child must not be blamed for matters for which he
         or she is not responsible, such as the conduct  of  a  parent'  see
         Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  1  WLR
         3690, para 10, per Lord Hodge JSC."

    At [17], His Lordship noted that there is nothing in section 117B(6),

         "to import a reference to the conduct of the parent.  Section  117B
         sets out a number of factors relating to  those  seeking  leave  to
         enter or remain, but criminality is not  one  of  them.  Subsection
         117B (6) is on its face freestanding, the only qualification  being
         that the person relying on it is not liable to deportation..."

14. Judge O'Rourke made no reference to the above judgment, nor to  any  of
    the reported cases from this tribunal or the Court of Appeal subsequent
    to it.

15. The question then arises as to whether the judge's  error  of  law  was
    material.

16. Although the grounds of appeal sought to impugn the judge's  assessment
    of the best interests of E, nothing in the submissions advanced  before
    me highlighted any error of law in the approach  the  judge  took  when
    performing that assessment, in [26(iv)]. The judge  noted  that  E,  at
    five years old, would  have  only  very  limited  integration  in  this
    country; his existence would be focused almost entirely on his parents.
    Any friendships that he does have that this early  stage  in  his  life
    could be  easily  replicated  in  China,  found  the  judge.  Both  the
    appellant and sponsor have close family links in  China,  in  the  same
    province, with their respective families living in sufficient proximity
    for the sponsor to be able to stay upon his return (on  the  assumption
    that the sponsor will choose  to  remain  in  this  country,  with  the
    appellant and E leaving China). The judge noted that there had been  no
    evidence as to other family members in this country,  and  whether  the
    sponsor decided to follow the appellant would be a matter for him.  The
    child would be too young to be aware of  his  nationality.   He  speaks
    some Mandarin, which is the language of the home  he  shares  with  his
    parents, who would be able to provide him with language tutoring in the
    future. He would be returning to a country with a  buoyant  economy,  a
    good education system, and would be able to be  brought  up  among  his
    extended family, into the culture and ethnicity into which he had  been
    born.  To  the  extent  the  medical  conditions  of  E  required  some
    treatment, there is no  evidence  that  such  treatment  would  not  be
    available in China.

17. Although the judge did  not  address  in  express  terms  the  criteria
    enunciated in EV (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and endorsed in  KO  for  assessing  the
    best interests of the child, namely the "real  world"  context  of  the
    parents, it is clear that that was  the  operative  background  against
    which the judge  performed  his  assessment.   See,  for  example,  the
    judge's references to the possibility of the sponsor continuing to live
    in this country.  Those references demonstrated the awareness the judge
    had of the sponsor's British nationality, and his ability, if he  chose
    to do so, to remain in this country. Further, the judge  addressed  the
    possibility of the sponsor returning to visit  the  appellant  and  his
    son, in the event the family choose for  only  the  appellant  and  the
    children  to  leave  this  country.  Plainly,  the  references  to  the
    appellant herself relocating to China were mindful of  the  expectation
    that she be removed to  that  country,  against  the  backdrop  of  the
    possibility of the sponsor remaining here.  This  was  a  "real  world"
    assessment in all but name.

18. Although the judge referred at the end of [26(iv)] to  the  possibility
    of E's best interests being outweighed  by  the  cumulative  impact  of
    other  public  interest  considerations,  including   the   immigration
    misconduct of the appellant,  it  is  clear  from  the  analysis  which
    proceeds in that paragraph that the judge did not hold the  immigration
    misconduct of the appellant against E in order to  determine  what  E's
    best interests were. This is because  the  judge's  free-standing  best
    interests assessment in relation to E was conducted  without  reference
    to  the  immigration  misconduct  of  the  appellant;  his  stand-alone
    conclusion was that it would be consistent with E's best interests  for
    him to return to China with his mother, and his father if he  chose  to
    accompany them. The judge had not, for example, concluded that the best
    interests of E were for him to remain in  this  country,  finding  that
    they were outweighed by the immigration history of his mother.  On  the
    contrary, the thrust of the judge's  analysis  was  that  it  would  be
    consistent with E's best interests for him to accompany his mother upon
    her return to China.  The only sense in which the judge  mentioned  the
    immigration  misconduct of the parents as being a  relevant  factor  in
    this paragraph was towards the end of his assessment,  when  addressing
    the fact that the British children would temporarily  (that  is,  until
    they reach the age of  majority)  be  unable  to  enjoy  their  British
    citizenship  rights.   There  was  no  question  of   the   appellant's
    immigration misconduct weighing against  the  child's  best  interests,
    for, by definition, on the judge's analysis, it was consistent with the
    child's best interests for him to return to China with his mother.

19. It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of E was sound.

20. Turning to the next issue of whether, in light of those best interests,
    it would be "reasonable" to expect E to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  I
    consider the approach taken by the judge to be entirely consistent with
    that which was required by KO (Nigeria).  In that case, at  [10],  Lord
    Carnwath quoted the Immigration Directorate Instructions  ("the  IDIs")
    in force at the  relevant  time  in  those  proceedings.  His  Lordship
    included the following extract in his quotation,

         "...it is generally the case that it is in a child's best interests
         to remain with their parent(s). Unless special  factors  apply,  it
         will generally be reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK with
         their parent(s), particularly if the parent(s)  have  no  right  to
         remain in the UK."

21. His Lordship was later to say at [17] that those factors  were  "wholly
    appropriate and sound in law".

22. Against that background, Judge O'Rourke's operative conclusion that  it
    would be reasonable to  expect  E  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  was
    entirely consistent with the best interests assessment required  by  EV
    (Philippines)  and  KO  (Nigeria),  in  particular  the  "real   world"
    assessment required by those cases. The overall conclusion of the judge
    was consistent with the approach taken by the IDIs quoted  at  [10]  of
    KO, which the Supreme Court described as "wholly appropriate..."

23. Although, of course, the sponsor in the present  matter  is  a  British
    citizen, which is a factor to embed within the "real world" assessment,
    he is a naturalised British citizen of Chinese descent, who arrived  in
    this country from China as a student in 2002. He would be  entitled  to
    remain in this country, should he choose to do so, and would be able to
    visit his son and wife in accordance with the findings of fact made  by
    Judge O'Rourke.  Alternatively,  he  would  be  able  to  rely  on  his
    knowledge of Mandarin, his background as a Chinese citizen, his Chinese
    ethnicity and his family links in order to be able to return  to  China
    with the appellant.

24. For these reasons, although Judge O'Rourke erred by  referring  to  the
    immigration  misconduct  of  the  appellant  when  initially  directing
    himself as to the concept of "reasonableness", I find that that did not
    infect his ultimate analysis and so did not feature a material error of
    law. His overall assessment that it would be reasonable to  expect  the
    appellant and E to leave the United Kingdom  was  consistent  with  the
    approach taken by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)  and  did  not,  in
    operative terms, count the  immigration  misconduct  of  the  appellant
    against him.

Conclusion

25. It follows that the judge did not err materially, and  this  appeal  is
    dismissed. The judge erred in  his  initial  self-direction  concerning
    what amounted to reasonableness, but that was not a material error,  as
    on the facts of this case it is reasonable to expect  E  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

Postscript

26. At the hearing, I was encouraged by both parties to remake the decision
    for myself.  As will be seen from the preceding  analysis,  I  did  not
    consider that it was necessary to do so. Adopting that  approach  would
    have entailed setting aside judge O'Rourke's decision.  The focus of my
    consideration is whether Judge O'Rourke  materially  erred  in  law  by
    reference to the facts as they stood when the matter was heard by  him.
    In the absence of a material error of law in his decision, it  was  not
    necessary to do so.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

[pic]


Signed                                  Date 10 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith























