
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01892/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 November 2018                       |On 16th November 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    S. Z.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Pakistan who applied for Indefinite Leave to
Remain in the UK based upon the length of his residency. That application
was refused on 18 January 2018, and his appeal against that refusal came
before the First-tier Tribunal at North Shields on 3 July 2017, when it was
heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge ST Fox. The appeal was dismissed on
human rights grounds, in a decision promulgated on 12 October 2017.

The Appellant's application for permission to appeal the decision was
granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 10 July 2018 on the grounds that
it was arguable; (i) the Judge had failed to properly engage with or
consider the best interests of the Appellant's child, and, (ii) had made
unintelligible findings [18].

There has been no application to adduce further evidence pursuant to Rule
15(2A) and there has been no response to the grant of permission by way of
Rule 24 Notice by the Respondent. Thus the matter comes before me.

When the appeal was called on for hearing the Respondent conceded through
Mr McVeety that the decision was materially flawed to the extent that the
only proper course was that the appeal should be remitted for hearing
afresh.

In circumstances such as this, where it would appear that the relevant
evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the
effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First Tier
Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.
Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is such
that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other than
Judge ST Fox at the North Shields Hearing Centre. No interpreter is
required. The Appellant has today filed and served a bundle of further
evidence. The Respondent has indicated that he intends to review the
decision under appeal in the light of that evidence within the next
fourteen days. On that basis the pragmatic course is for the appeal to not
be listed prior to 17 December 2018 to allow that review to take place, and
its result communicated to the Tribunal.

Notice of decision

 1. The decision did involve the making of an error of  law  sufficient  to
    require the decision to be set  aside  on  all  grounds,  and  reheard.
    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 9 November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
