
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01123/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On May 3, 2019                               |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                            mr Muhammad Ihtisham
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holt, Counsel, instructed by Eric H Smith
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Mr Azhar


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a Pakistani national, applied on May 30, 2017 for  entry
    clearance under paragraph 297  HC  395.   The  respondent  refused  his
    application on November 20, 2017 finding that  the  appellant  did  not
    satisfy either paragraph 297(i)(e) or (f) HC 395.

 2. The appellant  appealed  this  decision  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and his appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shergill on November 6, 2018 and in  a
    decision promulgated on November  22,  2018  the  Judge  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Permission to appeal was given by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch  on  March
    8, 2019 who found there was an arguable error of law  where  the  Judge
    had sought to go behind the Court Order without having any legal expert
    evidence to support the findings made.

 4. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 5. Mr Holt adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted that the Judge  had
    not given adequate reasons for attaching no weight to  the  order  that
    had been made in Pakistan.  He submitted that the Judge had refused the
    appeal for three reasons, namely:-

      1) the foreign Order had to be lawfully attained;






      2) a foreign Court Order had been obtained under false pretences; and


      3) there had been a failure by the sponsor to tell the court  that  he
         was residing in the United Kingdom.

    Based on those findings the Judge had attached no weight to  the  Court
    Order.  Mr Holt submitted that this approach was flawed  because  there
    was evidence before the court in Pakistan that the sponsor  was  living
    in the United Kingdom and that the court would have been aware  of  it.
    The documentation clearly demonstrated that the Judge in  Pakistan  had
    the sponsor's power of attorney documentation, which was  contained  at
    page 55 of the appellant's own bundle, and the Court  Order  (contained
    at page 57) confirmed the court had the document before it.  The  power
    of attorney documentation confirmed that the appellant was residing  in
    the United Kingdom.

 6. The Judge also erred by finding that "presently residing"  was  only  a
    temporary state of affairs.  He submitted  "presently  residing"  meant
    currently residing  and  the  Judge  had  attempted  to  interpret  the
    Pakistani court was thinking.  The respondent had never  suggested  the
    court documents were not genuine and the Judge  should  not  have  gone
    behind them.

 7. Mr Tan submitted that the Court Order from Pakistan simply  established
    that the sponsor had been awarded custody of the child.  The Judge  had
    listened to the oral evidence and found that this evidence contradicted
    evidence that had been presented to the court in Pakistan.   The  Judge
    had to consider whether the Immigration  Rules  were  met  and  he  had
    concluded that neither sub-paragraph (e) nor (f) of  paragraph  297  HC
    395 had been satisfied.  The Judge concluded at paragraph [10] that the
    sponsor did make a financial  contribution  but  also  found  that  the
    appellant's  mother  played  a  significant  role  in  the  appellant's
    upbringing.  Mr Tan argued that the materiality of a Court Order had to
    be considered because the Judge had found the appellant had  failed  to
    demonstrate that the sponsor had sole responsibility and  the  findings
    made in respect of sub-paragraph (f) were clearly open to the Judge.

 8. Mr Holt responded to  this  argument  submitting  that  the  error  was
    material because the Judge had ignored the fact that  the  sponsor  did
    have a Court Order and he argued that if weight had been given  to  the
    Order  then  the  court  may  have  concluded  the  sponsor  had   sole
    responsibility, or  alternatively,  that  the  order  would  amount  to
    serious and other family  circumstances,  namely  that  preventing  the
    appellant to join the sponsor would be a breach of the Court Order.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 9. This had been an application by the appellant to join his father and in
    refusing his appeal the First-tier Judge rejected the appellant's claim
    that the sponsor had sole responsibility for him and also rejected  his
    claim  that  there  were  serious  and  compelling  family   or   other
    considerations which made his exclusion undesirable.

10. Permission appears to have been given on  the  approach  taken  by  the
    Judge to the Order.  I accept there may be an argument that the Judge's
    approach to the documentation may have gone  beyond  his  jurisdiction,
    but how material that ultimately is a  separate  issue.   In  order  to
    decide that, it is necessary to look  at  the  Judge's  decision.   His
    findings commenced at paragraph [6] and concluded at paragraph [17].

11. The Judge found the sponsor to be a straightforward and candid  witness
    who had provided financial  support  through  the  payment  of  various
    remittances, fees, the sending of gifts and  the  occasional  visit  to
    Pakistan.

12. The Judge did not accept the Court Order in the  sense  that  he  found
    that the court in Pakistan did not have the full  picture.   The  Judge
    effectively went behind the Court  Order  on  the  basis  of  the  oral
    evidence that he was given.

13. Mr Holt challenged that approach, but as in any case oral evidence  can
    be viewed with greater weight than  written  evidence.   The  court  in
    Pakistan was simply provided with a signed document, whereas the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had the benefit  of  hearing  oral  evidence.   The
    Judge thereafter made a number of findings, which in any  appeal  would
    normally be open to him.  Mr Holt argued that by going behind the Court
    Order the Judge has erred.

14. Paragraph [12] of the Judge's decision is significant because  in  that
    paragraph the Judge considered the issue  of  sole  responsibility  and
    concluded  that  the   mother   had   not   abdicated   responsibility.
    Accordingly, regardless of what the Court Order actually said the Judge
    concluded the sponsor did not have sole.  In other words,  the  reality
    of the situation was different to  what  was  written  on  paper.   The
    grounds of appeal did not actually challenge that finding.

15. The Judge went on  to  consider  paragraph  297(1)(f)  HC  395,  namely
    whether  there  were  any  serious  and  compelling  family  or   other
    considerations which would make the appellant's  exclusion  undesirable
    and in detailed reasons the Judge concluded that it was in the  child's
    best interests to remain in Pakistan.  None of those reasons have  been
    challenged.

16. Whilst it is arguable the Judge may have erred by rejecting  the  Court
    Order I find that firstly, the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  in  a
    better position to consider the situation because he had the benefit of
    hearing oral evidence from the sponsor, whereas the court  in  Pakistan
    simply had documentation presented; and secondly, having heard the oral
    evidence the Judge concluded the appellant did not meet the Immigration
    Rules and accordingly dismissed the appeal.

17. Those findings were open to the Judge and I therefore find there was no
    material error in law.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

18. The original decision is upheld.  I dismiss the appeal.


Signed                              Date         15 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date         15 May 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
