
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/ 01753/2020
                                                              HU/ 01748/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|(remotely via Teams)                 |                                     |
|On 14 July 2021                      |On 2 August 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

             JACOB ADEJEI DIXON and CESAR NANA DIXON               Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Smith
For the Respondent: Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Ghana who were born on 6  December  2001
    and 24 November 2003 respectively.  They  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  made  on  3
    January 2020 refusing their  claims  for  settlement  as  relatives  of
    United Kingdom sponsors, Mr and Mrs Yarney  (hereafter  the  sponsors).
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 18 December 2020,
    dismissed his appeals. The appellants now appeal, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Following  the  initial  hearing,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 2. I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that its decision
    should be set aside. My reasons for reaching  that  conclusion  are  as
    follows.

 3. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has not taken account  of  material
    evidence or has misunderstood the evidence adduced by  the  appellants.
    The refusal turned on paragraph 297 of HC 395 (as amended):

         (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in  the  United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
         there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
         which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care;

    The threshold criterion of 'serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations' is a potentially difficult one to  surmount.  I  stress
    that, even on a legally sound assessment of the evidence,  there  would
    have be no certainty that these appeals should succeed. However, whilst
    the outcome reached by the judge may ultimately prove to be  a  correct
    one, his decision is unsound and cannot stand because it is founded  on
    an inaccurate and incomplete  analysis  of  the  evidence.  At  several
    points in the decision, the complains of the 'extraordinary' absence of
    evidence from the appellants themselves concerning their wishes,  their
    current circumstances and their emotional response  to  the  deaths  of
    their parents. Although the judge does  refer  (briefly)  to  a  letter
    written by the appellants, he does not refer at all to  an  email  from
    them which was in the  appellants'  bundle  of  documents  [appellants'
    bundle: 26]. I am aware that a Tribunal does not need to refer to  each
    and every item of a party's evidence,  but  where,  as  here,  a  judge
    emphasises the absence of evidence as a factor in the  outcome  of  the
    appeal, it is important that he/she explains why such evidence  as  has
    been provided was insufficient  or  inadequate.  The  email  does  give
    details of the appellants' state of mind, their  emotional  attachments
    to the sponsors, their problematic relationship with their half-brother
    Louis, and the limited support they receive  from  the  individual  who
    currently looks after them on a day to day basis (Mr Opong). These  are
    all aspects of the appeal which feature in the judge's analysis,   only
    to be dismissed as of no importance, are addressed in the  email  (viz.
    the effect of their parents' deaths  on  the  appellants,  whether  the
    appellants have been abused by Louis and the stability of  the  current
    care arrangements with Mr Opong (a paid carer,  inaccurately  described
    by the judge as a 'family friend'). Had the  judge  directly  addressed
    all the evidence of the appellants,  including  the  email,  and  given
    reasons for rejecting it, he may not have fallen into error. However, I
    am not satisfied that the judge's understanding  and  consideration  of
    the evidence in this instance  has  provided  a  sound  basis  for  his
    findings and conclusions.

 4. The appeal was brought on Article 8 ECHR grounds. The judge found  that
    the appellants do not enjoy family life with the sponsors [26].  It  is
    unclear why an absence of evidence of any relationship  prior  to  July
    2019 (the death of the father) should be relevant  to  determining  the
    existence of family life now [25]. I also  agree  with  Ms  Smith,  who
    appeared before both Tribunals for the  appellants,  that  the  judge's
    findings on family life at [25-26] fail to  engage  properly  with  the
    evidence which was before him, including the written and oral  evidence
    of the sponsors. Again, I stress that the judge was not bound, even had
    he carried out a thorough examination of all the relevant evidence,  to
    conclude that family life does  exist.  However,  his  findings  cannot
    stand because I am not satisfied that the judge has adequately assessed
    all the relevant evidence.

 5. Both representatives agreed that, if the First-tier Tribunal's decision
    were to be set aside, then there would  need  to  be  a  further  fact-
    finding hearing which is better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 18 December 2020
    is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision following a hearing de novo.


    LISTING DIRECTIONS: list  at  appropriate  London  First-tier  Tribunal
    centre; first available date; not Judge Russell; no interpreter; may be
    suitable for remote hearing.



         Signed                              Date 14 July 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

