
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01803/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 July 2019                       |On 10 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                 Eileen [g]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Details of the Appellant

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Jamaica born on 27 April 1963  and
    was aged 55 at the date of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appellant, having arrived as a visitor on 17 August 2000,  remained
    without leave.  Having made an unsuccessful application  in  2007,  she
    was then granted a period of leave outside of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    following a further application, from 2 May 2014 to 1 November 2016.  A
    further application was made on 24 October 2016 which  was  refused  by
    the respondent on 13 December 2017.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  4
    December 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Malley  dismissed  the
    appellant's human rights appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission.   The  grounds  before  me  were
    narrative.   However,  Mr  Nath  (who  indicated  this  was  a  reasons
    challenge) confirmed that the appeal 'comes down  to  Section  EX'  and
    that the grounds in essence were:

      1) that the judge had given inadequate reasons for her conclusions  on
         the of the appellant's medical situation;

      2) the judge gave inadequate reasons for finding that  there  were  no
         insurmountable obstacles to family life in  Jamaica  and  erred  in
         failing to give adequate reasons for finding that any  interference
         would  be  proportional,  particularly  considering  the   positive
         findings that the judge had made.

Discussion on Error of Law

 3. Although Mr Nath initially indicated that the judge had failed to grant
    an adjournment to allow further medical evidence to  be  submitted,  he
    withdrew that submission when it was pointed out to him  that  at  [22]
    and [23] of the Decision and Reasons Judge O'Malley had considered that
    there had been an original date of the hearing on 29 August 2018  which
    had been adjourned as it had been stated the  appellant  was  suffering
    from depression and those representing the appellant wished  to  obtain
    an  expert  report  into  her  mental  health  and  difficulties   were
    identified in obtaining instructions.  That  adjournment  was  granted.
    Subsequently at the start of the hearing on  20  November  Counsel  was
    asked as to the position and it was confirmed that  the  appellant  had
    provided witness statement but there was no medical report  beyond  the
    correspondence from the GP.  The judge noted that there was no  request
    to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness and the  judge  did  not
    make any such direction.  No request for an  adjournment  was  made  or
    noted.  Mr Nath conceded that this was the case.

 4. The appellant had made a Rule  15(2A)  application  to  submit  further
    evidence in relation to the appellant's  medical  circumstances.   This
    included an updated witness statement for the appellant, a copy of J  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  629,  a
    letter from Living Well Network dated 15 May 2019  and  a  letter  from
    Edith Cavell Surgery dated 20 May 2019, patient report forms and crisis
    support information from Mental Health Assistance.

 5. I have considered the Rule 15(2A) application.  This was evidence  that
    was not before the First-tier Tribunal which the appellant now seeks to
    upon in this error of law appeal.  Rule 15(2A) requires,  'if  a  party
    wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that was not before  the
    first-tier Tribunal' the notice must not only indicate  the  nature  of
    the evidence, but also explain why it was not submitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal; and when considering whether to admit such evidence  the
    Upper Tribunal must have regard to whether there has been  unreasonable
    delay in producing that evidence.  Much of the evidence relates to  the
    appellant's health issues which post dated the First-tier Tribunal  and
    was not therefore in existence at the date  of  the  hearing.   However
    there was  no  adequate  explanation  for  what  I  consider  to  be  a
    considerable  delay  in  producing  any  medical  report   despite   an
    adjournment having been granted for 3 months in the First-tier Tribunal
    to allow one to be produced (and in any event no  such  medical  report
    has been produced, the appellant relying on letters from her GP and the
    Living Well Network.

 6. Although  Mr  Tarlow  objected  to  the  admission  of  this  evidence,
    notwithstanding my reservations above, I have  decided  to  admit  this
    evidence including in my consideration of Mr Nath's argument about  the
    judge's consideration of the appellant's medical conditions.

 7. However, for the  reasons  set  out  below,  I  am  not  satisfied  the
    additional evidence  takes  the  appellant's  error  of  law  case  any
    further.  The evidence relates almost  entirely  to  the  circumstances
    after the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  November  2018,
    promulgated on 3  December  2018.   The  appellant  in  her  additional
    witness statement stated that she  had  for  a  number  of  years  been
    seriously depressed.  The appellant also mentioned  her  depression  in
    her original, handwritten, witness statement stating that  the  refusal
    of her application by the respondent 'left  me  depress  and  suicidal'
    (sic).

 8. The appellant also stated at [34] of  her  updated  witness  statement,
    that when she received the decision from the court she  tried  to  kill
    herself.  It was Mr Nath's  submission,  in  line  with  the  arguments
    considered in J, that the  First-tier  Tribunal,  being  aware  of  the
    appellant's previous issues with depression and it being stated in  her
    witness statement  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  her  handwritten
    statement, that she had difficulties with depression and that when  her
    application was refused she was left depressed and suicidal.  It was Mr
    Nath's submission  that  the  judge  did  not  properly  consider  this
    eventuality and that it had been corroborated by what the appellant and
    Mr  Nath  claimed  was  her  suicide  attempt  when  her   appeal   was
    unsuccessful.

 9. The letter from the Living Well Network dated  15  May  2019  indicates
    that the Living Well Network hub is a primary care service and that the
    appellant was introduced to them at the beginning of 2019 and that  she
    was presenting with suicidal ideation at the sheer hopelessness of  her
    situation.  The letter notes that the appellant had tried to  self-harm
    by scratching at her wrist and that she had been taken to  St  Thomas's
    Hospital earlier in 2019 after collapsing at home as  she  had  stopped
    eating.  The letter also mentions physical health issues.  There  is  a
    further letter dated 20  May  2019  from  the  appellant's  GP  surgery
    certifying  that  she  has  a  number  of  health  problems   including
    depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, insomnia, sleep  deprivation
    and essential hypertension and that she had presented in November  2018
    with an acute mental crisis having cut her own wrists and was depressed
    over her immigration status.  She was admitted to hospital in  December
    2018 with a severe viral illness and saw the psychiatric liaison worker
    there who advised she was still depressed.  The GP indicates that  they
    saw her again in February 2019 to review her depression and  her  anti-
    depressant medication.  She was still  having  thoughts  of  self-harm.
    The letter from the GP notes that the appellant continued to work three
    hours a day but reported poor sleep.  The  appellant  had  a  telephone
    consultation in relation to her OCD in April 2019.

10. In summary it was Mr Nath's submission that the judge had  inadequately
    considered the difficulties with the appellant's  health  including  in
    particular, following the arguments made in J,  the  possible  risk  of
    suicide  if  the  appellant  were  to  be  refused.   The   appellant's
    additional 15(2A) documents included  patient  report  forms  from  the
    Ambulance Service and a further patient report forms  from  the  London
    Ambulance Service.  The forms note that the appellant had been  'turned
    down for leave to remain status' the previous day. The notes  indicated
    that the appellant had scratched herself and was expressing  desire  to
    further self-harm.  The hand written report  also  indicates  that  the
    appellant had "cut arm - wound is superficial" the previous  day.   The
    notes, as highlighted by Mr Nath, also indicated that the appellant had
    thoughts to take overdose.  However, the  notes  state  both  that  the
    appellant did not go through with cutting her wrist 'due to  impact  on
    her grandchildren'  and  that,  in  relation  to  future  overdose  the
    appellant also denied intent due to the impact on  grandchildren.   The
    notes go  on  to  again  record  that  the  appellant's  family  are  a
    protective  factor.   The  ambulance  notes  also  confirmed  that  the
    appellant did not need taken to hospital and  that  she  should  engage
    with her GP.

11. Mr Nath's submission is without merit.  The appellant, although in  her
    original witness statement mentioned thoughts of self-harm/suicide  and
    was given an adjournment in August 2018 for three months,  produced  no
    further evidence  (other  than  GP  correspondence  considered  by  the
    judge).  There was no request to treat her as a vulnerable  witness  at
    the hearing before Judge O'Malley.

12. The judge set out the evidence in some considerable detail from [22] to
    [49] and the submissions from [50] to [59].  The judge noted  that  the
    appellant explained that her treatment for her mental health  condition
    was medication only and that  she  had  applied  for  more  counselling
    through the GP but did not qualify for that.  The  appellant  confirmed
    that she had not had depression in Jamaica and that it had only come on
    when she had received the refusal from the Home Office.   I  also  note
    that in the recording of the submissions, by the judge,  there  was  no
    submission that the appellant would be at risk of  suicide  or  further
    self-harm if the appeal were to be refused,  along  the  lines  of  the
    arguments made, (although the extent of the argument relied  on  by  Mr
    Nath was ultimately rejected by the Court of Appeal) in J.

13. It is difficult to understand how the judge in  this  case  could  have
    reached any other conclusion.  The judge at [69] set out  the  ages  of
    the appellant, 55 and her partner at  68,  the  judge  having  accepted
    their relationship.  The judge  found  that  they  were  both  in  good
    health.  Although the narrative grounds  complained  that  this  was  a
    factual error, I disagree.  This finding was made in the context of the
    entirety of the judge's findings including at [69], which set  out  the
    difficulties which the appellant and her partner have.  The judge  went
    on at [69] to find:

         "... In assessing the impact of her  mental  health  I  accept  her
         honest evidence that she has continued to be  able  to  work  in  a
         demanding care role, both day and night shifts.  I accept that  she
         is  treated  with  medication  and  that  she  has  previously  had
         counselling but was not considered suitable for further counselling
         when she requested this recently.  I note that the GP letter, dated
         2 September 2018 does not detail any  suicidal  thoughts,  although
         this was included in an earlier letter, and accept that this is the
         up-to-date position".

14. The 15(2A) evidence, at its highest, showed that the appellant has  had
    some further difficulties, including with her mental health.  As  noted
    above the 'attempts' in December 2018 appears to have been superficial,
    the  ambulance  attending  the  following   day   and   deciding   that
    hospitalisation was not required.  It was also recorded by  the  London
    Ambulance Service that her grandchildren were a protective factor which
    had ultimately prevented her from going through with a suicide  attempt
    and although the appellant has had thoughts, to take an  overdose,  she
    "denies intent due to impact on her grandchildren".

15. The additional evidence including from the Living Well Network  and  GP
    detail the depression and thoughts of self-harm, but the evidence  also
    details that she continues to work, albeit this is now  for  "very  few
    hours".  The inpatient discharge letter dated  17  December  2018  from
    Guy's and St Thomas' hospital details treatment for a physical  illness
    which is recorded as 'influenza' with  'no  comorbidities'.    Although
    the most recent GP letter  confirms  that  during  this  admission  the
    appellant also saw psychiatric  liaison  in  relation  to  her  ongoing
    depression, the letter from The Living Well Network dated 15  May  2019
    refers to the appellant being admitted to St Thomas' as it  was  'clear
    she had stopped eating'.  This strongly suggests  that  the  underlying
    complaint was a mental  one,  whereas  the  medical  evidence  from  St
    Thomas' confirms she had flu and which her GP referred to as a  'severe
    viral illness'.

16. I am of the view that the medical evidence does not support, as Mr Nath
    and the grounds of appeal suggest,  that  there  were  further  suicide
    "attempts".  Rather there is evidence that the appellant,  who  suffers
    from  depression,  has  superficially  self-harmed  and  has  had  some
    thoughts of self harm, but that she denies intent to  complete  suicide
    because of the protective factors.  Even  if  such  evidence  had  been
    available at the First-tier Tribunal it is more than evident  that  the
    appellant would not have met the high threshold in respect  of  suicide
    risk in Article 3/Article 8 cases (and indeed such  was  not  the  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant is belatedly seeking to
    recharacterise her appeal.

17. In any event, none of that evidence was before the judge and the  judge
    did not fall into any error of law in the consideration of the evidence
    that was before her.  As already noted, despite  an  adjournment  being
    granted of three months no further medical evidence was produced.   Any
    further, albeit mild, deterioration in the  appellant's  mental  health
    that might have occurred following her  unsuccessful  appeal  does  not
    establish that Judge O'Malley fell into an error of law. Judge O'Malley
    accepted that the appellant suffered from depression as a  reaction  to
    the respondent's decision and that  'her  condition  has  not  resolved
    while the uncertainty continues'.  That the appellant might continue to
    suffer such difficulties when her appeal was  unsuccessful  is  perhaps
    not unsurprising and would have been in the judge's mind.  However,  it
    was entirely open to her to find as she did that, given the  low  level
    of medical management, that she had not been suitable  for  counselling
    and that there were no suicidal thoughts detailed in the most recent GP
    letter, the appellant (and her  partner)  remained  generally  in  good
    health. Those findings incorporated the difficulties both  experienced.
    Those reasons were adequate, open to Judge O'Malley and cannot be  said
    to be irrational.

18.  The  judge  went  on  to  direct  herself  correctly  in  relation  to
    insurmountable obstacles under Appendix  FM,  EX.1.   Although  it  was
    submitted at the very end  of  the  hearing  that  the  judge  did  not
    properly take into consideration the length of time  that  the  sponsor
    has spent in the UK and the difficulties in relocating to Jamaica, that
    is not the case.  The judge  recorded  in  evidence  that  the  sponsor
    gained British citizenship in the 1970s and had been in the UK  for  53
    years.  The  judge  clearly  had  this  in  mind  and  took  this  into
    consideration including that the sponsor was of retirement age and took
    into account  the  medical  evidence.   Considering  all  the  factors,
    including in light of the relevant jurisprudence including  R  (on  the
    application of Korobtsova) [2015] EWHC 970 the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's and the sponsor's circumstances, including his age and that
    he had familiarity with Jamaica including  taking  visits  there  every
    year, staying for three months or sometimes six weeks, would bring them
    "within the remit of insurmountable obstacles".

19. There was also no error in the judge's consideration, in the context of
    the accepted facts that the sponsor goes on his own  to  visit  Jamaica
    without the appellant every year for six weeks to three months and that
    the couple (although it is accepted they are in a relationship  by  the
    judge) do not live together, that a  separation  would  not  in  itself
    amount to insurmountable obstacles to the continuance of  their  family
    life.

20. The judge took into consideration all the circumstances  including  the
    strong connections that both the appellant and her  partner  have  with
    Jamaica and gave reasons that were open to her.  Although I accept,  as
    set out in the grounds for permission and as rehearsed by Mr Nath, that
    the judge made a number  of  positive  findings  including  as  to  the
    relationship and that the appellant and sponsor were found to be honest
    and helpful witnesses, that in itself does not mean that the judge  had
    to necessarily reach a decision in  the  appellant's  favour.   It  was
    incumbent on the judge to assess all the evidence  in  accordance  with
    the relevant jurisprudence.

21. The judge  had  set  out  the  relevant  jurisprudence  from  [11]  and
    following  including  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11  which  clarified   the
    definition of insurmountable obstacles at EX.2. as meaning:

         "very  significant  difficulties  which  would  be  faced  by   the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner".

    In general, in cases concerned with  precarious  family  life,  a  very
    strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the public  interest
    in immigration control.
22. Although Mr Nath submitted that Chikwamba and Agyarko essentially meant
    that the appeal should have succeeded, that was a makeweight argument
    and did not disclose any error of law in the judge's reasoned findings,
    material or otherwise and I note that the judge directed herself
    appropriately, including as to  TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    1109 which included the consideration, by the Court of Appeal, that the
    outcome of a subsequent entry clearance application was 'by no means
    certain'.  That was also the case before the First-tier Tribunal.

23.  The  judge  took  into  consideration  all  of  these  issues   in   a
    comprehensive consideration of Section EX, paragraph 276ADE and Article
    8 outside of the Immigration Rules.  This involved consideration of all
    the factors including the length of time in the UK of the appellant and
    her  partner,  their  ages  and  various  medical  conditions.   It  is
    difficult to see, on the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal,  how
    any other Tribunal would have reached a different conclusion.  Even  if
    that there were not the case, there is no error of law in the  decision
    reached by Judge O'Malley.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  8 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed therefore no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  8 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

