
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01336/2016
                                                HU/01342/2016, HU/01344/2016
                                                HU/01348/2016, HU/01351/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                          |On 8 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

     R U G    First Named Appellant

                                     And

     S R Second Named Appellant

                                     And

     W R Third Named Appellant

                                     And

     Y F Fourth Named Appellant

                                     And

     Y F Fifth Named Appellant
                         (anonymity direction Made)

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first and second Appellants are the parents of  the  third,  fourth
    and fifth Appellants. They made an application for leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on Article 8 grounds alone. It was refused and  they
    appealed. Following a hearing, and in  a  decision  promulgated  on  17
    April 2018, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Cassel  dismissed  their
    appeal. It was acknowledged at paragraph 10  of  the  Judge's  decision
    that the sole issue  for  consideration  was  based  upon  the  medical
    condition of the fifth Appellant. Before me today it  was  extended  to
    include, given that medical condition, whether or not her  needs  could
    be met in Pakistan.

 2. The Appellants sought permission to appeal which was initially refused.
    However, a renewed application was granted on 5 November 2018 by  Judge
    of the Upper Tribunal Grubb. His reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  A1 and A2 are married. A3, A4 and A5 are their  children.  The
         First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cassel)  dismissed  the   appellants'
         appeals against the refusals of leave based on  Article  8  of  the
         ECHR.

         2.   On the basis of the grounds, it is  arguable  that  the  Judge
         failed  to  give  proper  weight  to  the  expert  medical  reports
         concerning A5's health and availability of treatment in Pakistan.

         3.   Consequently, Grounds 1 and 2 are arguable. Grounds  3  and  4
         have less merit but I would  not  exclude  consideration  of  them.
         Permission to appeal is granted."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset of the hearing medical evidence forwarded to the Tribunal
    by the Appellant's representatives in a letter  of  3  April  2018  was
    shared between both parties.

 5. Mr Fripp reminded me of the basic facts of  this  appeal  which  turned
    upon the health of the fifth Appellant. She  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom prematurely and suffers  from  multiple  debilitating  problems
    including a hole in the heart.

 6. Within the evidence  before  Judge  Cassel  was  the  medical  evidence
    referred to above alongside an affidavit  from  the  first  Appellant's
    brother. The medical evidence comprises of a report dated 25 March 2018
    on the fifth Appellant prepared by  Dr  Imdad  Ali  MBBS,  DCH,  MRCPI,
    FRCPI,  FRCPCH,  Consultant  Paediatrician  at  the  Newham  University
    Hospital. It sets out  the  fifth  Appellant's  problems,  medications,
    background history and states that  Dr  Ali  believes  that  the  fifth
    Appellant's "long term need cannot be provided in Pakistan, even in big
    cities. YF's need can be categorised as complex need which can only  be
    provided  in  well-established  multidisciplinary  team  effort,  which
    cannot be provided in Pakistan.".

 7. Dr Yasmeen Memon's report is dated 31 March  2018  and  indicates  that
    having reviewed the evidence of Dr Ali she agrees  that  the  provision
    the fifth Appellant needs cannot be provided in either Hyderabad or any
    big city in Pakistan. Dr Saleem Shaikh in a report of 2 April 2018 also
    comments upon Dr Ali's report from the United Kingdom and  stated  that
    it is not possible to provide the required long term  medical  care  in
    support to the fifth Appellant as in  Pakistan  there  is  neither  the
    required medical resources nor the  multidisciplinary  teams  available
    even in the big cities to treat her complicated medical condition which
    could deteriorate at any given time.

 8. Mr Fripp highlighted the medical evidence  indicating  that  there  had
    been no opposition  by  the  Respondent  to  either  its  admission  or
    reliability. The genuine nature of the evidence or authenticity had not
    been challenged. He contended that the Judge has failed  adequately  to
    deal with this medical evidence. There is no detailed analysis  of  the
    fifth Appellant's health,  the  medication  she  is  receiving  or  her
    consequent needs. The Judge has erroneously attached no weight  to  the
    evidence of Dr Ali on the basis  that  he  has  not  set  out  his  own
    knowledge of the health system in Pakistan. This,  Mr  Fripp  accepted,
    was reasonable but the Judge's approach to the evidence  of  Drs  Memon
    and Shaikh is flawed. There was never any suggestion by the  Presenting
    Officer at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  that  this  evidence  was
    anything other than authentic. The Judge's criticisms of  the  evidence
    are flawed, weight should have been given to this evidence.

 9. Mr Fripp accepted that in the grant  of  permission  to  appeal  little
    endorsement had been given to grounds 3 and 4 and  he  did  not  pursue
    them.

10. Ms Cunha urged me to accept that overall there was no error of law  and
    that any  such  error  that  had  been  highlighted  by  Mr  Fripp  was
    immaterial. There was no challenge at the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    to the medical evidence albeit she asserted that it had been  submitted
    that it was self-serving and that there was no credible  evidence  that
    the fifth Appellant's needs could not be met in Pakistan. Even  if  the
    Judge had provided inadequate reasoning as to why he did  not  consider
    the medical reports adequate, it did not amount  to  a  material  error
    given his overall assessment.

11. I reject Ms Cunha's submissions. She accepts, and I find in  accordance
    with the submissions of  Mr  Fripp  that  the  Judge  has  inadequately
    reasoned his consideration of the three  medical  reports  referred  to
    earlier in this decision. This has resulted in his finding at paragraph
    31 of his decision that the medical needs of the  fifth  Appellant  are
    not exceptional and can be met without apparent difficulty. In light of
    the evidence it is plain that in coming to this decision the Judge  has
    failed to give proper weight to  the  medical  reports  concerning  the
    fifth Appellant's health and the availability of treatment in Pakistan.
    In so doing he has materially erred.

12. Mr Fripp reminded me of a decision taken  earlier  this  week  where  a
    refusal was made of an adjournment  application  for  today's  hearings
    consequent upon the fifth Appellant having a medical appointment  today
    and her mother, the second Appellant, consequently being unavailable to
    attend today's hearings. In refusing the adjournment the  decision  was
    taken to limit today's hearings to the finding only of whether  or  not
    there had been an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

13. Mr Fripp urged me to accept that the totality of the Appellants' claims
    had not been fully considered and in the circumstances  invited  me  to
    remit the appeal.

14. Looking at the position today that is a submission I accept.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Cassel  and  Judge
C M Phillips.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date:  7  January
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
