
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01558/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd August 2019                   |On 20th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                       miss Abiola Sheryl Lee Montique
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Abraham (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S C Clarke,  promulgated  on  27th  December  2018,  following  a
    hearing at Nottingham on 7th December 2018.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, was born on 29th November  1999,
    and is a female.  She appealed against the decision of the  Respondent,
    Entry Clearance Officer, dated 6th December 2017,  refusing  her  entry
    clearance, in order to come to settlement to the United Kingdom as  the
    daughter of [TW], her sponsoring mother, who is a British citizen,  and
    is settled in the UK.  The relevant  Immigration  Rules  are  paragraph
    297(1)(e) and (f) of HC 395.

Submissions

 3. At the hearing before me on 2nd August 2019,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, began by stating that this
    was a matter on which it would be conceded that there was an  error  of
    law in the decision below, by the Secretary of State, responding to the
    appeal against that decision made by the Appellant on this occasion.

 4. The reasons were that the witness statement of the  Appellant  and  the
    oral evidence of the Sponsor unequivocally maintained that the  Sponsor
    has been actively involved in the life of the Appellant, despite having
    to leave her behind as a baby in Jamaica, and the judge does  not  even
    comment on that.

 5. At the same time, there are no adverse credibility findings made by the
    judge against the Sponsor.  Indeed, the judge makes it clear  that  the
    Sponsor had been "an open witness".

 6. Secondly, there were school letters  from  the  Appellant's  school  in
    Jamaica confirming that it was the  sponsoring  mother  in  the  United
    Kingdom who had been paying the fees and having active interest in  the
    child's upbringing.

 7. Third, the Entry Clearance Officer had refused the application  on  the
    basis of "maintenance", but  by  the  time  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager  had  considered  the  question,  it  had  been  conceded  that
    maintenance was no longer an issue, but the judge made  no  comment  on
    this.

 8. For his part, Mr Abraham submitted that he had provided  a  1,000  page
    bundle and the matter had been copiously documented and  well-presented
    and the concession by the Respondent Secretary of State was one that he
    could only welcome.

 9. He had handed up to the Tribunal the Grounds of Appeal as well  as  the
    notes of Counsel below, appearing before Judge  Clarke,  which  he  now
    felt it unnecessary to go through, the concession having been made.

10. Mr Mills submitted that I should make a finding of an error of law  and
    allow the appeal.





Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the decision of the  judge  below  amounted  to  an
    error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) for the reasons that have
    been conceded by the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  as  represented
    today by Mr Mills.

Re-making the Decision

12. I have remade the decision on the basis of the  concession  today,  the
    evidence before the judge below, and the submissions that I have  heard
    before this Tribunal.   This  is  a  case  where  the  written  witness
    evidence of the Appellant  has  not  been  undermined.   The  Sponsor's
    evidence, where she was described as a "open  witness",  has  not  been
    undermined.   The  evidence  of  both  of  them  is  consistent.    The
    sponsoring mother has been providing  for  the  Appellant  and  by  all
    accounts has "sole responsibility" (a term which has long been held  to
    be  interpreted  not  in  a  literal  manner  which  would  render   it
    meaningless in its application in this  jurisdiction),  and  there  has
    been long-standing  contact  between  the  sponsoring  mother  and  the
    Appellant child in this case.   In  addition  to  this,  there  are  no
    financial considerations in terms of  maintenance.   On  a  balance  of
    probabilities, the Appellant discharges the burden  of  proof  that  is
    upon her and this appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal below amounted to an error  of  law.
I set aside the decision of the original judge.  I remake  the  decision  as
follows.  This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019
