
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal: HU/01967/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 11 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                YUNFEI ZHANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of China born on 24 July 1980.  He  arrived
      in this country on 1 October 2009 with entry clearance as a post study
      partner valid until 20 February 2011. An application  on  15  February
      2011 for an extension of stay as a dependent partner was granted until
      2 October 2012. On 1 October 2012 an application for leave  to  remain
      as a spouse of a settled person for 30  months  was  granted  and  the
      appellant's leave was extended until 26 August 2015.

   2. On 25 August 2015 the appellant lodged an application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and settled  in  the
      United Kingdom. This application was refused on 10 January 2016.

   3. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before a  First-tier  Judge
      on 4 May 2016 to be determined as a paper case.

   4. The First-tier Judge observed that the  appellant  had  lodged  little
      documentation to support his application. The  judge  found  that  the
      appellant had not applied for leave to remain in a  marriage  category
      until after 9 July 2012. He had been granted entry clearance  in  2009
      and an extension to that clearance in February 2011 as  a  post  study
      partner. The judge stated:

           'The applicant was only granted leave to remain as a spouse of a
           settled person, a  different  category,  in  October  2012.  His
           application therefore falls to be determined Under  Appendix  FM
           of the Immigration Rules."

   5. The judge found there were no documents to support the claim that  the
      appellant met the requirements under the rules for indefinite leave to
      remain as a partner and dismissed the appeal under the  rules  and  on
      human rights grounds.

   6. The appellant appealed and a First-tier Judge considered  the  grounds
      and granted permission, commenting:

   7.

           "There is no respondent's bundle in my paperwork,  although  the
           judge says such a bundle was before her, as a  result  I  cannot
           see the basis of the respondent's  refusal.  The  applicant  put
           before the judge in the  paperwork  a  complicated  proposition,
           albeit in letter form, as well as the respondent's  transitional
           provisions with highlighted passages, which he suggests apply to
           him, none of which  appear  to  have  been  dealt  with.  It  is
           arguable even if the decision is correct,  insufficient  reasons
           have been given to show why the applicant's proposition  is  not
           in fact correct."

   8.  Mr  Singh  helpfully  supplied  me  with  the  relevant  transitional
      provisions. He referred to the proposition set out in the  appellant's
      grounds at paragraph 4.5.5 which reads as follows:

           "PBS dependants who have already switched to being  the  partner
           of a settled person under Part 8  (or  have  applied  to  do  so
           before 6 April 2014) can continue under Part  8  and  apply  for
           indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 287  or  295G.  Their
           period of leave as a PBS dependant can be  combined  with  their
           leave as the partner of a settled person to  meet  the  required
           qualifying period."

   9.  Mr Singh said that the appellant had been  granted  leave  to  remain
      under Part 8 of the immigration rules and the Secretary of  State  had
      made a mistake when considering the application. Mr Singh referred  to
      the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  (IDIs),  the  transitional
      provisions and to the relevant rules in Part 8. Paragraph 287 (a)  (i)
      (d) provided for indefinite leave to remain as  a  spouse  where  "the
      applicant was admitted to the UK or given an extension of  stay  as  a
      spouse or civil partner of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant, and
      then obtained an extension of stay under  paragraphs  281  to  286  of
      these rules and has completed a period of 2 years as a spouse or civil
      partner of the person who is now present and settled here..."

  10. Mr Singh  was  able  to  confirm  that  the  appellant  qualified  for
      indefinite leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
      settled in the United Kingdom and that the First-tier  Judge  had  not
      properly  directed  herself  by  reference  to  the   IDIs   and   the
      transitional provisions.

  11. It is accepted that the appeal should be allowed under the immigration
      rules. It is not in the premises  necessary  to  disturb  the  judge's
      conclusions on the human rights grounds. In fairness to the First-tier
      Judge it was difficult to determine this appeal  where  neither  party
      was represented and where the respondent had made a mistake in dealing
      with the application as  Mr  Singh  accepted.  The  determination  was
      materially flawed in law and I re-make it.

      Appeal allowed under the immigration rules




Anonymity Direction

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

Fee Award

Any fee paid by the appellant should be returned to him.


Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               3 November 2016

