
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/01733/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |                  Decision & Reasons       |
|                                  |Promulgated                                |
|On 9 October 2017                 |                  On 19 October 2017       |
|                                  |                                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               anjana pariyar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Lemer, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. This is an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the appeal of a national of Nepal  against  a  decision  of  the
Entry Clearance  Officer,  now  represented  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

2. The Upper Tribunal gave permission to appeal for the following reasons:

  "Despite the FTJ's  otherwise  careful  assessment  of  the  relationship
  between the Appellant and her parents, it is arguable that  the  FTJ  may
  have erred in law by attaching weight to the Respondent's view, expressed
  in a policy outside the Immigration Rules, that a separation of more than
  two  years  between  an  adult  child  and  her  parents  were  generally
  sufficient to negate emotional dependency, and  that  the  FTJ  may  have
  erred in law by failing to adequately consider the explanation  given  by
  the appellant's parents migrating without  her  (Rai  v  Entry  Clearance
  Officer, New Delhi [2017] ECWCA Civ 320)."

3. It is right to emphasise that although  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
Appeal in Rai is very pertinent, judgment was not given until 28 April 2017
which was a few days after the decision complained of  was  promulgated  by
the First-tier Tribunal.  It follows that  although  the  decision  in  Rai
declares the law and binds the First-tier Tribunal, and the Judge erred  if
the decision is not consistent with it, the Judge is not to  be  criticised
for failing to consider a case that is both relevant  and  similar  on  its
facts because it had not been decided when the  First-tier  Tribunal  heard
the case and made its decision.

4. The First-tier Tribunal began by setting out the  pertinent  facts.   The
Appellant was born in August 1988 and so  is  almost  30  years  old.   She
applied for entry clearance as the adult dependent relative of  her  father
who is a former soldier who served the United Kingdom  in  the  Brigade  of
Gurkhas.

5. The appellant's father  was  given  entry  clearance  in  June  2009  and
settled in the United Kingdom in June 2011.  The appellant's mother settled
in the United Kingdom on the same day.  She had  had  indefinite  leave  to
enter on 8 August 2010.

6. The respondent was satisfied that an  application  for  settlement  would
have been made before 2009 if that had been  an  option  available  to  the
appellant's father when he was discharged from the Brigade of Gurkhas.

7. However the respondent applied published guidelines and decided that  the
appellant was not able to show a meaningful family life with her parents in
the United Kingdom because they had lived apart for more than two years  at
the date of application.  It was the respondent's  case,  which  the  judge
accepted, that the appellant's parents had left  her  in  Nepal  when  they
removed to the United Kingdom.  She had not  been  left,  for  example,  to
pursue her education in a boarding school in Nepal, but the family unit had
been broken up.

8. It was the  appellant's  case  that  she  had  remained  emotionally  and
financially dependent on her parents although she shared a  home  with  her
brother.

9. The judge received evidence from the appellant's father  and  mother  and
read evidence and made findings.  Mr Lemer has assisted me by  setting  out
the findings that he said were made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
which he found particularly helpful.  I adopt Mr Lemer's summary although I
make it clear that I agree with him that the matters  set  out  there  were
established to the satisfaction of the First-tier Tribunal.  I would expect
Mr Lemer to get it right but the responsibility is mine and I have checked.
 The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings:"
  (a)         The appellant is unmarried and unemployed.
  (b)    The family belong to the oppressed Dalit Community, excluded  from
         full  participation   in   social   occasions,   and   subject   to
         discrimination.
  (c)    Financial reasons prevented the sponsor applying for the appellant
         to join the family at an earlier stage.
  (d)         The appellant is financially dependent upon her parents.
  (e)    There is regular contact between the appellant and her parents  by
         phone and other modern means of communication.
  (f)         It is traditional for Nepalese unmarried  daughters  to  live
  with their parents."

10. The  "regular  contact"  set  out  above  includes  two  visits  by  the
appellant's mother to Nepal to visit her children.

11. I am quite satisfied the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law.   The  judge
said at paragraph 65:

  "I bear in mind that Annex K was introduced after the cases  referred  to
  above.  It could be taken that the view of the Secretary of State is that
  a separation of more than two years between an adult child and parents is
  generally sufficient to negate any such  emotional  dependency.   I  must
  give weight to this."

12. It is not entirely clear what the judge meant  by  saying  that  he  was
bound to "give weight" to the policy.  If it was his view that  he  had  to
accept that the policy was a correct statement of the law  and  that  there
was unlikely  to  be  emotional  dependency  after  more  than  two  years'
separation he was wrong.  Whereas the High Courts have approved  parliament
identifying weighty factors in an Article 8 balancing exercise I know of no
authority that requires a judge to accept that a minimum degree of  contact
is necessary before private and family life  of  a  kind  that  might  come
within the protection of the Convention is established.  It may be the case
that the Secretary of State can commit herself to an irreducible minimum so
that a judge would have to accept that private and family life  of  a  kind
that engaged the protection of Article 8 existed in circumstances where the
Secretary of State's policies accepted that it existed  but  converse  does
not apply. This is not to discourage the Secretary  of  State  from  making
policies but to recognise their scope and limitations.

13. Mr Bramble did not argue against this view.   Rather  it  was  his  case
that in fact the judge had conducted a  proper  balancing  exercise  taking
into account all relevant factors and the mis-statement of the law was  not
in fact a misdirection.

14. The problem with that submission  is  that  it  is  irreconcilable  with
paragraph 66 of the judge's decision.  There the judge reminded himself  of
the chronology, of the fact that the appellant had  been  living  with  her
brother and of the fact that her mother particularly  had  made  visits  to
Nepal and had kept in touch and that it was traditional  for  an  unmarried
daughter to live with her parents but found the fact that the parents  were
willing to leave her in Nepal and that they had been apart for "getting  on
for six years", together with the fact that she was not asked to seek entry
clearance until after her brother led him to conclude that  "the  requisite
degree of emotional dependency  exists,  after  such  a  passage  of  time,
between the appellant and her parents."

15. In short it is clear that the judge's finding was heavily influenced  by
the period of absence taken with the  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  State
considered this to be significant.  What the judge did not do, just as  the
judge who was criticised in Rai did not do, was look at the reasons for the
appellant's parents leaving her and seeing how  those  reasons  illuminated
the question of whether or to what  extent  private  and  family  life  was
diminished by reason of the separation.

16. It must be remembered that the instant  case  was  prepared  before  the
judgment was given in Rai and so the witness statements could not have been
prepared with the judgment in mind.  This means they may not  be  quite  as
helpful on the point as they could be but it also means that what is  there
cannot be said to be there to satisfy Rai.  The appellant's  father  offers
an explanation.  He said that he applied for settlement  with  his  son  in
2007 at that time there "were hundreds of Gurkhas" applying for  indefinite
leave to enter and he was advised  (it  is  immaterial  if  this  was  good
advice) by a friend that he had to obtain his own visa in order to  support
his family.  He explained that he saved money and made an  application  for
indefinite leave to remain for his wife and then his son and that arranging
the funds for his son's application used up all his  resources.   Again  he
had said his friends had advised him that he and his wife had to be settled
in the United Kingdom in order to apply for their  children  to  join.   He
said it had taken him almost a year to save the money for the air fare  and
a deadline was looming.

17. He had said at paragraph 6:

  "I wanted to apply for all my dependent children at the same time  but  I
  was unable to do so due to my financial circumstances."

18. He then said it took him over three years to save  the  money  for  just
one application fee.  He had applied for leave for his sons N and S and did
not want to let down his daughter.  Unremarkably this  position  is  echoed
but encouragingly not repeated word for word in the statement of his  wife.
The appellant said in her statement:

  "When our father and mother left Nepal to settle in the UK, they consoled
  us that they will make our application as soon as possible.  It  was  not
  an easy decision for our parents to leave us on our own in Nepal."

19. The  appellant  did  not  give  evidence.   Her  parents'  evidence  was
believed.  I have decided to believe what  they  say  in  their  statements
namely that it was always their intention for  the  whole  family  unit  to
remove to the United Kingdom assuming that could be lawfully  achieved  but
they had to go in stages to  make  the  necessary  financial  arrangements.
This claim is not only clearly set out in the papers but is consistent with
the rest of the evidence and indicates a  wholly  responsible  attitude  to
meeting the requirements of immigration control.  It does not  suggest  any
abandonment of the family unit.

20.  I  must  ask  myself  very  carefully  if  the  relationship  that   is
established is family life within the meaning of Article 8.   It  is  clear
that family life does not ordinarily end on a person's eighteenth  birthday
and  it  is  right  that  decision-makers  adopt  a  fact   sensitive   all
encompassing approach to Article 8 rather than trying  to  narrow  it  down
into too many restricted requirements.  The plain fact  is  this  appellant
comes from a culture where there is a strong expectation that a family unit
will remain together  until  the  children  leave  to  marry  and  that  is
especially the case for daughters.  It is plainly the case that within this
family unit there has remained a substantial financial dependency but  also
an emotional dependency.  The appellant has not established herself in  any
other family unit.  I am satisfied that the relationship  she  enjoys  with
her parents can only be described sensibly as private and family life of  a
kind that the United Kingdom is required to promote.

21. I then have to ask myself, having reminded myself of the five  tests  in
R on the application of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and the provisions  of
section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  if  the
decision to refuse her entry clearance is  proportionate.   Proportionality
is possibly even  more  flexible  than  the  initial  test  of  engagement.
Certainly an interference that would be proportionate in the case  of,  for
example, a young man of 19 who still lives in the family home in the United
Kingdom but who is preparing to leave shortly to take work would  be  quite
disproportionate in the case of, for example, a 2-year-old child living  in
a nuclear family in the United Kingdom.  The  Immigration  Rules  generally
identify the necessary requirements of entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
British law is not required to  accept  that  different  social  traditions
determine the outcome of an Article 8 balancing exercise.

22. However people such as the appellant are in  a  special  position.   Her
father served in the armed forces and it is recognised that Gurkhas are the
victims of an historic wrong.  Her father would have  come  to  the  United
Kingdom with his children at the end of his military service  if  that  had
been possible.  I find this a relevant factor on  an  Article  8  balancing
exercise that needs to be borne in mind.  This is not a criminal  case  and
the public interest must surely lie in encouraging and respecting those who
have served the Crown and looking favourably on their  desires  to  promote
unity within their own family.

23. This is by no means straightforward but I am quite  satisfied  that  the
prolonged separation in this case was not because the  private  and  family
life has been broken up or there was any intention to  abandon  the  family
unit.  I am satisfied that, to  use  a  convenient  phrase,  Article  8  is
engaged.  I am also satisfied, given the  particular  facts  of  this  case
including the historic wrong done to Gurkhas and that  this  is  an  appeal
that ought to have been allowed.

24. That may well have been the decision that the First-tier Tribunal  would
have reached if the decision in Rai had been available but that is not  the
point.

Notice of Decision

25. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.  I  set  aside
its decision and I substitute the decision allowing the appeal.

Signed



|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 19 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |







