
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01580/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On : 23 June 2021                    |On 02 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                     THAVAPRAGASM ROSALINE MATHURANAYAKI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Australia,  originally  from  Sri  Lanka,
    born on 31 May 1942. She entered the UK on 18 March 2017 together  with
    her husband, to visit their daughter, with a visit visa valid until  18
    September 2017. On 15 September 2017 they both  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK  on  family  and  private  life  grounds.  Whilst  the
    application was pending, her husband suffered a fatal heart  attack  in
    October 2017 and passed away on 16 December 2017. The  application  for
    leave to remain was refused on 27 March 2018.

 2. The appellant appealed against the refusal  decision,  relying  in  her
    grounds of appeal  on  her  compelling  and  exceptional  circumstances
    following the death of her husband and the fact that she would have  no
    support on return to Australia given the strained relationship with her
    two children who lived there. Her appeal was heard on 17 September 2018
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson, who rejected her  claim  to  be
    estranged from her son in Brisbane and concluded  that  the  claim  had
    been made solely to bolster her application to stay in the UK and  that
    she would have the support of her family in Australia as  she  had  had
    previously.  The  appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 12 December 2018 and permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was refused. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 2
    May 2019.

 3. The appellant then made a further application for leave to remain on 12
    September 2019, supported by additional medical  reports,  letters  and
    appointments and letters of support from family members in the UK.  She
    relied upon the same issues as previously, claiming that she had  never
    travelled or lived alone, having lived in Australia  with  her  husband
    from December 1995 when they had migrated there from  Sri  Lanka,  that
    she had never worked in Australia or owned any assets  and  had  always
    been with her husband and that she could not take care of  herself  and
    feared loneliness if she had to return  there.  She  claimed  that  her
    children in Australia would  not  take  care  of  her  and  she  feared
    returning there as a single woman. She stated that her family ties were
    in the UK and that her husband was buried here, with a  place  for  her
    next to  him.  She  said  that  she  was  emotionally  and  financially
    supported by her daughter and family and she had a strong bond with her
    grandchildren.

 4. In addition to those previously stated  issues,  the  appellant  relied
    upon further medical issues and disabilities arising from  an  accident
    post-dating the previous appeal, whereby she fell down  the  stairs  in
    her daughter's house in November 2018, and she claimed that  she  could
    not  cope  without  her  daughter.  In  that  respect  the  appellant's
    application was supported by an occupational therapy assessment  report
    and a psychiatric report.

 5. The appellant's application was treated as a fresh human  rights  claim
    and was refused on 13  January  2020,  with  a  right  of  appeal.  The
    respondent considered that the appellant could not meet the family  and
    private life requirements in Appendix FM of the immigration  rules  and
    that her circumstances were not such as to justify  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the  immigration  rules.  The  respondent  had  regard  to  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal in the appellant's previous  appeal
    and noted that her claim that she was estranged from her  two  children
    in Australia and that they had withdrawn their support from her had not
    been found to be credible. The respondent therefore did not accept that
    the appellant would have no one to  care  for  her  in  Australia.  The
    respondent, further, did not accept that the appellant would be  unable
    to continue, in Australia, the therapy and medical  treatment  she  was
    receiving in the UK following her husband's death.

 6. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard  by  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge Hatton on 18  March  2020.  The  judge  heard  from  the
    appellant and from her daughter and also had  before  him  the  medical
    reports and letters provided  with  the  appellant's  application.  The
    judge considered that the  appellant  had  fabricated  her  account  of
    having hostile relations with her son and daughter-in-law in  Australia
    and her claim that her son had sold the  bungalow  where  she  and  her
    husband had lived in Australia. The judge accorded little weight to the
    medical evidence and rejected the account  of  the  appellant's  health
    having significantly deteriorated as a result of her involvement  in  a
    road accident on 31 December 2019. The judge  found  further  that  the
    appellant continued to receive a pension in Australia and Sri Lanka. He
    considered that there was insufficient justification to depart from the
    findings of the Tribunal in the  appellant's  previous  appeal  and  he
    concluded that the appellant could return to Australia where she  would
    be adequately supported and cared for. The judge accordingly  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 7. The appellant sought, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis that the judge had arguably  erred  in  his
    approach to the medical evidence.

 8. The matter came before me on 20 November 2020 and I  heard  submissions
    from both  parties  on  the  error  of  law  question.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on  10  December  2020,  I  found  that  Judge  Hatton  had
    materially erred in law and I set aside the decision on  the  following
    basis:

    "13. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that her circumstances  at
    the time of the appeal before Judge Hatton were not the same  as  those
    considered by Judge Robertson 18 months previously, in September  2018,
    as her care needs and dependency upon her daughter  for  her  care  had
    increased to an extent that it was not sufficient  to  say  that  those
    needs would be adequately met by the support available from her son  in
    Australia. As such, it is argued that Judge  Hatton  erred  in  law  by
    treating Judge Robertson's findings  on  the  appellant's  relationship
    with her son in Australia and the support and  accommodation  available
    to the appellant in that country as dispositive of  the  appeal  before
    him and that he had failed to give proper consideration  to  the  fresh
    evidence.

    14.  Whilst at first glance this argument appeared to be a criticism of
    Judge Hatton for  effectively  following  the  principles  set  out  in
    Devaseelan, a closer consideration of the evidence shows that there  is
    indeed merit in the grounds and that the judge focussed on the previous
    findings on the care available to the appellant in Australia and failed
    to engage with the fresh evidence and to understand the nature  of  the
    issues raised in that evidence in terms of what she would  be  deprived
    of by leaving the UK. That evidence, in the form  of  the  occupational
    therapist report and  the  psychiatrist  report,  provided  a  detailed
    account of the impact on the appellant's physical and mental health  of
    an incident in November 2018 when she fell on the stairs. The  incident
    is described in the occupational therapist's report at page 26  of  the
    respondent's appeal bundle and the subsequent information  provided  up
    to page 37 provides details of the  deterioration  in  the  appellant's
    mobility and her increased dependency upon her daughter for  her  needs
    including the assistance she received from her daughter to wash and get
    dressed.  As  Mr  Martin  submitted,  Judge  Hatton  appeared  to  have
    completely ignored that evidence,  as  is  apparent  from  his  limited
    consideration of the care available to the  appellant  in  the  UK,  at
    [54], and  instead  went  on  to  make  adverse  findings  against  the
    appellant on the understanding that the deterioration in her health was
    claimed to have arisen from a road traffic incident in  December  2019.
    His adverse finding at [64] clearly illustrates his misunderstanding of
    the evidence in that regard.

    15.  Accordingly I am entirely in agreement with Mr Martin, that  Judge
    Hatton was side-tracked by the question of the appellant's family  ties
    in Australia which, albeit not immaterial, was not  the  focus  of  the
    argument being made before him on the fresh evidence. He clearly failed
    to appreciate the matters which had arisen since the decision  made  by
    Judge Robertson and the impact of that change in circumstances  on  the
    question of the appellant's ability to return to Australia. As such his
    decision is unsustainable and has to be set aside.

    16.  Both parties were in agreement that if Judge Hatton's decision was
    set aside, the re-making of the decision could  be  undertaken  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. I agree with Mr Clarke that the findings made by  Judge
    Hatton in regard to the  appellant's  circumstances  in  Australia  are
    entirely separate to the error of law and can  be  preserved,  although
    there is merit in the point made in the grounds at [11] that the  judge
    failed to take into account the fact that the appellant had the support
    of her husband when she was living in Australia. Other than  that,  the
    judge's adverse findings on the appellant's family and  other  ties  in
    Australia can and should be preserved.

    17.  The matter will be retained in the Upper Tribunal for the decision
    to be re-made on that basis and will be listed for a resumed hearing."

Hearing and Submissions

 9. The matter then came before me for the decision to be re-made.

10. The appellant was present at the hearing but did not give oral evidence
    before me. However  the  sponsor,  her  daughter  Antonette  Rajakumar,
    adopted her witness statements and was cross-examined by Ms Isherwood.

11. Ms Rajakumar said that her parents used to come  to  the  UK  to  visit
    every year and on the last occasion,  in  July  2017,  her  brother  in
    Australia told them that he was going to rent out the house where  they
    had been living. They did not know what to do at first  and  then  they
    decided to apply to extend their stay before their visa expired.  Their
    son then rented out the house and subsequently  sold  the  house.  When
    asked why the appellant could not  use  the  funds  from  the  sale  to
    purchase another property in Australia,  Ms  Rajakumar  said  that  the
    property was her brother's and they were no longer in contact with him.
    She had tried to persuade him to wait before selling the house, but  he
    had gone ahead and sold it and, when she tried  to  contact  him  later
    after their father died, he ignored her calls. Ms Rajakumar  said  that
    her parents had  not  applied  for  leave  under  the  adult  dependent
    relative rules as they did not know about that at  the  time  and  they
    chose the route they considered to be the best. Ms Isherwood asked  the
    sponsor about the payment of medical bills in the UK  and  she  replied
    that her mother's medical treatment was through the NHS. When asked  to
    confirm her mother's entitlement to a pension  and  state  benefits  in
    Australia, Ms Rajakumar said that she was entitled but that it was  not
    about the money. The issue was that  her  mother  could  not  go  there
    alone. Although her brother and sister were living  in  Australia  they
    were not on good terms with her mother and they would  not  look  after
    her. Ms Rajakumar said that she had not considered a care home  because
    her mother was supported by her family in the UK and was  not  mentally
    fit to return to Australia alone and could not  survive  there  without
    her family. Ms Rajakumar said that she was an  Australian  citizen  but
    she could not return there with her mother  because  she  had  her  own
    family here as well as the family business, a restaurant.  Her  brother
    Jude was a British citizen and did not have Australian citizenship, but
    he could not go to Australia with their mother in any event as  he  had
    his own family and work commitments here.

12. Ms Rajakumar said that her mother was never left  alone  in  the  house
    here and when she was at work her aunt would come to  look  after  her.
    She worked three days a week, from 9am to 1pm or 2pm and sometimes with
    overtime as well but  never  beyond  4pm.  Her  husband  worked  as  an
    accountant five days a week and looked after the restaurant business in
    the evenings and weekends. The  restaurant  had  just  re-opened  after
    lockdown. With regard to the road traffic accident,  her  mother  never
    fully recovered from that despite the consultant considering  that  she
    may recover within seven months. Her mother had contracted covid 19  in
    January 2021 and now suffered from long-covid and could not  catch  her
    breath. She had had an X-ray recently but  had  not  yet  received  the
    results from the GP. Her memory had also been affected and for  a  week
    she could not remember anything, although it  was  improving.  She  was
    still on the waiting list for Talking Therapies, to receive bereavement
    counselling.  Ms  Rajakumar  said  that  her  mother  had  always  been
    completely dependent upon her father when they were  in  Australia  and
    she had had no friends there and rarely went out.

13. When re-examined by Mr Martin, Ms Rajakumar said  that  she  had  never
    been asked to pay for her mother's NHS treatment, but she would  do  so
    if asked. She had paid for some medical reports herself. Her mother was
    able to manage on her own in the UK at first, after  her  father  died,
    but since she contracted covid-19 in January 2021 and  had  her  memory
    loss she could no longer be left alone.

14. Both parties then made submissions before me.

15. Ms Isherwood submitted that the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the appellant's previous appeal were the starting point, in  accordance
    with the principles in Devaseelan.   The  account  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with her son in Australia had been rejected as lacking  in
    credibility. The family's approach to the immigration system in the  UK
    undermined their credibility. They had  completely  ignored  the  adult
    dependent relative rules and had simply stated  that  they  refused  to
    return to Australia without making any enquiries as to the health  care
    and social housing available there and the possibility of a care  home.
    Ms Isherwood submitted that the appellant was a burden  on  the  public
    purse here. It was her family's responsibility to inform the  NHS  that
    she was not entitled to medical care. Had leave been granted under  the
    adult dependent relative rules the family would have  had  to  give  an
    undertaking not to use public funding. Ms  Isherwood  relied  upon  the
    cases of Ribeli v Entry Clearance Officer, Pretoria [2018] EWCA Civ 611
    and Mobeen v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ
    886 which involved similar considerations and where, in the first case,
    the Court considered the possibility of the sponsor moving back to  her
    home country to provide support for the appellant and to the fact  that
    it was not a matter of choice. Ms Isherwood submitted further that  the
    medical evidence was  contradictory  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    ability to be  left  alone.  There  was  no  evidence  of  her  current
    condition relating to covid-19 and the evidence indicated that she  had
    improved and could do things for herself. There was  no  live  evidence
    from the sponsor's brother and the appellant's sister-in-law to confirm
    the claim that she could not be left alone. The appellant's  grandson's
    witness statement made it clear that he and his sister were alone  with
    the appellant after they returned from school and  before  the  sponsor
    came home from work and that  the  appellant  helped  them  with  their
    homework. Ms Isherwood submitted that there  was  no  evidence  showing
    that the appellant was emotionally dependent upon the sponsor such that
    there were compelling circumstances outside the immigration rules.  The
    appellant was capable  of  managing  without  her  family  and  it  was
    proportionate for her to return to Australia.

16. Mr Martin  submitted  that  the  two  authorities  relied  upon  by  Ms
    Isherwood were distinguishable from the appellant's  circumstances.  It
    was not the case that the appellant was attempting  to  circumvent  the
    immigration rules. On the contrary she had always tried  to  regularise
    her position. The  respondent,  by  treating  the  appellant's  further
    submissions as a fresh claim, had accepted that there  was  a  material
    change in her circumstances.  It  was  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to return to Australia to make an application under the adult
    dependent relative rules. With regard to  those  rules,  the  appellant
    could meet the requirements of E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5 in any event, as  she
    did require long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks  and  the
    quality of the care she required was not available  in  Australia.  She
    required more and more assistance of the kind  she  received  from  her
    daughter and son and her late husband's relations. She would  not  have
    that in Australia and would have to resort to social care, which  would
    have a significant impact upon her mental health. Mr  Martin  submitted
    that there were no contradictions in the medical evidence as  suggested
    by Ms Isherwood. The letter from the appellant's grandson  was  written
    at a time when the appellant could be left alone. The  statements  from
    the appellant's son and sister-in-law explained the support  they  gave
    her.  The  medical  evidence  showed  a  clear  deterioration  in   the
    appellant's health. Even in 2019 she needed help with most daily tasks,
    but since then she had  deteriorated  further  and  currently  required
    almost total assistance. The medical evidence confirmed  that  she  was
    suffering from the prolonged effects of covid and that it had  affected
    her breathing and her memory. Even if it was not  considered  that  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 were met, it was  still  the  case
    that the removal of the appellant to Australia would shorten  her  life
    and would be disproportionate.

Discussion and Findings

17. It is not in dispute that this is a case which falls for  consideration
    outside the immigration rules, the appellant  having  been  granted  no
    previous leave to enter or remain other than as a visitor. I  therefore
    give consideration to Article 8 outside the rules.

18. I did not understand there to be any real challenge by Ms Isherwood  to
    the question of family life having been established for the purposes of
    Article 8(1) and I note that that was accepted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Robertson in the appellant's appeal in  2018  (see  [9(ii)],  [11]  and
    [15]. As Ms Isherwood submitted, that decision is the starting point in
    the consideration of this appeal. In any event I have no hesitation  in
    accepting myself that there is an established family life  between  the
    appellant and her family in the UK,  in  particular  her  daughter,  Ms
    Rajakumar. Ms Isherwood referred to a lack  of  evidence  of  emotional
    dependency between the appellant and her family in the UK, but it seems
    to me that, on the contrary, the evidence clearly points to there being
    such a dependency. Aside  from  the  evidence  of  the  family  members
    themselves I have regard to the psychiatric report from Dr Lawrence  at
    page 42 of the respondent's appeal bundle where reference  is  made  at
    page 81, paragraphs 73 and 73, to the close emotional bond between  the
    appellant and Ms Rajakumar.

19. The real question is, therefore, whether the appellant's  circumstances
    are sufficiently compelling so as to render her  removal  to  Australia
    disproportionate and thus to justify  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    immigration rules.

20. Ms Isherwood made forceful submissions to the effect that the appellant
    was a drain on public resources, given her use of the NHS, and that she
    had sought to circumvent the requirements of the immigration  rules  by
    coming to the UK as a visitor and then seeking to remain here with  her
    family. She relied upon the findings of the previous Tribunal  and  the
    preserved findings of Judge Hatton in rejecting the  appellant's  claim
    to have become estranged from her son in Australia and to have lost her
    accommodation there, and submitted that there would  in  any  event  be
    social care and housing, medical treatment and support available to her
    in Australia together with financial support through her Sri Lankan and
    Australian pensions.

21. Whilst there may have been some force in such submissions previously  -
    and indeed Judge Robertson's findings to a similar effect  were  upheld
    by the Upper Tribunal - the situation  has  undoubtedly  changed  since
    then and the focus has now shifted from the situation in  Australia  to
    the impact upon a vulnerable, elderly woman of removal from her  strong
    and loving family support network. As Mr Martin submitted,  that  shift
    in focus was acknowledged by the respondent  to  the  extent  that  the
    further submissions made after the appellant's appeal was dismissed  by
    Judge Robertson were treated as a fresh claim and  thus  considered  to
    have some prospect of success before  a  different  Tribunal.  It  also
    formed the basis of the decision that Judge Hatton had materially erred
    in law in his determination of the appellant's appeal.

22. As I found in  my  error  of  law  decision,  Judge  Hatton  failed  to
    appreciate the evidence of the impact upon the appellant of a  fall  in
    November 2018 and conflated the evidence  of  her  injuries  from  that
    incident with those of a road traffic accident a year later,  believing
    as a result that there were inconsistencies in her account and  in  the
    medical evidence which did not, in fact, exist. He also  failed,  as  a
    result, to give due weight to the report of an  occupational  therapist
    who assessed the appellant on 25 September  2019,  prior  to  the  road
    traffic accident,  which  referred  to  her  restricted  mobility,  her
    significant dependence upon her  daughter  for  personal  and  domestic
    activities such as washing and getting dressed (section 12) and kitchen
    tasks (sections 13 and 16) and her  anticipated  deterioration  without
    the support of her daughter. The psychiatric report from  Dr  Lawrence,
    dated 10 July 2019, also in the respondent's  appeal  bundle,  provided
    further support to the claim about the appellant's deterioration,  both
    mental and physical, and her dependence upon her daughter, as  well  as
    her mental decline since the death of  her  husband.  Also  before  the
    judge was a letter dated 25 November 2019 from the appellant's  GP,  Dr
    Almona Musa of the Shaftesbury Medical Centre, confirming that she  was
    not fit to travel at that time, owing to chest pains, and that she  had
    "chronic disabling medical conditions."

23. Ms Isherwood relied upon a report from Dr Chanpreet Nayyar, dated 8 May
    2020, in  the  appellant's  supplementary  bundle,  which  followed  an
    examination as a result of the road traffic accident in  December  2019
    and which  anticipated  that  the  impact  of  the  accident  was  only
    temporary and that the appellant was expected to  recover  after  seven
    months. However, Ms Rajakumar submitted that the  anticipated  recovery
    did not happen, in particular because her mother contracted covid 19 in
    January 2021. That is indeed confirmed in the  report  from  Dr  Almona
    Musa of Shaftesbury Medical Centre,  dated  16  June  2021,  as  is  Ms
    Rajakumar's evidence that her mother still suffered from long-covid and
    that  she  developed  memory  problems   and   confusion,   which   was
    particularly evident for a week. Ms  Rajakumar  said  that  her  mother
    continued to be breathless. Support for that claim can be found in  the
    NHS Mental Health Assessment (MH3) form at pages 14, 21 and 22  of  the
    appellant's supplementary bundle of documents. That assessment was made
    at an appointment on 25 March  2021  which  followed  a  referral  from
    Northwick Park  Hospital  where  the  appellant  was  admitted  for  an
    overnight stay on 19 February 2021.

24.  The  totality  of  the  medical  evidence  provides  support  for   Ms
    Rajakumar's claim that her mother has become more  and  more  dependant
    upon her, to the extent that she cannot be  left  alone.  Having  heard
    from Ms Rajakumar, I have no reason to disbelieve her evidence in  that
    regard. She presented as an entirely  credible  witness  who  was  very
    anxious about her mother and extremely distressed at  the  impact  upon
    her mother if she had to leave the support of her  family  in  the  UK.
    Whilst it may be, giving due consideration to  the  findings  of  Judge
    Robertson, that there was  some  exaggeration  of  the  extent  of  the
    deterioration  in  family  relationships  in  Australia,  I  found   Ms
    Rajakumar  to  be  credible  in  her  evidence  before  me   of   those
    relationships being strained and the  contact  limited.  I  accept  her
    claim as to her mother's vulnerability  and  dependence  upon  her  and
    other family members. Ms Isherwood's submission, that the  evidence  in
    that regard was contradictory, failed to take account of the passage of
    time since the letter from the appellant's grandson and failed to  have
    regard to the clear deterioration  in  the  appellant's  condition,  in
    particular in the last few months.

25. Turning to the requirements of the adult dependent relative  rules,  as
    referred to by Mr Martin, I accept from the evidence presented that the
    requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  are  met,  namely   that   the
    appellant, as a result of her age and disability,  requires   long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks. With regard  to  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.2.5, it cannot be  said  that  in  a  country  such  as  Australia
    appropriate care would not be available to the appellant.  However,  as
    Mr Martin submitted, it is the quality of the care that is relevant  in
    this case, namely the care of loving family members and  in  particular
    of a daughter who is able to assist with intimate tasks such as washing
    and dressing. That level of care could not be replicated in  Australia.
    It is no doubt for that reason that there was an absence of evidence of
    in-depth research by the sponsor into care homes and access to care  in
    Australia, a matter upon which Ms  Isherwood  relied.  The  appellant's
    ability to meet the requirements of the rules  to  that  extent  is  of
    course a matter of some weight.

26. As for Ms Isherwood's robust submission on the  appellant's  deliberate
    intention to circumvent the immigration rules, I found  Mr  Rajakumar's
    evidence in that regard to be persuasive, namely that there had been no
    such intention. As Mr Martin submitted, the appellant  had  not  simply
    overstayed her visa and then decided several months or years  later  to
    make a human rights claim, but there had been  continuous  attempts  to
    regularise her stay and, aside from the short period  of  time  between
    the dismissal of the appeal before  Judge  Robertson  and  the  further
    submissions in September 2019, the appellant's  applications  had  been
    made timeously and during periods of extant leave. Although  the  first
    application was made by the appellant and  her  husband  together,  her
    subsequent applications to remain in the UK, albeit outside  the  remit
    of the immigration rules, were nevertheless  with  some  understandable
    basis, following the loss of her husband and the ensuing  deterioration
    in her mental health and given her reluctance to leave behind her close
    family ties in this country and return to a country where she had never
    lived without her husband and had never lived independently.

27. Finally, I turn to the two authorities relied upon by Ms  Isherwood.  I
    agree with Mr Martin that neither add to Ms  Isherwood's  case.  As  Mr
    Martin submitted, the case of Ribeli is  distinguishable  as  an  entry
    clearance case as opposed to a case which is based upon the  impact  of
    removal from a close family support network. Of relevance  too  is  the
    fact that the sponsor in that case was not unwilling to travel to South
    Africa to care for her mother, whereas Ms Rajakumar provided  a  proper
    basis for concluding that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  her  to
    return to Australia, in light of her family and business commitments in
    the UK. As for Mobeen, the appellant in that  case  did  not  have  any
    significant  health  issues  and  was  considered  able  to   live   an
    independent  life  in  Pakistan,  unlike  the  appellant   before   me.
    Furthermore, unlike this appellant, Mobeen involved a  person  who  had
    overstayed her visa for some two years before making  her  application.
    In the circumstances it seems to me that  neither  of  the  authorities
    detracts from the appellant's case being considered as  an  exceptional
    and compelling one.

28. For all of these reasons, having regard to the particular circumstances
    in this case, namely the appellant's vulnerability in terms of her  age
    and her mental and physical health, the circumstances of  the  loss  of
    her husband and her need to visit his grave, the  resultant  dependence
    upon her daughter and other family members in the UK, and  her  current
    presentation  as  a  result  of  long  covid,  I  conclude   that   the
    proportionality balance falls in her favour.  I  take  account  of  the
    public interest factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002, including her lack  of  English  and  her  use  of
    public resources through the NHS, and I give weight of  course  to  the
    fact that the appellant is not able to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    relevant rules, albeit to the extent stated  above.  I  have  not  been
    provided with evidence of the sponsor's finances but there has been  no
    suggestion of an inability by the sponsor to support her mother. I note
    that she  and  her  husband  are  employed  and  they  have  their  own
    restaurant business and that the appellant's son Jude is  in  full-time
    employment as a software engineer. The sponsor expressed a  willingness
    and ability to reimburse the NHS for her mother's medical treatment and
    to sign an undertaking should she be asked to do so. In  all  of  these
    circumstances taken cumulatively, and on the particular facts  of  this
    case, I conclude that there are particularly  compelling  circumstances
    and that requiring the  appellant  to  return  to  Australia  would  be
    disproportionate and in breach of Article 8.  Accordingly I  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.



DECISION

29. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of  law  and  the
    decision was  set  aside.  I  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal.



Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 25 June 2021

