
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01354/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 17 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                          Carlisle Algernon Coulson
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Jein
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal M A Khan who, in a determination promulgated on
    8 October 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse him leave to remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Jamaica  born  on  4  April  1954.   He
    entered Britain as a visitor in October 2015 with a visa valid until 15
    April 2016.  Before that date he made a human  rights  application  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  His application  was  refused
    and the matter came before Judge Khan on 12 September 2018.

3.   At the beginning  of  the  hearing  the  appellant's  Counsel  made  an
    application for an adjournment on the basis that when she had  met  the
    appellant  that  morning  she  had  gained  the  impression  that   the
    appellant's physical and mental health had deteriorated.  He  had  been
    diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure.  The situation,
    she stated, had become worse since his father's death  in  April  2018.
    She applied for an adjournment on the basis that a psychological report
    could be obtained.  The judge refused that application  on  the  ground
    that the appellant's representatives "have  had  more  than  sufficient
    evidence (sic) to obtain any medical or other evidence  necessary  with
    regard to the appellant's medical condition".  The  judge  went  on  to
    hear oral evidence from the appellant, his daughter, three sisters  and
    brother-in-law, and submissions.  The judge considered  the  provisions
    of paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and found that the appellant could not
    meet those provisions.  He then considered the rights of the  appellant
    outside the Immigration Rules and having placed weight on the fact that
    the appellant had relatively recently entered as a visitor, that he did
    have a child in Jamaica, although he had stated that he  was  estranged
    from that child, and having noted that  the  appellant  was  likely  to
    receive some money from his  parents'  estate  once  probate  had  been
    obtained, considered that there was no basis on  which  this  appellant
    would be entitled to remain on human rights grounds.

4.   The grounds of appeal argued that it was unfair that the judge had  not
    granted the adjournment request to obtain  a  psychiatric/psychological
    report  and  had  therefore  misdirected  himself  in  law.    It   was
    acknowledged that no further medical evidence had been produced, but it
    was argued that the fact that as the adjournment had not  been  granted
    the decisons in relation to paragraph 276ADE(1) and Article  8  outside
    the Rules were unsafe.  A third ground - that the judge had  failed  to
    consider the best interests of the minor grandchildren of the appellant
    was also set out, although it was not relied on before me.

5.   Permission to appeal  having  been  granted,  the  hearing  was  listed
    before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart on 14  December  2018.   Judge
    Peart, having noted that there was no medical evidence,  adjourned  the
    appeal to be relisted before himself on 15 March  2019.  On  7  January
    2019 Judge Peart ordered:-

         "Ms Miszkiel do no later than 4  March  2019  file  and  serve  the
         appellant's bundle and skeleton hardcopies to Ms Kiss, Field  House
         and also by e-mail to Designated Judge Peart".

    On 15 March  there  was  no  Presenting  Officer.   Judge  Peart  again
    adjourned because he considered that there had been a failure to comply
    with directions, although the reality was that a report from Dr  Dhumad
    had been served on 9 March 2019 but did however not appear to have been
    before Judge Peart. He stated, in court, that cause should be shown  as
    to why there should not be a wasted cause  order.   Judge  Peart  again
    reserved the case to himself, however  the  appeal  was  then  relisted
    before me on 7 June 2019.  It was clear that the appeal was  not  part-
    heard and therefore a transfer order was not required.  Although  there
    was some discussion as to whether or not Judge Peart had  actually  set
    aside the determination of the judge, I found that he had not done  so.
    There is no decision on the file indicating that the determination  was
    set aside and indeed Mr Gajjar confirmed with his client that that  had
    not been ordered at the hearing.  I therefore  heard  submissions  from
    both parties.

6.   I made it clear that the issue before me was whether or not  there  was
    any material error of law in the determination of the First-tier Judge.
     The report from Dr Dhumad was not before the First-tier Judge and none
    of the various witness  statements  which  had  been  prepared  by  the
    appellant's solicitors, nor the skeleton argument prepared  by  Counsel
    for that hearing had mentioned the requirement for a medical report. No
    application for an adjournment had been made before the hearing.

7.   I find that there was no error of  law  in  the  determination  of  the
    Judge in the First-tier. It was his duty to deal with the appeal before
    him on the basis of the  evidence  that  there  was  before  him.   The
    assertions  of  the   appellant's   Counsel,   who   has   no   medical
    qualifications were not an appropriate basis on which  to  adjourn  the
    appeal, particularly given that there had been no prior application for
    an adjournment before the hearing nor indeed had there been any medical
    evidence whatsoever placed before the Tribunal.  I  consider  that  the
    judge's decision not to adjourn the  appeal  was  fully  open  to  him.
    There was nothing unfair in the decision.

8.     Moreover, the judge properly went on to  consider  all  the  relevant
    factors as they were before him, and was entitled to take into  account
    that the appellant had only lived in Britain  for  a  short  period  of
    time, that he had a son in Jamaica and that he had some means.  I  find
    that he made no error in his assessment of the rights of the  appellant
    under Article 8 of the ECHR. I have read the medical report and it is a
    report which the respondent may wish  to  take  into  consideration  if
    further submissions are made but that does not alter the facts as  they
    were before the judge. I would add that the judge did properly consider
    the rights of all members of  the  appellant's  family  and  there  was
    nothing to indicate that the Article 8 rights under Section 55  of  the
    appellant's grandchildren would be infringed by the decision.  For  the
    avoidance  of  doubt  I  would  confirm  that  I  do  not  consider  it
    appropriate to make a wasted costs order and do not do so.

9.     Accordingly I  find  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the judge in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  his
    decision shall stand.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed: [pic]                           Date: 12 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

