
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01193/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 January 2020                    |On 23 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                          Mr Raymond Derrick Brooks
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Colindale Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Background

The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born in 1968.  He says that he
arrived in the UK in 1997 on a visit visa.  In 1999 he was sentenced to
four years and six months' imprisonment for possessing a class A drug with
intent to supply.  In September 1999 he made an application for leave to
remain as a spouse but withdrew the application and was removed to Jamaica
in November 2000.  He claims to have re-entered the UK illegally in
November 2001.

On 3 July 2006 he was arrested for illegal entry and detained but
subsequently released.  In January 2012 he made an application for leave to
remain as a spouse but that application was rejected because no fee was
paid and the wrong form was used.  In May 2012 a further application of the
same type was made but that was rejected for similar reasons.  The same
happened in October 2012.

A human rights application was made in February 2013 but refused with no
right of appeal in May 2013.  On 5 June 2015 further evidence was submitted
in relation to the human rights claim and on 23 July 2015 he was granted 30
months' leave on the basis of family and private life in the light of the
fact that his daughter was under the age of 18 at the date of application.

On 24 January 2018 he made a further application for leave to remain on
human rights grounds which was refused in a decision dated 28 December
2018.  His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal
Judge Thorne at a hearing on 21 August 2019, resulting in the appeal being
dismissed.

    The Grounds and Submissions

The grounds of appeal in relation to Judge Thorne's decision contend, in
summary, that he was wrong to refuse the appellant's application for an
adjournment.  The grounds argue that the evidence was that the appellant is
illiterate, was destitute and homeless and sought an adjournment in order
to obtain legal representation.  It is further argued that there should
have been real concern on the part of Judge Thorne in relation to the
appellant's ability to remember the name of the solicitors that he had
visited the day before the hearing.

In addition, the grounds contend that the letter requesting an adjournment,
drafted by those solicitors, revealed that the appellant had had
insufficient time to prepare for the appeal because he was told on Friday,
16 August 2019 that his hearing was to be held on Tuesday, 21 August 2019.

It is further argued that it was irrational of the judge to conclude that
an adjournment was not merited and that given that he had been in the UK
for nearly 18 years, with representation he may have succeeded in his
appeal.  It is further said in the grounds that "reports" might have been
obtained which could expand on the issue of the appellant's "cognitive
abilities".

In his submissions, Mr Murphy relied on the grounds and referred to various
aspects of Judge Thorne's decision.  I was also referred to the detail of
the letter dated 21 August 2019 requesting an adjournment.  Various
authorities cited in the grounds were referred to and relied on.

Mr Singh contended that there was no error of law in Judge Thorne's
decision refusing to adjourn the hearing.  It was submitted that the
appellant's contention that he was illiterate was inconsistent with what is
recorded at [29] of Judge Thorne's decision in terms of the appellant
having said that he had "read" that returnees to Jamaica are being killed.

It was further submitted that it was very unlikely that the appellant would
have been able to persuade a firm of solicitors to represent him, given
that they required payment and he did not have funds.  That was clear from
[21] of the decision.

As to what was said about the appellant's potential memory problems, his
inability to remember the name of the solicitors that he had attended the
day before the hearing did not establish that he had any particular
difficulties.  There may be many reasons why someone may say that they do
not remember an event, or indeed may not in fact be able to remember.

It was submitted that Judge Thorne assisted the appellant during the course
of the hearing by asking him questions, as is clear from [23] and [29],
before concluding that an adjournment was not warranted.

Assessment and Conclusions

It is necessary to describe Judge Thorne's decision and the background
circumstances in a little more detail in order to explain why I have
concluded that his decision must be set aside for error of law.

At [19] Judge Thorne very properly referred to a letter from Jein
Solicitors dated 7 March 2019 to the First-tier Tribunal asking for a
remission of the fees for the appeal on the basis that the appellant had no
money and was homeless.  The letter states that the solicitors were
representing him on a pro bono basis.  In fact, that letter reiterates
previous requests to the Tribunal made on the same basis.  The application
for a remission of the appeal fee was eventually granted, notified in a
letter dated 23 April 2019 to Jein Solicitors.

The judge's decision records at [21] that the appellant said that he had
sacked Jein Solicitors and wanted an adjournment to instruct new
representatives.  He said that 'yesterday' he had gone to a new firm of
solicitors whose name he could not remember and that they had agreed to act
on a pro bono basis and to draft a letter asking for an adjournment.
However, they required to be paid in order to represent him.  The
appellant's evidence was that he had no money but hoped that if he could
get an adjournment he could persuade those "unidentified" solicitors to
represent him for nothing.

Judge Thorne referred to the letter dated 21 August 2019 requesting an
adjournment, stating that it was written as if drafted by the appellant
although the appellant told him that he had not drafted it and was
illiterate.

The appellant answered various questions asked by Judge Thorne, saying that
he lived in Harrow with a woman who was just a friend, and that he was fit
and well and not on any medication.  He said that he was unemployed and had
no money at all.  He also referred to having a British citizen daughter who
was now over 21 years of age but he did not see much of her as she lived
with her mother and her mother did not like him.  He was, however, still
officially married to her mother although they separated many years ago.
He said that he had no other relatives in the UK.

He went on to state that his mother lived in Jamaica but he had not spoken
to her for a year.  She lived with her grandchildren.  He also said that he
had one brother living in Jamaica but had not spoken to him for 10 years.
He referred to a daughter there who was 25 years of age and said that he
last spoke to her two weeks before the hearing.  She lived with her partner
and 2 year old child.

After being asked what further information he wanted to submit and which
required an adjournment the appellant said that "I want to get my file.
There are some bits and pieces.  I want to get them and put them before the
court.  I want to get my Jamaican passport and my biometric card."

The application for an adjournment was resisted by the respondent's
representative and at [27] Judge Thorne said this:

"I concluded that the interests of justice did not require [an] adjournment
and that no useful purpose would be served.  I therefore proceeded."

The letter requesting an adjournment dated 21 August 2019 appears to be
signed by the appellant in manuscript.  It is written in the first person
and therefore one can readily understand why Judge Thorne decided that it
was written as if drafted by the appellant, although he did not actually
make a concrete finding to that effect.

The letter refers to alleged failings on the part of Jein Solicitors,
stating that he had not seen the respondent's decision letter until 16
August 2019 (five days before the hearing).  The letter also states that
the solicitors refused to provide him with a copy of the letter but
eventually did so.  The letter also states that it was only on Friday 16
August that he was told about the hearing on Tuesday, 21 August.

In relation to one of the reasons given in the respondent's decision for
refusing his application for leave to remain, namely that he was dishonest
by not disclosing a conviction, it states in the letter that he was told
that if his conviction was over 10 years old he did not need to disclose
it.  It then says that he sought urgent legal representation to prepare his
appeal bundle and prepare for the hearing. The letter cites Nwaigwe
(adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and quotes from it.

The letter goes on to state that it is not his fault that the Home Office
sent the refusal letter to Jein Solicitors and that they did not "tell me
or list me under the court papers" and it requests time to prepare for the
hearing and make a witness statement.

It then states that:

"Whether or not it would be reasonable to refuse an adjournment is an
academic question.  But faced with a lack of current papers, only being
notified of my refusal, appeal and subsequent hearing date 4 days ago I
have lack of documentary evidence, proceeding in such circumstances would
deny me a fair hearing."

It then requests that the hearing listed for 21 August 2019 at Taylor House
be adjourned and subsequently relisted on the first available date, saying
that "I am at Court to request the adjournment in person."

As I have already indicated, from the perspective of the letter being
written in the first person it does suggest that it was written by the
appellant, which is inconsistent with his claim to be illiterate.  It also
has what appears to be his signature.  On the other hand, there is some
merit in what was said on the appellant's behalf by Mr Murphy to the effect
that the citation of the case of Nwaigwe and other legalistic expressions
in the letter tend to suggest that it was not written by him but by the
"unidentified" solicitors that he went to see the day before the hearing.

There were undoubtedly inconsistencies in the information put before Judge
Thorne.  For example, as Mr Singh pointed out, the claim to be illiterate
is inconsistent with what the appellant said, recorded at [29], that he had
read about people who were returning to Jamaica being killed.  Similarly,
the claim in the grounds that the appellant was homeless is inconsistent
with what appears at [23] where he is recorded as having said that he lived
in Harrow with a female friend.

It is not necessary for me to make findings about whether or not the
appellant is in fact illiterate.  Quite apart from anything else, a person
saying that they are illiterate does not necessarily mean that they are
literally unable to read.  However, contrary to what is said in the
grounds, the appellant plainly was not homeless at the hearing before Judge
Thorne in the light of what he said about where he was living.

In addition, what is asserted in the grounds about an issue arising in
terms of the appellant's cognitive ability because he was apparently unable
to remember the name of the solicitors that he went to see the day before
the hearing, seems to me to be a speculative assertion.  Whereas the
grounds suggest that reports might have been obtained in advance of the
hearing in relation to the appellant's cognitive abilities, that is
inconsistent with his having said that he was fit and well and not on any
medication.

Judge Thorne concluded that no useful purpose would be served by adjourning
the hearing and that the interests of justice did not require it.  One can
readily see why he concluded that no useful purpose would be served by
adjourning the hearing in circumstances where the appellant said that he
had been told by the solicitors who drafted the letter on a pro bono basis
that they required to be paid in order to represent him and he hoped that
he could get an adjournment and persuade them to represent him for nothing.

However, as was said in SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284, the test in relation to whether the judge
ought to have granted an adjournment was not one of irrationality or
whether refusing the adjournment was a decision properly open to him, or
was Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse. The Court held at [13]-[14] that
"The test and sole test was whether it was unfair."  Put another way, "what
does fairness demand?".

I am satisfied that Judge Thorne did not approach the question of the
adjournment on that basis.  I do not consider that it could be said that
the appellant had no prospect of securing legal representation.  I disagree
with what is said in the grounds to the effect that the fact that the
appellant was unrepresented would in itself constitute a good reason to
adjourn the case. Mr Murphy quite properly disavowed that aspect of the
grounds.  Nor do I consider that an unrepresented appellant can never have
a fair hearing.  However, in this case there was no express finding by
Judge Thorne that the appellant was not telling the truth about having
sought representation from solicitors other than Jein Solicitors, and he
made no finding to the effect that the letter requesting an adjournment was
written by the appellant, albeit that one can detect some understandable
scepticism on his part on those issues.  There were, in my judgement,
reasons to believe that the appellant was genuinely seeking legal
representation.

Furthermore, Judge Thorne made no finding that the appellant was not
telling the truth about only having been notified of the hearing by his
former solicitors four days before the hearing and that no preparation for
it had been done by them.  Although Judge Thorne asked the appellant a
number of questions in order to elicit his case, that does not mean that
everything of significance was necessarily elicited from the appellant.

Whilst one can see the basis upon which the appeal was in fact dismissed,
one ought to be hesitant in concluding that because a claim is apparently
weak there was no unfairness in refusing to adjourn a hearing.  It would
not be appropriate for me to express a view about the strength or weakness
of the appellant's case. Suffice to say that in my judgement it could not
be said that there was nothing of any legal or evidential value that could
be advanced on his behalf which might have affected the outcome of the
appeal.  In any event, even a person with an apparently weak case is
entitled to a fair hearing which allows them to advance the best possible
case in the circumstances.

In summary then, bearing in mind that there was information before Judge
Thorne which suggested that the appellant had sought legal representation,
and taking into account his contention that he only had relatively short
notice of the hearing for which he was not prepared, I am satisfied that
the judge erred in law in refusing to adjourn the hearing. In coming to
that view I make no findings in relation to the allegations raised about
the conduct of Jein Solicitors.

Having decided that the First-tier Tribunal's decision must be set aside,
the appropriate course, bearing in mind the Senior President's Practice
Statement at paragraph 7.2, is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a judge other than First-tier
Tribunal Judge Thorne.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on
a point of law.  Its decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted to
the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo before a judge other than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Thorne, with no findings of fact preserved.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 17/01/20

