
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01203/2018
                                                               HU/01209/2018
                                                               HU/01212/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 June 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                        Racheal [M] (First Appellant)
                           n o (second appellant)
                            k o (third appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr N Garrod instructed by Justice and Law Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first appellant is a national of  Ghana.   She  together  with  the
    second appellant, NO, and the third  appellant,  KO,  sought  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life.  Leave was refused by the Secretary
    of State on 11 December 2017 and they were unsuccessful  in  an  appeal
    before a First-tier Judge.

2.   In a decision following a hearing on 13 March 2019 I  held  that  there
    were errors of law in the judge's decision such that it required to  be
    remade.

3.   The particular issue concerns the second appellant, NO,  who  was  born
    in the United Kingdom on 22 April 2009.  The judge found the matter  to
    be finely balanced but concluded that it would not be unreasonable  for
    her to be removed from the United Kingdom.   He  considered  it  to  be
    irrelevant that if she stayed  in  the  United  Kingdom  she  would  be
    eligible to apply for British citizenship when she was 10 years old, as
    she could not do so at that time.  I concluded that the judge  had  not
    given proper consideration to  the  amount  of  time  that  the  second
    appellant had spent in the United Kingdom and the private life she  has
    developed while here.

4.   Before the renewed hearing the second appellant reached the age of  10,
    and an additional statement was put in by the first appellant referring
    to the fact that on 14 May of 2019, some three weeks after the  second
    appellant's  10th  birthday  she  had  submitted  an  application   for
    registration for her as a British citizen under  section  3(1)  of  the
    British Nationality Act 1981.  She also attached a  copy  of  a  letter
    acknowledging receipt of her application and  a  letter  requiring  her
    biometrics to be provided.

5.   Ms Everett, who appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State,  properly
    and wisely acknowledged the difficulty that the Secretary of State  was
    in in the circumstances that the case had now reached.  On the face  of
    it it seemed clear that the second appellant  qualified  as  a  British
    citizen and that as was frankly acknowledged put the Secretary of State
    in difficulty with regard to the reasonableness of her removal.  It was
    a question of qualification, rather than status and  therefore  it  was
    not necessary to await the formal awarding of  British  citizenship  to
    the second appellant.

6.   In the circumstances I did not need to call on Mr Garrod  who  appeared
    on behalf of the appellants.

7.   I am satisfied that the appeal in this appeal must  be  allowed,  as  I
    indicated at the hearing.  The second appellant has now  qualified  for
    British citizenship status and there is no reason to suppose  that  she
    is not of good character or that  she  has  spent  more  than  90  days
    outside the United Kingdom.  Her age and the fact of  her  having  been
    born in the United Kingdom on or after 1 January 1983 is  acknowledged.
    In these circumstances I find it would clearly be unreasonable for  her
    to be removed from the United Kingdom, and in the circumstances that in
    effect precludes the removal of the other appellants since  a  10  year
    old child cannot be expected to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  her
    own.  These appeals are therefore allowed under Article 8.

    8.   No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]


Signed                                  Date 27 June 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

