
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01546/2019
     HU/02773/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th December 2019                         |On 13th February 2020         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                   ms K K
                                  mr K S B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Ball (instructed by Optima law Solicitors))
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellants who  are
    wife and her husband.  They have  a  son  who  is  dependent  on  their
    claims.  The wife and husband are Indian nationals.  They had  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The application was refused in relation  to  the  wife  on  suitability
    grounds, on two separate suitability grounds, (1)  that  there  was  an
    outstanding litigation debt and (2) that she had  cheated  in  a  TOEIC
    test.

 3. The judge heard evidence from both the Appellants at some length in the
    First-tier and they were claiming before the judge that  they  were  at
    risk from their families if returned to  India  because  they  were  of
    different faiths.  The judge rejected that argument.  He noted first of
    all that they had made no protection claim,  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that they had had for some considerable time been in receipt  of  legal
    advice, and they claim that the risk  had  arisen  some  years  before.
    Furthermore, the protection claim amounted to a new  matter  which  the
    Secretary of State did not consent to being considered.

 4. The judge noted that they had made an application  on  the  basis  that
    they were separated and indeed that the wife was claiming abuse at  the
    hands of her husband.  That, however, had all been dropped by the  time
    it came before the First-tier Tribunal and they were then back together
    and presented as a united family.  They were  also  the  parents  of  a
    child born on 10th July 2015 in the UK and they  were  putting  forward
    the case that  that  child  was  stateless  because  he  has  not  been
    registered with the Indian High Commission.

 5. The judge in relation to the litigation debt, found that the  Secretary
    of State's view on suitability was merited despite the wife's claim  at
    the hearing that she had not known  anything  about  this.   The  judge
    noted that in fact it was detailed in the  refusal  letter,  which  the
    wife claimed to have read and understood  months  before  the  hearing.
    While the judge made an error apparently in who she was represented by,
    in connection with the proceedings that gave  rise  to  the  litigation
    debt, that really is immaterial to the finding that she was aware of it
    and therefore it was a valid reason for the Secretary of State to  make
    an adverse suitability finding.

 6. The second suitability finding was on the basis that she cheated  on  a
    TOEIC test. The judge went to  considerable  lengths  considering  that
    between paragraphs 44 and 48 of the Decision and reasons and found that
    she had not proffered an innocent explanation that she  was  guilty  of
    fraud in that respect.

 7. It is true to say that the entirety of their evidence found  no  favour
    whatsoever with the judge.  He found that they  had  both  prevaricated
    and had given differing evidence about various matters such as who  was
    financially supporting them and overall the  judge  found  them  to  be
    entirely without any credibility.

 8. With regard to the statelessness or otherwise of their child, the judge
    correctly referred herself to paragraph 403 and 404 of the  Immigration
    Rules as they now are.  It is clear in paragraph 403 that for  a  child
    to be recognised as stateless, the parents  have  to  provide  evidence
    that they have attempted to register the child's  birth  and  that  the
    relevant authorities have refused.  As the judge pointed out, there was
    no such evidence before her.  They  had  provided  a  letter  from  the
    Indian High Commission but all that does is confirm the child  has  not
    been registered.  It is argued that they could not have done so because
    to do so they would have had to produce their passports to  the  Indian
    High Commission and those passports are with the  Secretary  of  State.
    However, there is no indication or suggestion that they have ever asked
    for them for that purpose and it seems to me that when the Secretary of
    State is putting forward a case that the child can be registered as  an
    Indian citizen, that arrangements could not be made for those passports
    to be produced to the relevant authorities.  The simple fact  is  these
    Appellants cannot meet the requirements of  paragraph  403(f)  and  the
    judge was therefore right to so find.

 9. That deals I think with both of the grounds upon  which  permission  to
    appeal was granted and so I find that whilst  there  are  a  couple  of
    factual errors made by the judge they in  no  way  infect  the  overall
    findings.  There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    Decision and Reasons and the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 10 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed [pic]                            Date 10 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
