
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01366/2015
                                                               HU/01361/2015
                                                               HU/01359/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2016                 |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                         SANG [B] (first appellant)
                         SOO [J] (second appellant)
                          JUN [B] (third appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms B Asanovic of Counsel, Gillman-Smith Lee
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are mother, father and son all citizens of South  Korea.
     It is right to note that the third appellant is a young man just  over
    18 years of age who has very complex mental and physical needs.  It was
    essentially  on  that  basis  that  an  application  was  made  to  the
    respondent for leave to remain on the  basis  of  human  rights.   That
    application was refused in a decision of 16th June 2015.

2.   The appellants sought to appeal  against  that  decision  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Borsada on 11th April 2016.   The
    appeal was dismissed.

3.   The appellants now seek to challenge the correctness of that  decision,
    permission to do so having been granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grant-Hutchison on 12th September 2016.  The matter comes before me  to
    determine the issues as between the parties as to error of  law  and/or
    misunderstanding of fact.

4.   The first appellant came to the United Kingdom in  2006  as  a  student
    and latterly as a dependent partner.  The second appellant entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2007 as a dependant and subsequently became herself a
    student.  The third appellant first came to the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student.  He re-entered the United Kingdom on 17th January  2013  as  a
    general dependent child with leave valid until 31st May 2015.   It  was
    noted that the appellants  returned  to  South  Korea  at  the  end  of
    2012/early 2013 and spent a period of time in  that  country,  renewing
    their leave applications before once again returning to the UK.

5.   The determination is a detailed consideration of the  circumstances  of
    all three appellants.  Little purpose would be served in setting out in
    detail  all  that  was  recounted  in  the  determination.   The  third
    appellant had spent nine years  in  South  Korea  before  entering  the
    United Kingdom.  He has family in South  Korea  who  could  assist  and
    provide support on return and that  there  was  a  functioning  special
    needs education system in South Korea that could be accessed.

6.   It was noted that the second appellant had problems due  to  rheumatoid
    arthritis.  In particular it was also noted specifically that the third
    appellant was in need of effectively  24  hour  care,  the  fundamental
    burden of which would fall upon his parents.  He had to be fed  through
    a "peg" which was expensive and required specialist  food.   The  judge
    noted that a very complex package for the third appellant was currently
    in place and recognised that such a care package would probably not  be
    available in South Korea.  The Judge did not find, except however, that
    there was inadequate or no medical care available in  South  Korea  for
    someone of the appellant's particular conditions.  The interests of the
    third appellant were considered in particular in paragraphs 10  and  11
    of the determination.

7.   In essence Ms Asanovic, who represents the appellants before me,  seeks
    to make two challenges to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   The first  challenge  is  that  the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  a
    significant aspect of the return namely the  social  isolation  of  the
    third appellant.  It was submitted that it  has  taken  many  years  to
    establish  means  of  communication  with  the  third  appellant   with
    specialist input.   Such  communication  had  been  predicated  on  the
    understanding  of  English,  the  third  appellant  cannot  communicate
    himself by speech but it is said is able  to  understand  something  of
    what is said through language.  If he were  to  be  returned  to  South
    Korea it is said that that particular specialist assistance  would  not
    be available and that would take a very long time for him  to  come  to
    understand Korean without language for wider  communication,  his  life
    and enjoyment would be  significantly  impaired.   It  said  that  that
    matter alone is  a  very  significant  obstacle  to  reintegration  and
    settlement which the Judge did not consider.

9.   Linked with those concerns was also the lack of specialist care,  which
    would mean that the burden would fall disproportionately upon the first
    and second appellants as carers without the  element  of  respite  that
    they now enjoy from such care.

10.  The grounds do not identify with any particularity the  nature  of  the
    communication and interaction which the third appellant now enjoys.  My
    attention was not drawn to any evidence in particular.   A  flavour  of
    the matter can be seen from the Acorns letter of 26th March 2015  (B97)
    prepared when the third appellant  was  17.   Such  said  that  he  was
    totally dependent upon others and his care needs are met by his parents
    who provide him with 24 hour care and support.  He is immobile and uses
    a wheelchair.  There is difficulty handling him or  repositioning  him.
    The Acorns Children's Hospice provides the opportunity of some  respite
    breaks together with other more general support. Advice is provided  as
    to manual handling issues and his mother receives therapy  sessions  to
    aid relaxation.  Mention is made at the support of a transition worker.
     It noted that as the third appellant has grown  so  the  physical  and
    emotional demands on the parents have grown exponentially.  The  report
    makes clear, however, that once the third  appellant  reaches  18,  his
    parents will no longer be able to access Acorns Services.   They  would
    need to find other support.  There is a report from Victoria School  of
    19th March 2015 but that involvement  has  now  ended  with  the  third
    appellant being 18.

11.  As I have indicated there are a number of reports  in  the  appellants'
    bundle but the aspect of communication and how  that  is  achieved  and
    managed between persons other than the third appellant's parents is not
    clearly stated.

12.  I do not note in the bundle which I have any  skeleton  argument  which
    details those matters.

13.  It is apparent from the determination that  the  Judge  has  understood
    fundamentally the issues which present themselves, namely  of  a  child
    almost  entirely  dependent  upon  his  parents  and  upon  specialised
    support.  The Judge considers the communication between parents and the
    child.  As indicated the Judge does not exclude the possibility of  the
    care available in South Korea nor does he make light of the burden that
    would be placed upon the  parents.   Clearly  were  the  appellants  to
    return to South Korea then the burden  upon  the  parents  to  maintain
    their care of their son is one which they have readily accepted in  the
    United Kingdom.  The issue of respite care does not seem to  have  been
    overtly raised in the arguments before the Judge, what  is  significant
    is that the Judge finds that there is family in South Korea  who  could
    assist and provide support  on  their  return.   No  mention  of  these
    matters have been made to me in submissions but clearly that  would  be
    an obvious and practical means of support  and  respite  care.   Indeed
    within an extended family setting it  may  be  argued  that  the  third
    appellant would have a wider social network than at present.  As I have
    indicated I can find no suggestion that these matters were specifically
    argued before the Judge such that he failed to take account of them.

14.  It is not reasonable to be expected that the Judge  should  seize  upon
    every fine detail or nuance of the claim.  I find that it  is  entirely
    clear that he has fully understood the difficulties generally which the
    appellants face in terms of  managing  care  and  in  organising  their
    lives.  I do not find that the point now relied upon is so obvious that
    the Judge ought to have noted it and relied upon it.  In any  event  in
    the absence of any specific  and  detailed  medical  evidence  on  that
    matter of communication and support, it would seem highly unlikely even
    if the  argument  was  raised  that  it  would  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.

15.  No doubt if it is  a  matter  of  considerable  importance  it  can  be
    further dealt with upon clear medical evidence.

16.  The second challenge is to the approach  taken  by  the  Judge  to  the
    possibility of the third appellant flying back to South  Korea  in  the
    light of the report of Dr Huq.  There is no suggestion made  before  me
    that the Judge has misinterpreted what Dr Huq had  to  say  as  to  the
    difficulties which the third appellant may face on a long-term  flight.
    Considerable safeguards needed to be put in place.

17.  In paragraph 12 of the determination the Judge sets  out  the  evidence
    in relation to transportation and indicates that ideally  there  should
    have been further evidence on a number of matters.  He reminds  himself
    however that it is for the appellants to prove their case on appeal and
    on the available evidence the Judge was not  satisfied  that  they  had
    discharged this burden on the issue of  flight.   Ms  Asanovic  submits
    that that was entirely the wrong approach for the Judge to  have  taken
    in this matter.  It was clearly important that the  best  interests  of
    the child or young person were considered and if the Judge was in doubt
    as to the helpfulness of the evidence so far presented, he should  have
    requested further evidence in order to satisfy himself on such matters.



18.  I disagree with that contention.  It is the function of  the  Judge  to
    determine the issues upon the evidence presented and upon the arguments
    which are made.  There was  no  indication  that  any  adjournment  was
    requested by either party in order to obtain or clarify the evidence as
    presented.  It is of course always open  to  a  Judge  to  adjourn  the
    matter for further evidence.  It is not  an  obligation  upon  a  Judge
    generally to conduct an  investigation  or  indeed  to  direct  further
    evidence.  What the Judge has done  in  this  case,  and  I  find  most
    fairly, is to highlight concerns that fall to be addressed.  The  Judge
    most fairly expressed those concerns and made the  comment  that  there
    may be important information which is missing from the  evidence  which
    had it been presented might have led to  a  different  conclusion.   In
    this case the Judge was asked to make a decision upon the  evidence  as
    presented and the arguments advanced and this he did.  The  Judge  most
    helpfully posed a number of questions which might fall to  be  answered
    which might in turn create a different response from a decision  maker.
    I find that such an approach to the  evidence  as  presented  was  both
    proper and fair and not in error of law.

19.  I indicated to Ms Asanovic that essentially the grounds  of  appeal  as
    advanced were seeking to reargue the merits of the matter  rather  than
    highlight aspects or errors of law.  She  invited  my  attention  to  a
    number of further documents in the course of  her  submissions.   There
    was a statement of the medical conditions of  the  third  appellant  as
    prepared by his father. It is said that his condition has  deteriorated
    since 12th October and he now relies upon a ventilator  for  24  hours.
    That is supported by a report from Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham
    of 2nd November 2016, indicating that he may require a tracheostomy  in
    the future.

20.  There is a further  letter  from  the  same  trust  of  9th  June  2016
    expressing the concern of the extremely high risk for him to  undertake
    prolonged air travel.  There is a risk of serious medical complications
    including death and that prolonged air travel is not  recommended.   It
    is said by Ms Asanovic that this supplements the report of Dr  Huq  and
    goes some way to meeting the concerns that were expressed by the Judge.
     In those circumstances, had the Judge had that evidence before him the
    conclusion might have been different.

21.  Significantly the documents to which  I  make  reference  postdate  the
    decision. It is not my task to review the merits of  this  case  unless
    and until I find there to be an error of law in the decision  that  was
    made.  I find none.

22. As I again indicated to Ms Asanovic  it  is  open  to  the  appellants'
    representative  to  make  such  submissions  as  to   change   in   the
    circumstance since the hearing with supporting evidence,  inviting  the
    Secretary of State to treat that evidence as a fresh claim to  conclude
    in the light of that  evidence  that  removal  is  disproportionate  as
    affecting all three appellants.  It seems to me that that is the proper
    process, one which should be adopted in this case.  However, so far  as
    the purposes of the appeal against the decision of the First-tier Judge
    is concerned, that appeal is dismissed.  I do not find there to be  any
    material error of law nor any material  omission  of  fact.   It  is  a
    tragic case as was recognised by the Judge  himself.   However  I  find
    that the decision that had been arrived at was reasonable and lawful in
    all the circumstances.

23.  In all the circumstances the  original  decision  shall  stand,  namely
    that the appeals  of  the  appellants  are  dismissed  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under human rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge King
16 November 2016
