
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01697/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 March 2018                      |On 26 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  aziz [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa, Solicitor, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  challenges  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Telford sent on 26 May 2017  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on  16  December
    2015 refusing him entry clearance as a partner under paragraph EC-P.1.1
    of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The ECO decision stated  that
    the appellant was also being refused under S-EC.2.5(a).

2.   I heard concise submissions from both representatives.

3.   The appellant advanced two grounds, the FtT judge being  said  to  have
    erred firstly in dealing with the issue of suitability and secondly  in
    assessing the issue of whether the appellant had  shown  he  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.

4.   I find both grounds made out.

5.   So far as concerns the first ground, it  is  clear  that  the  ECO  was
    wrong to seek to refuse the appellant  under  S-EC.2.5(a)  as  it  only
    applies to persons who have committed offences.  It  is  common  ground
    that the appellant has not committed any offence.  Mr Duffy  sought  to
    argue that this error did not  affect  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    suitability issue because the judge disregarded S-EC.2.5(a) and instead
    applied paragraph 320(ii) which was the applicable Rule addressing  the
    driving concern of the ECO which was the appellant's  poor  immigration
    history.

6.   There are two difficulties with the respondent's attempt to defend  the
    judge's application of paragraph 320(ii).  The first is that the  judge
    nowhere explains his reasons for deciding to apply a  general  rule  of
    refusal which the respondent had not invoked.  The judge's assertion at
    paragraph 19 that "[The  discretion  exercised  by  the  respondent  in
    regard to paragraph 320(ii) was correctly applied"] is misplaced.   The
    respondent had not exercised this at all.  Secondly  paragraph  320(ii)
    is a rule that imports a discretion to be applied  by  Entry  Clearance
    Officers  by  reference  to  published  Guidance   which   requires   a
    consideration in the round of all relevant  factors,  including  family
    life in the UK.  As I will go on to explain, it cannot be said that the
    judge's  application  of  paragraph  320(ii)  reflected  an  adequately
    conducted balancing exercise.

7.   As regards the second ground, its gist was that the  judge's  treatment
    of the issue of whether the appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage, wrongly focused on the historic situation to the  neglect  of
    the issue of (what the reported  case  of  GA  ("Subsisting"  marriage)
    Ghana* [2006]  UKAIT  00046  referred  to  as)  "the  parties'  present
    relationship and future intentions".  In one  respect,  I  am  with  Mr
    Duffy on this issue.  It was clearly open to the  judge  to  treat  the
    history of the relationship as relevant to the question of  whether  at
    the date of the hearing the appellant was in a subsisting relationship.
     However, I agree with Mr Mustafa that the  judge's  treatment  of  the
    parties' present  relationship  and  future  intentions  is  defective.
    Although the judge correctly takes  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    couple now have a child (born in  February  2017),  the  judge  nowhere
    explores the  nature  of  the  appellant's  wife's  attitude  to  their
    relationship now that they have a child.  The judge appears  to  regard
    the appellant's "fathering" as of no significance at all  -  indeed  at
    paragraph 24 he analyses  his  family  life  purely  in  terms  of  his
    relationship with his wife, making no mention of his child.  Further at
    paragraph 14 the judge resolves his inquiry into the best interests  of
    the child by concluding that "parenthood and fathering with the  mother
    as a couple can continue as it is or in Bangladesh".  The  child  is  a
    British citizen and it is common ground that it is  not  reasonable  to
    expect a British citizen child to  leave  the  UK.   If  the  judge  at
    paragraph 14 meant to say that one viable alternative  was  the  mother
    and child living in the UK without the appellant,  then  that  required
    more by way of reasoning as to why that would be either in the  child's
    best interests or proportionate.  There were  witness  statements  from
    the appellant and his wife  that  mentioned  the  significance  of  the
    child's arrival to  their  relationship.   The  spouse  relied  on  her
    witness statement in evidence.  The judge should  have  addressed  this
    evidence and reached an assessment of it and then  factored  that  into
    his decision on whether there was presently a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  To be fair to  the  judge,  he  may  have  ignored  this
    evidence on the basis that the appellant has not seen  his  child,  but
    physical contact is not necessarily determinative  of  the  appellant's
    feelings about the child and about the couple's relationship  now  that
    they have a child.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and his decision is to be set aside.  Both parties agreed  with  me
    that the most appropriate course was to remit the case to the FtT for a
    hearing de novo.

9.   At the next hearing it  is  inevitable  that  the  FtT  will  face  the
    dilemma of whether to apply paragraph 320(ii) notwithstanding that  the
    discretion it contains has not been exercised by the ECO.  On the other
    hand, as a result of the proceedings so far, it will be entirely  clear
    to the appellant that he will need to prepare to address the  paragraph
    320(ii) issue and make submissions as to why it should not  be  applied
    by the  FtT  judge  or,  if  applied,  not  applied  adversely  to  the
    appellant.

10.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Telford).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 22 March 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

