
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01913/2018
                                                               HU/01920/2018
                                                               HU/02251/2018
                                                               HU/01928/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th December 2018                         |On 15th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     S T
                                    a z t
                                     t s
                                     z t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza of Counsel, instructed by Bukhari Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Obhi promulgated on 2 July  2018,  in  which  their
    appeals against the Respondent's decisions to refuse their human rights
    claims dated 15 and 20 December 2017 were dismissed.

 2. The Appellants are all nationals of Pakistan and form  a  family  unit.
    The first and third Appellants are husband and  wife,  the  second  and
    fourth Appellants are their children.  The third Appellant entered  the
    United Kingdom in  February  2007  with  valid  entry  clearance  as  a
    student, initially valid to April 2008  and  extended  to  April  2011,
    subsequent to which he  was  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant to 25 August 2012.  He made a further application for
    leave to remain in the same category which was refused on  26  February
    2013 and an appeal and subsequent application for Judicial Review  were
    both unsuccessful.  A further application on 23 June 2016 was rejected.
     On 27 June 2017, the third Appellant applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds  of  long  residence  under
    paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules,  which  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 20 December 2017 on the basis that he  had  not  had  any
    lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom since 30 October 2013.  In
    the alternative, he did not meet any of the requirements for  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    and there were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave
    to remain outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  third  Appellant
    appealed against that decision and his appeal was joined  to  those  of
    his family members who had made a separate application as follows.

 3. The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom in February  2010  as  a
    student and was then granted leave to remain  as  a  dependent  of  the
    third Appellant in line with his grants of leave to remain as a student
    and then a Tier 1 migrant to 25 August 2012.   Subsequent  applications
    for leave to remain in 2012 and 2013 were refused and an application on
    23 June 2016 was rejected.  The most recent application  by  the  first
    Appellant, including the second and fourth Appellants as her dependents
    was  made  on  15  September  2017  on  human  rights  grounds.    That
    application was refused by the Respondent on 15 December  2017  on  the
    basis that she could not satisfy the requirements for leave  to  remain
    as a partner under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  because  her
    spouse was not a British Citizen nor settled in the United Kingdom  and
    she had overstayed here since 2012; in any event paragraph EX.1 was not
    satisfied because there were no insurmountable obstacles to family life
    continuing outside of the United Kingdom.  In relation to the children,
    the Respondent accepted that the eldest child had been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over seven years but considered it was reasonable to expect
    both children to leave and the requirements for leave to  remain  as  a
    parent in Appendix FM were not satisfied.  In relation to private life,
    the Respondent  did  not  consider  that  there  were  any  significant
    obstacles to the Appellants reintegration  into  Pakistan  where  there
    were no language barriers and where there were continued ties.

 4. Judge Obhi dismissed the appeals in a decision promulgated  on  2  July
    2018 on  all  grounds.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  third
    Appellant accepted that he could not meet the requirements of paragraph
    276B of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of long residence.  The Appellant's appeal  was  focused  on  the
    eldest daughter's  situation  (the  second  Appellant),  who  had  been
    resident in the United Kingdom from the age of  four  and  was  now  12
    years old and in secondary school.  In outline, Judge Obhi  found  that
    it was in the best interests  of  the  children  to  remain  with  both
    parents and that their best interests were capable of being met  either
    in the United Kingdom or in Pakistan and there were advantages  to  the
    children either way.  The appeal was ultimately dismissed on the  basis
    that it was not unreasonable for the eldest child to leave  the  United
    Kingdom and there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellants
    reintegration into Pakistan.

The appeal

 5. The Appellants appeal on five grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the importance of the  claim  to
    the children, in particular the eldest child  and  there  were  factual
    errors in the decision as to her age  at  the  date  of  hearing,  with
    references to her being seven and 11, although she was 12 at  the  date
    of hearing.  There was a statement from her  and  letters  of  support,
    including wider community connections and significant  achievements  at
    school which were not  fully  taken  into  account  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Secondly that the First-tier Tribunal trivialised facts  and
    unfairly summarised the evidence before it.  Thirdly, that in paragraph
    27 of the decision, there was  a  factual  error  as  to  the  language
    ability  of  the  child  Appellants.   Fourthly,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal disregarded the social work report.  Fifthly,  the  Appellants
    claimed that the general mindset of the First-tier Tribunal was to  fit
    the facts to the desired conclusion without evidential basis.

 6. At the hearing, Mr Raza on behalf of the Appellants  focused  on  three
    specific grounds of appeal which differed from the written  grounds  of
    appeal upon which permission was granted, although in a way  which  did
    not require any permission to amend  the  grounds  and  which  provided
    greater clarity and precision than the original  drafting.   The  three
    grounds focused upon were  as  follows.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in fact as to the age of the eldest child which amounted
    to a material error of law infecting the assessment of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to expect her to leave the United  Kingdom.   Secondly,  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in paragraph 48 of  the  assessment  of  best
    interests of the children.  Finally,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    balancing  exercise  to  assess  the  proportionality  of  removal  was
    inadequate.

 7. At the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  eldest
    child was twelve and a half  years  old  and  in  her  second  year  of
    secondary education and the youngest six and  a  half  years  old.   In
    paragraph 35 of the decision, the qualifying child, which can  only  be
    the eldest child as only she had been resident in  the  United  Kingdom
    for more than seven years, is referred to as being seven years of  age.
    In paragraphs 47 and 48 of the decision eldest child is referred to  as
    being 11 years of age and about to start secondary  school.   Also,  it
    was submitted that the reference to school in paragraph 48 contains  an
    odd conclusion that the eldest child will have to change schools in any
    event, although the change from primary to secondary education  is  not
    comparable to a move to Pakistan and  entering  a  different  education
    system there.

 8. Mr Raza highlighted the reasoning given in paragraph 53 of the decision
    which focused on possible advantages for  the  children  to  return  to
    Pakistan rather than whether their best interests were to remain in the
    United Kingdom.

 9. It was  further  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  that  when
    considering the best interests of a child, a period of seven years from
    the age of four is more pertinent than from a younger age as  found  by
    the Upper Tribunal in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
    children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00107  (IAC)  and  that   in
    accordance with the Court of  Appeal's  decision  in  MA  (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  strong
    and powerful reasons are needed to rebut the presumption that it  would
    be unreasonable for a child who has resided in the United  Kingdom  for
    more than seven years to be expected to leave the United Kingdom.   The
    First-tier Tribunal did not deal with this point nor identify  powerful
    reasons in this case.  Overall it  was  submitted  that  there  was  an
    inadequate assessment of the  best  interests  of  the  children  which
    infected the proportionality assessment.

10. Further to the recent decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53, handed  down
    since promulgation of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  Mr  Raza
    submitted that the requirement for strong and powerful reasons survives
    and even on the basis of this  decision,  on  the  facts  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the eldest child to leave the United Kingdom.

11. Mr Raza accepted on behalf of the Appellants that the child  Appellants
    could not meet the requirements of paragraphs 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules in their own right and the sole issue is  therefore  whether  the
    parents  could  benefit  from  section  117B(6)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  pursuant  to  which   the   child
    Appellants' appeals would then succeed under Article 8 of the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

12. The Appellants rely one further factual error in paragraph  48  of  the
    decision, that in fact the majority of the Appellants' wider family are
    in the United Kingdom, not in Pakistan.

13. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr  Avery  submitted  that  there  was  no
    material error of law in relation to the age of the eldest child in the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The reference to being seven years old
    in paragraph 35 was most likely to be  a  typographical  mistake  where
    reference should have been to the child being a  qualifying  child  who
    had spent more than seven years in the United Kingdom.  As to the later
    reference to her being 11 years old, at worst the error is a difference
    in a year and was submitted not  to  be  material  given  the  detailed
    assessment of the facts and circumstances.

14. Mr Avery submitted that further to the decision in KO,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was more difficult to successfully challenge  given
    that what Judge Obhi is criticised for doing in this  case  is  exactly
    what the Supreme Court now suggest is required - an assessment  of  the
    reality of the situation in the real world where  none  of  the  family
    have leave to remain and are expected to return  to  their  country  of
    origin.  In this appeal, the adult Appellants are expected to return to
    Pakistan.   The  guidance  set  out  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 854 applies to assess the real-world  situation.   In  the  present
    case the First-tier Tribunal gave detailed consideration as to what the
    position of the children would be in Pakistan and it was  open  to  the
    Judge to find  that  in  those  circumstances  as  found,  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave.  It  was  submitted  that
    there was no strict requirement for strong and powerful reasons  to  be
    identified and in any event, this took the appeal no further.

Findings and reasons

 1. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  contained
    any errors of fact which  amounted  to  material  errors  of  law  when
    considering the age and education of the eldest child.  I consider  the
    reference in paragraph 35 to the eldest child being seven years of  age
    is a typographical error given the  context  of  this  paragraph  being
    about whether either of the children are qualifying children within the
    meaning of section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The reference to seven years of  age,  should  have  been  a
    reference to being resident in  the  United  Kingdom  continuously  for
    seven years and is not a mistake as to the  eldest  child's  age.   The
    later references to the eldest child being 11 years of  age,  when  she
    was in fact 12 do not make any  material  difference  to  the  findings
    given  the  detailed  assessment  and  findings  in  relation  to   her
    educational and other circumstances.  The references  to  her  changing
    schools were entirely accurate given that  she  had  started  secondary
    school that academic year and was due to change school again to  attend
    a grammar school in the next academic year.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal's decision shows  clear  consideration  of  the
    evidence before it in  the  appeal,  including  the  Appellants'  clear
    wishes as to their future, wider community support and the  educational
    achievements of the second Appellant in particular.  It cannot be  said
    that the evidence and context were not fully taken into account by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In relation to the social work report, this is dealt with in  paragraph
    41 of the decision and little weight is attached to it for the  reasons
    set out therein.  The vast majority of the social work report sets  out
    and records the feelings and wishes of the first  to  third  Appellants
    and their views of what life would be like in Pakistan.   The  analysis
    and opinion extends to seven relatively  short  paragraphs,  concluding
    that the eldest child's removal from the United Kingdom would represent
    a significant upheaval for her and may expose her  to  instability  and
    uncertainty, including in future education and opportunities such  that
    removal would not be in her best interests.  As noted by the First-tier
    Tribunal, the author has  no  experience  of  childcare,  education  or
    culture in Pakistan and makes no reference to the  wider  circumstances
    and family there, nor that education would  be  available  in  English.
    The Independent Social Worker had also not been provided with a copy of
    the reasons for refusal letter.  These are all lawful  and  sustainable
    reasons for attaching little weight to the report, which in  any  event
    provides little analysis of the family  circumstances  and  the  eldest
    child in particular, not taking the Appellant's case any  further.   As
    such I find no error of law in the weight attached to this evidence  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  deals  primarily  with  the  best
    interests of the children and whether it is reasonable for  the  eldest
    child to be expected to leave the United Kingdom in paragraphs 43 to 48
    of the decision.  Therein the First-tier Tribunal finds that the second
    Appellant has not been totally detached from the culture,  language  or
    religion of  her  parents,  the  evidence  being  that  she  had  basic
    proficiency in Urdu.  It was noted that the parents were supportive  of
    the children and that they could be educated in English  as  the  first
    Appellant was in Pakistan.  It  was  found  that  there  were  extended
    family members in Pakistan.  In paragraph 46, it  was  noted  that  the
    only real reason given for it being  in  the  second  Appellant's  best
    interests to remain in the United Kingdom is that she had been accepted
    at a grammar school and is very bright, but there was no reason why the
    educational facilities in Pakistan could not be taken advantage  of  in
    the alternative.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found that the circumstances were different  to
    those in the case of MT  and  ET  (child's  best  interests;  extempore
    pilots) Nigeria [2018[ UKUT 88 (IAC), in which case there was a finding
    that it was in the best interests of the child to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and then concluded in paragraph 48 as follows:

         "That is not a finding that I  make  in  the  present  case.   [The
         second Appellant's] best interests are met by remaining within  her
         birth family.  She is not of an age where her wishes  and  feelings
         can determine her welfare decisions.  Weight should  be  placed  on
         her wishes and feelings I need to be cautious in accepting what she
         says as she has been influenced by the family and it is clear  from
         the report social worker that she is still closely attached to  her
         family and their problems are her  problems.   I  accept  that  her
         parents believe that she would be  better  off  living  in  the  UK
         because she has been offered a place at a grammar school.  I accept
         that in an ideal world they should be able to choose the school for
         her.  I also accept  that  stability  for  a  child  is  important.
         However in this case she is about to change school  in  any  event.
         Her best interests are capable of being met either in  Pakistan  or
         in the UK.  In the UK she has no wider extended family, in Pakistan
         she does.  She will not lose the rich culture of her origins if she
         is in Pakistan, whilst it appears  that  in  the  UK  she  is  even
         beginning to lose the language."


 6. The Appellants take a factual issue  within  this  paragraph  that  the
    Appellants have no wider extended family in the United Kingdom, whereas
    it is said that the balance of their family are  here  rather  than  in
    Pakistan.  Even if correct, I do not find that is material  given  that
    there is no dispute that there is wider family in Pakistan and numerous
    other reasons given for the  assessment  made  of  best  interests  and
    reasonableness.

 7. Although the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  the
    Supreme Court's decision in KO which had not been handed down when this
    appeal was initially heard, I find that the approach of  the  Judge  in
    this case as to the question of whether it is reasonable to expect  the
    eldest child to leave the United Kingdom,  is  entirely  in  accordance
    with that decision.  The key findings in KO are as follows:

          "16.    It is natural to begin with  a  first  in  time,  that  is
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  This paragraph is directed solely to  the
         position of the child.  Unlike its predecessor DB 5/96 it  contains
         no requirement to consider  the  criminality  or  misconduct  of  a
         parent of the balancing factor.  It is impossible my view  to  read
         it is importing such a requirement by implication.


         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in  the  context
         of the right of the parent to remain.  I refer that it was intended
         have the same effect.  The question again is what  is  "reasonable"
         for the child.  As Eliza LJ said in MA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016]  one  WLR
         5093, Paris 36, there is nothing in this  subsection  to  import  a
         reference to the conduct of the parent.  Section 117B  sets  out  a
         number of factors relating to  those  seeking  leave  to  enter  or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them.  Subsection 117B(6)  is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification  being  that  the
         person relying on  it  is  not  liable  to  deportation.   List  of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above)  seems
         to be wholly appropriate  and  sounding  law,  in  the  context  of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).


         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  whether
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
          To that extent the record of the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to there ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even on that hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to remain.   The  point  was
         well expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:


             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?'  In a case such as this
             second only be one answer: 'because the parents have no  right
             to remain in the UK'.  To approach the question any other  way
             strips  away  the  context  in   which   the   assessment   of
             reasonableness is being made ..."


         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 854, para 58:


             "58. In my judgement, therefore, the assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on  the  basis  of  the
             facts as they are in the real world.  If  one  parent  has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against which  the  assessment  is  conducted.   If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus
             the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect  the
             child to follow parent with no right to remain to the  country
             of origin?"


         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para  40,  I  would  respectfully  disagree.   There  is
         nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness"  is  to  be
         considered otherwise than in the real world in which  the  children
         find themselves."


 8. In the present appeal, the First-tier Tribunal assessed very  carefully
    the  real  world  situation  of  these  Appellants  and  made  specific
    reference to the factors required for the best interests assessment  as
    set out in EV (Philippines), approved by the Supreme Court in KO.   All
    of the Appellants are nationals of Pakistan and  all  are  expected  to
    leave the United Kingdom as they have no lawful  leave  to  remain  and
    that is the background against which the best interests assessment  and
    the question  of  reasonableness  must  be  assessed.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  gave   detailed   consideration   to   the   eldest   child's
    circumstances in particular, including the likely circumstances for her
    on return to Pakistan with her family in that real world context.  This
    approach discloses no error of law, the findings and conclusions  being
    entirely sustainable and in accordance with the approach  confirmed  by
    the Supreme Court in KO.

 9. There is no separate  or  additional  requirement  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to identify strong and powerful reasons for the  finding  that
    it would be reasonable for a child who resided in  the  United  Kingdom
    for a period of at least seven years to  be  expected  to  leave,  even
    where those seven years occur after  the  age  of  four.   Sufficiently
    strong and powerful reasons are in any event given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on  the  facts  of  this  case,  recognising  the  real  world
    situation of the Appellants.

10. For all of these reasons I find no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision  on  any  of  the  grounds  put  forward  by   the
    Appellant's, those originally set out in writing those made  orally  at
    the hearing before me and the decision to dismiss the appeal  therefore
    stands.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date         7th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

