
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01797/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th September 2017                        |On 20th September 2017        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                           Itohan Vivian Osadolor
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  15th  August  1983.  She
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cameron,
    promulgated on 3rd February 2017, dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that  the  judge  failed
    to properly apply Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act and failed to  properly
    assess Article 8. The material issues in the appeal  were  whether  the
    documents submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  consideration  in
    line with Section 85(5), which were not available to the Respondent  at
    the time he made the decision which  the  Appellant  appealed  against,
    meet the requirements for the issue of entry clearance visa  sought  by
    the Appellant and whether proper consideration has been  given  to  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights in light of her peculiar circumstances. It
    was also submitted that the Tribunal failed to  properly  consider  the
    evidential flexibility policy set out in paragraph D of Appendix FM-SE.



3.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Easterman  on  17th  July
    2017 on the grounds that the judge appeared to apply both the  old  and
    current version of Section 85(5) and therefore it was arguable that the
    judge erred in law.

4.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent  stated:  "Notwithstanding  the
    phraseology of paragraph 8 of the determination, the PO at paragraph 17
    accepted that the new provisions applied which  the  judge  did  apply,
    please see paragraph 45. Also, the judge is entitled to give weight  to
    the fact that not all the required  evidence  was  submitted  with  the
    application form, paragraph 40. It is submitted that because this is  a
    human rights appeal the judge is entitled  to  find  that  despite  the
    Appellant and Sponsor being in a genuine and  subsisting  marriage  the
    appeal remains dismissed under  Article  8.   In  doing  so  the  judge
    followed the approach approved by case law and assessing  the  evidence
    reached findings which are open to be made."

Submissions

5.   Mr Nwaekwu relied on Mostafa (Article  8  in  entry  clearance)  [2015]
    UKUT 00112 (IAC) and submitted that the judge erred in law  in  failing
    to  assess  the  Appellant's  application  under  Appendix  FM  on  the
    information which was available at  the  date  of  hearing.  The  judge
    failed to make a clear finding that the Appellant satisfied Appendix FM
    at the date of  hearing  and  then  failed  to  properly  carry  out  a
    proportionality  assessment  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant   now
    satisfied the Immigration Rules. Had  the  judge  considered  that  the
    Appellant could satisfy the Rules as at the date  of  hearing  then  he
    would  have  found  that   the   refusal   of   entry   clearance   was
    disproportionate.

6.   Mr Nwaekwu relied on paragraphs 20 and 21 of Mostafa which state:

         "20. We must now ask  ourselves  if  refusing  the  Claimant  entry
             clearance by refusing to give  him  entry  clearance  for  the
             specific    and    limited    purpose    sought     interferes
             disproportionately with the private and family  lives  of  the
             Claimant and his wife.


         21.  In  these  circumstances  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  must
             justify the interference and satisfy us that the  interference
             is proportionate.  Subject to two sets  of  considerations  we
             can see no justification for stopping a  husband  joining  his
             wife when a Tribunal is  satisfied  that  their  circumstances
             satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  The first  relates  to
             their candour.  For example, if they had  contributed  to  the
             application being refused by presenting inaccurate information
             or  by  omitting  something  material   or   committing   some
             comparable misdemeanour.  We  can  accept  that  it  might  be
             appropriate  to   refuse   someone   entry   clearance   whose
             application suffered from deficiencies such as  these  because
             good administration requires applicants  to  engage  with  the
             system and, further, we consider  that  there  are  duties  of
             candour and cooperation on all applicants. There are  no  such
             failings here. The second set of considerations relates to the
             impact of  refusal  on  the  relationships  that  have  to  be
             promoted.   Refusal  of  entry  clearance  will   not   always
             interfere disproportionately with such a relationship."

7.   Mr Nwaekwu submitted that the judge had  failed  to  conduct  a  proper
    proportionality assessment and had failed to make a finding on  whether
    the Appellant could satisfy the Rules at the date of hearing.  The case
    of Mostafa applied to all entry clearance cases, not just  visit  visas
    and in fact family life held more  weight  in  settlement  cases.   The
    judge's decision should be reversed.

8.   Mr Tufan submitted that Mostafa  was  not  applicable  because  it  was
    decided before the 2014 amendment came into force. Mr Tufan referred me
    to Appendix FM-SE paragraph D which states:

         "(a) In deciding an application in relation to which this  Appendix
             states that specified documents must be  provided,  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer or Secretary of State ('the decision-maker')
             will consider documents that  have  been  submitted  with  the
             application, and will only consider documents submitted  after
             the application where sub-paragraph (b) or (e) applies.
         (b)  If the applicant:
             (i)  Has submitted:
                  (aa) a sequence of documents and some of the documents  in
                      the sequence have been  omitted  (e.g.  if  one  bank
                      statement from a series is missing);
                  (bb) a document in the wrong format  (for  example,  if  a
                      letter is not on letter headed paper  as  specified);
                      or
                  (cc) a document  that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                      document; or
                  (dd)  a  document  which  does  not  contain  all  of  the
                      specified information; or
             (ii) Has not submitted a  specified  document,  the  decision-
                  maker may contact the applicant or his  representative  in
                  writing or otherwise, and request the document(s)  or  the
                  correct  version(s).   The  material  requested  must   be
                  received at the address specified in the request within  a
                  reasonable timescale specified in the request.
         (c)  The decision-maker will not request documents where he or  she
             does not anticipate that  addressing  the  error  or  omission
             referred to in sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a grant  because
             the application will be refused for other reasons.
         (d)  If the applicant has submitted:
             (i)  A document in the wrong format; or
             (ii) A document that is a copy and not an  original  document,
                  or
             (iii)    A document that does not contain all of the specified
                  information, but the  missing  information  is  verifiable
                  from:
                  (1)  other documents submitted with the application,
                  (2)  the website of  the  organisation  which  issued  the
                      document, or
                  (3)  the website of the appropriate regulatory  body,  the
                      application may be granted  exceptionally,  providing
                      the decision-maker is satisfied that the  document(s)
                      is  genuine  and  that  the   applicant   meets   the
                      requirement  to  which  the  document  relates.   The
                      decision-maker reserves  the  right  to  request  the
                      specified original document(s) in the correct  format
                      in all cases where sub-paragraph (b) applies, and  to
                      refuse applications if this material is not  provided
                      as set out in paragraph (b).
         (e)  Where the decision-maker is satisfied that there  is  a  valid
             reason why a specified document(s) cannot be supplied  because
             it  is  not  issued  in  a  particular  country  or  has  been
             permanently lost, he or she may  exercise  discretion  not  to
             apply  the  requirement  for  the   document(s)   or   request
             alternative  or  additional  information  or  document(s)   be
             submitted by the applicant.
         (f)  Before making a decision under Appendix FM or  this  Appendix,
             the  decision-maker  may  contact  the  applicant   or   their
             representative in writing  or  otherwise  to  request  further
             information or documents.   The  material  requested  must  be
             received at the address specified  in  the  request  within  a
             reasonable timescale specified in the request."
9.   Mr Tufan relied on SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387:
         "37. On the other hand, if someone from the United Kingdom  marries
             a foreign national or establishes a family life with them at a
             stage when they are contemplating trying to live  together  in
             the United Kingdom, but when they know that their partner does
             not have a right to come here an extreme example would be  the
             case of a so-called 'mail-order bride', the relationship  will
             have been formed  under  conditions  of  known  precariousness
             which will make the  analogy  with  the  Strasbourg  case  law
             reviewed in Nagre a close one (see also Abdulaziz, Cabales and
             Balkandali v United Kingdom [1985] 7  EHRR  471  at  paragraph
             68). In that sort of case, it will be appropriate to  apply  a
             similar test of exceptional circumstances before  a  violation
             of Article 8 will be found to arise in relation to  a  refusal
             to grant leave to enter outside the Rules."
         "51. In our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in the light of the
             Rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the same as  in  respect  of
             the substantive LTE and LTR Rules in  Appendix  FM.  In  other
             words, the same  general  position  applies,  that  compelling
             circumstances would have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or
             LTR where the evidence Rules are not complied with."
         "89.  The  FTT  also  erred  in  saying  that  it  would   not   be
             proportionate to expect FA  to  make  a  further  application.
             Since FA's application failed to comply with  the  Immigration
             Rules and no  compelling  circumstances  were  identified  why
             those Rules should not be applied in her  case  in  the  usual
             way, there was nothing disproportionate in applying the  Rules
             in accordance with their terms,  with  the  effect  that  FA's
             application failed and she would have to make a new one.   The
             Entry Clearance Officer (and the  FTT)  was  not  required  to
             waive the operation of the Rules  as  some  sort  of  goodwill
             gesture  because  of  the  way  in  which  the  FA's  previous
             application had been dealt with."

10.  Mr Tufan submitted  that,  following  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11,  where
    family  life  is  precarious,  there  must   be   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences to establish a breach of Article 8.  There  were  none  in
    this case because it  was  open  to  the  Appellant  to  make  a  fresh
    application.  There was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

11.  Mr Nwaekwu submitted that the  judge  failed  to  make  findings  under
    Appendix FM.  Had the judge done so he would have come to  a  different
    conclusion in relation to proportionality. The judge had failed to make
    findings on each of the five steps set out in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  17.
    The  proportionality  assessment  was  lacking  in  substance  and  was
    defective. This was material because the judge could  have  come  to  a
    different decision had he asked himself the correct question set out in
    Razgar.

Discussion and Conclusion

12.  Entry clearance was  refused  on  29th  June  2015  for  the  following
    reasons: The Appellant could not satisfy the  suitability  requirements
    because she failed to submit a valid tuberculosis certificate with  her
    application. She could not satisfy the eligibility requirements because
    there was insufficient evidence to show that she was in a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship.  She  could   not   satisfy   the   financial
    requirements because the bank  statement  provided  for  the  Sponsor's
    salary did not  cover  the  same  period  as  the  payslips.  The  bank
    statements did not evidence the Sponsor's  earnings  for  the  relevant
    period. The Appellant had failed  to  provide  documents  specified  in
    Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration  Rules.  There  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to justify a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13.  The judge took into account the documents submitted at the hearing  and
    concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship. He found that there was family life and interference. His
    failure to set out the five steps in Razgar was not material because he
    had, in paragraphs 50 to 55, applied Razgar. The argument  put  forward
    by Mr Nwaekwu is that the judge failed  to  make  a  finding  that  the
    Appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules at the date of hearing and to
    add that into the balancing exercise when assessing proportionality.

14.  At paragraph 40 the judge stated: "The appellant did  not  provide  the
    specified documents in relation to the sponsor's  income  and  did  not
    provide the TB certificate and cannot therefore meet  the  requirements
    of the rules."

15.  The judge found at paragraph 54: "I have found that the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements (sic) the rules. I am not satisfied that  the
    appellant has shown that there are compelling circumstances which would
    tip the balance in the  appellants  favour  and  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  to
    reapply now that the sponsor stated he does meet  the  requirements  of
    the rules and for  the  sponsor  to  provide  the  specified  documents
    required.  I take into account SS (Congo) in particular at paragraph 89
    when coming to this finding."


16.  And at paragraph 55: "When taking  into  account  all  the  factors  in
    favour of the appellant balancing these against the  respondents  (sic)
    legitimate aim of the maintenance of  immigration  control  and  taking
    into account the factors set out above I come to  the  conclusion  that
    the balance falls in favour of  the  respondent  and  the  decision  to
    refuse entry  clearance  is  proportionate  to  the  respondents  (sic)
    legitimate aim."

17.  It is quite clear from paragraphs 40 and 54 that  the  judge  does  not
    accept that the Appellant met the Immigration  Rules  at  the  date  of
    hearing. The judge took into account the Sponsor's claim  that  he  now
    has all the required evidence, but it was not in the Appellant's bundle
    which was before the judge. There was no tuberculosis certificate;  the
    bank statements were incomplete and the Sponsor's earnings did not meet
    the required threshold.
18.  The judge's finding that the Appellant failed to meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules was open to him on the  evidence  before  him.
    The judge took this into account in  assessing  proportionality.  There
    was no error of law in that assessment.

19.   The  judge  accepted  that  there  was  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship between the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  and  that  therefore
    family life was established  and  Article  8  was  engaged.   Both  the
    Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  aware  at  the  time  they  formed   the
    relationship and when they married that there  was  no  right  for  the
    Appellant to come to the UK.  The  Appellant  would  have  to  make  an
    application under the Immigration Rules.

20.   The  Appellant  failed  to  submit  specified   documents   with   her
    application. The evidential flexibility policy did not  apply  in  this
    case for the reasons given at paragraph 39  of  the  judge's  decision.
    The Appellant could not satisfy Appendix FM-SE because she  had  failed
    to submit specified documents with her application.

21.   The  judge  also  considered   where   there   were   any   compelling
    circumstances justifying  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules  and
    concluded that there  were  none.  His  decision  was  consistent  with
    paragraph 21 of Mostafa. The Appellant had failed to  submit  specified
    material  with  her  application.  Good  administration  required   the
    Appellant to engage with the system. The judge's finding  that  it  was
    proportionate to refuse entry clearance was open to him on the evidence
    before him.

22.  At the time the application was made and at the  date  of  hearing  the
    Appellant  had  failed  to  provide  specified   documents   with   her
    application. That defect could not be remedied by later  submission  of
    the documents.  The judge considered whether there were any  compelling
    circumstances which would prevent the Appellant from making  a  further
    application and concluded that there were none. That is a course  which
    is still open to the Appellant.

23.  The Appellant's application for entry clearance  did  not  comply  with
    the Immigration Rules in that she failed to submit  specified  evidence
    and there were no compelling circumstances why the Rules should not  be
    applied in her case. There was nothing disproportionate in applying the
    Immigration Rules and the judge's assessment of proportionality was not
    lacking in substance or form.

24.  Accordingly, I find that there was no error of law in the  decision  of
    3rd February 2017 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 18th September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since I have dismissed the Appellant's appeal I make no fee award.





              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 18th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

