
                                    [pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01534/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at by Skype for business       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 5 May 2021                    |On the 17 May 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                             Prakash SUTHARSHAN
                        (No Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Georget, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


   DECISION OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) and (b) OF THE
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


      1. The appellant appeals with permission  from  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Wyman) dismissing his appeal against the
         respondent's decision to refuse him leave to remain on human rights
         grounds.

      2. The hearing took place on  5  May  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. The advocates attended remotely via video. There were  no
         issues regarding sound, or any technical issues and I am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin  on
         18 January 2021 on the basis that  the  First-tier  Judge  arguably
         erred in law  by  failing  to  consider  at  all  the  considerable
         procedural history regarding the appellant's attempts  to  register
         his marriage and that he may meet  the  requirements  of  Paragraph
         319C of the Immigration Rules.

      4. By a Rule 24 Reply dated 22 January 2021, the respondent  indicated
         that he does not oppose the application for  permission  to  appeal
         and invited the Upper Tribunal to set aside  the  decision  and  to
         determine the appeal by with a fresh continuance hearing.  This had
         not been received by the appellant's solicitors.

      5. When invited to make submissions on the  further  disposal  of  the
         hearing, Mr Georget submitted that the appropriate course was for a
         remittal to the FtT for the Article 8 appeal to be  reheard  afresh
         and to include any updating evidence. Mr Diwnycz agreed that  given
         the issues a remittal would be the  proper  course  to  take.  Both
         parties indicated their consent to the decision under the Procedure
         Rules.

      6. Pursuant to rule 40(3) of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (as amended), the Upper  Tribunal  is  not  required  to
         provide written reasons for its decision under  paragraph  40(2)(a)
         of the Rules, where the decision is made with the  consent  of  the
         parties (rule 40(3)(a)), or the parties have consented to the Upper
         Tribunal not giving written reasons (rule 40(3)(b)).

      7. The requirements of sub-paragraphs 40(3)(a)  and  40(3)(b)  of  the
         Rules are met. I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal can properly be set  aside  without  a  reasoned  decision
         notice.

      8. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with
         no findings of fact preserved and a fresh hearing  upon  his  human
         rights appeal shall take place. The decision in this appeal will be
         remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be  fixed  in
         accordance with the following directions:

          1)  It is directed that the appeal shall be listed for a  hearing
             on a date to be fixed before the First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton
             Cross), London).

          2) Counsel's availability should be taken account of when listing
             the appeal.

          3) A Sinhalese  interpreter  may  be  required  (the  appellant's
             solicitors to confirm in writing).




    Notice of Decision.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of an error
    on a point of law and therefore  the  decision  is  set  aside  and  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  the  directions
    set out above.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated    5 May 2021
