
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01216/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd May 2017                              |On 6th July 2017             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                              Mr Justice Nicol
                  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge V.L. Mandalia


                                   Between

                       mrs Nejat mohammed isshag salih
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer Pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     A. Chohan instructed by Citadel Immigration Lawyers
Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of FtTJ Row who, by  a  decision
    dated 27th October 2016, dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and dismissed her appeal on human rights grounds. The
    Appellant had appealed to the FtT against the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Pretoria ('ECO') to refuse her entry clearance  to
    join her spouse and sponsor in the UK,  Mr  Ezaidian  Hasham  Adam.  Mr
    Adam, like the Appellant, is a citizen of Sudan and has been recognised
    as a refugee in  the  UK  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department ('SSHD').

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by FtTJ  Row  on
    5th April 2017.

 3. At the conclusion of the hearing we announced that we agreed  with  the
    Appellant that there was a material error of law in the  decision  FtTJ
    Row. Since it was not possible for the Upper  Tribunal  to  decide  the
    appeal against the ECO's refusal,  it  was  necessary  for  the  appeal
    against that  decision  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (sitting in Birmingham) to be heard de novo by another  FtTJ.  We  said
    that we would give the reasons for our decision in writing. This we now
    do.

 4. The Appellant was born in 1987. She says that the sponsor is her cousin
    and she married him in Sudan on 2nd March 2008. The Appellant  produced
    to  the  ECO  a  marriage  certificate  testifying  to  the  fact.  The
    certificate was in Arabic but it had been translated  into  English  by
    the University of Khatoum.

 5. In his screening interview, Mr Adam said that he  left  Sudan  on  15th
    June 2008. He went first to Libya where he stayed until August 2010. He
    then travelled to Greece where he arrived on 10th September 2010.  From
    Greece, he travelled through Europe and got to the UK on 20th  November
    2010.  He applied for asylum  very  shortly  afterwards.  In  the  same
    screening interview he said that in March 2008  he  had  married  Negat
    Mohammed Isshaq who was currently in Sudan and who was 23. He  said  he
    had last seen her on 15th June 2008. Mr Adam was granted asylum on 11th
    February 2011.

 6. In their covering letter of 23rd March 2015 with  the  application  for
    entry clearance, Citadel Immigration Lawyers said that the  couple  had
    lost contact with each other from the time that Mr Adam left  Sudan  in
    2008 until sometime in 2013. They had been in contact with  each  other
    by telephone since then.

 7. The ECO refused the application for entry clearance because, apart from
    the wedding certificate, there was no evidence  that  the  sponsor  and
    Appellant had met, nor was the ECO  satisfied  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine  and  subsisting  or  that  they  intended  to  live   together
    permanently in the UK.

 8. In the course of his decision, FtTJ Row said as follows:

         '14. On behalf of the appellant it is suggested that it would be  a
         remarkable coincidence if the sponsor had given the name and age of
         his wife in an interview in 2011 and a person with  the  same  name
         and age appeared in 2015.

         15. On the other hand, people will pay large amounts  of  money  to
         gain illegal entry into the United Kingdom. They  will  tell  lies,
         commit criminal offences, and produce false documents in  order  to
         do so. The sponsor paid  in  order  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom
         illegally. He is no great respecter of immigration laws. He regards
         paying money to gain illegal entry as a legitimate means to gain an
         end. Such a  person  might  be  expected  to  recoup  some  of  his
         expenditure by bringing another person into the UK illegally. I  am
         entitled  to  regard  the  sponsor's  evidence   in   relation   to
         immigration matters with circumspection.'

 9.  Mr Chohan, on the Appellant's behalf, submits that  in  these  remarks
    the FtTJ has erred in law. It is a common place for  asylum  applicants
    to make payments to agents in order to travel to a safe  country.  Lies
    may also be told to achieve the same purpose. While such activities may
    not be praiseworthy, they are sometimes the only  way  by  which  those
    fleeing persecution can achieve the asylum to which they are  entitled.
    Critically in this case, the sponsor has been recognised as a  refugee.
    The flaw in FtTJ Zukcer's reasoning was to generalise  from  the  means
    which the sponsor used to gain asylum to reach a conclusion  about  his
    attitude towards immigration matters more generally.

10. On behalf of the ECO, Ms Isherwood observes  that  the  Judge  had  not
    overlooked the fact that the sponsor was  a  recognised  refugee  -  he
    referred to that in the first paragraph of his decision. I accept  that
    is correct. However, in my view it does not detract  from  Mr  Chohan's
    criticism of the decision, namely that the extrapolation from what  the
    sponsor did to achieve his own  safety  to  his  attitude  towards  the
    generality of immigration matters was unwarranted.

11. We agree with Mr Chohan that this was an error of law on  the  part  of
    the FtTJ. Was it a material error of law? Ms Isherwood accepted that it
    would be material unless the decision of  the  Judge  would  inevitably
    have been the same in the absence of that error.

12. We cannot accept that the decision would inevitably have been the same.
    There was some delay in the sponsor making contact with the  Appellant,
    even after he had been granted asylum in the UK. There were some  other
    gaps in the  evidence  as  to  the  relationship  between  the  couple.
    However, it is not possible to conclude that these, on their own  would
    inevitably have led to the dismissal of the appeal if the FtTJ had  not
    treated the sponsor's evidence with circumspection because of the error
    of law which we have identified.

13. Having reached that decision, it was unnecessary for us to consider the
    other criticisms made by Mr Chohan of the FtTJ's decision.

14. In those circumstances, the decision of the FtTJ had to be quashed.  It
    is not possible to separate out findings of fact which  are  unaffected
    by the error of law. For this reason, the only way forward was to remit
    the appeal to be heard de novo by another FtTJ in Birmingham.


Signed                                  Date: 26/05/2017

Mr Justice Nicol
