
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/01540/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 April 2018                           |On 18 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOHN FREEMAN


                                   Between

                              ZUGRIA ISKUZHINA
                                                                   appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Frances Shaw, counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts
For the respondent:    Miss K Pal

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by a citizen of the Russian Federation, born in  what
    was then the Soviet Union in 1947.  On 21 December 2015 she was refused
    a dependent relative visa to  join  her  daughter,  who  is  a  British
    citizen.  The reasons included a statement that she had no  significant
    health problems.  On 7  March  2016  that  decision  was  confirmed  on
    administrative review, and that reason was maintained, though financial
    grounds were no longer relied on.

2.   On 24 April 2017 the appeal came before the judge, with  oral  evidence
    from the sponsor.  The judge's note begins as follows "sponsor  attends
    and gives medical evidence.   In  November  2016  she  had  open  heart
    surgery for valve replacement" and goes on to relate the problems  that
    the appellant had had as a result  of  that.   Unfortunately  when  the
    judge came to write the decision he dealt with the medical evidence  as
    follows, at paragraph 9:

         "Whilst there is medical evidence that the appellant had  a  hernia
         operation in September 2015, no medical evidence has been  provided
         that the appellant requires long  term  personal  care  to  perform
         everyday tasks, nor has  the  availability  of  care  provision  in
         Russia been investigated properly or at all."

    The relevant Rule E-ECDR.2.4 required that the applicant for a visa  of
    this category "must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require
    long term personal care to perform everyday tasks".  Unfortunately  the
    judge did not deal with the evidence about that, which clearly had been
    put before him, and the decision must be set aside and the  appeal  re-
    decided.


3.   As I am told that there  is  further  evidence  about  the  appellant's
    medical state which will be relevant as of the  date  of  the  eventual
    hearing, there will be a fresh hearing before  a  different  first-tier
    judge.

Appeal allowed: decision set aside
Fresh hearing before another first-tier judge


                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                                                 12 April 2018
