
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01666/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|on 26 March 2019                     |On 1 April 2019                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                CHAUDHRY [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Caswell of Counsel.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
    1. The appellant appeals with permission a determination  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Mensah who in a decision promulgated  on  21  December
       2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.










Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who it is noted by  the  Judge
       at [1] sought leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
       his family life with his child.
    3. The Judge correctly notes this is a human rights appeal  setting  out
       details of the appellant's immigration history and findings  of  fact
       between [6 - 9] of the decision  under  challenge  in  the  following
       terms:

       "6.    The appellant entered the UK on the 22 July 2012 on  a  spouse
           visa valid until January 2013. On  the  29  September  2015  the
           appellant made a successful application on the basis  of  family
           and private life, granted until 10 May  2016.  He  made  further
           successful application on the same basis granted until  6  March
           2017. He made the application relevant to  this  decision  on  7
           March 2017. The appellant sought leave to remain in  the  UK  to
           have a family life with his son [MH] [D.O.B: [~] 2013].


       7.     The appellant told me he was divorced from the mother  of  his
           child in 2016. The appellant confirmed his son  lives  with  his
           mother Shazia [B] and he had lived with his  son  for  one  year
           before their marriage ended. He last saw his  son  in  2015  and
           through family court proceedings the appellant  has  established
           access  to   his   son   restricted   to   sending   cards   and
           gifts/clothing. The appellant told me he commenced family  court
           proceedings in 2016 and was granted this indirect access.


       8.     The appellant says he is going to seek greater access  to  his
           son through the family court but he did not know when this would
           happen. There is no issue taken with the fact the appellant  has
           a son in the UK. Under the rules he would have to have shown  he
           had a parental relationship with his  child.  Even  on  his  own
           evidence he has no direct contact with his son and hasn't for  3
           years. He  took  that  matter  to  the  Family  court  who  have
           determined it is in the child's best interests he remain  living
           with his mother and importantly the appellant be  restricted  to
           indirect contact. The appellant has filed copies of a couple  of
           cards he says he sent to his son; who is now 5 years of age. The
           appellant cannot meet the conditions of paragraph 276 ADE as per
           the refusal letter and  has  not  raised  any  very  significant
           obstacles to integration to Pakistan. His entire case  is  about
           his relationship with his son. He has spent the majority of  his
           life in Pakistan, he speaks Punjabi and only identified his  son
           as his family in the UK but accepted he has family in  Pakistan.
           He failed to show why he could not integrate. Turning to Article
           8 I have considered section 117B of the Immigration Act 2014.


       9.     On the current evidence I am not satisfied the appellant has a
           subsisting parental relationship with his son. He has  not  seen
           his son for 3 years and the family court have determined that is
           in his son's best interests. The appellant may  wish  to  pursue
           future contact proceedings to increase access to his son  but  I
           am considering the position as at the date  of  the  hearing.  I
           find he has failed to show he has an existing family  life  with
           his son. However, even if he had shown a very basic family  life
           I would have  still  refused  this  appeal  as  on  the  current
           evidence it is  entirely  proportionate  for  the  appellant  to
           return to Pakistan and continue to have the indirect contact  he
           currently is entitled to have. There is no reason he cannot send
           cards and  gift/clothing  from  Pakistan.  I  find  it  far  too
           speculative to accept his intention to pursue family proceedings
           makes the decision disproportionate on family and  private  life
           grounds absent any credible evidence such an application has any
           merit whatsoever."

    4. The appellant sought permission to appeal claiming (a)  the  decision
       breached his article 8 rights in the Immigration Act  2014,  (b)  the
       decision can be classed as unlawful, (c) is a clear error of law, (d)
       that not all the evidence was considered,  (e)  that  he  has  direct
       contact with his child, and, (f) that he has a direct bond  with  his
       child and that his child cannot remain without him.
    5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal in the following terms:

           "The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  against  the
           decision of Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Mensah  promulgated
           on 21 December 2018 in which the judge dismissed the  appeal  on
           human rights (Article 8) Grounds. The  application  was  made  3
           days out of time, the appellant prepared the grounds  personally
           and  I  have  exercised  my  discretion  so  as  to  treat   the
           application as having been made in time. The grounds amounted to
           no more than a disagreement with the findings of the  judge,  an
           attempt to reargue the appeal  and  they  did  not  disclose  an
           arguable error of law but for which the outcome  of  the  appeal
           might have been different. Mindful, however, that the  appellant
           is unrepresented, I have  considered  the  Judge's  decision  in
           order to ascertain whether it disclosed an arguable error of law
           but for  which  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  might  have  been
           different. The judge arguably failed to arrive  at  findings  of
           fact in circumstances where upon it was incumbent upon her to do
           so. If paragraph  1  of  the  skeleton  argument  on  which  the
           appellant relied at the hearing and his witness  statement  were
           considered it was plain that in  addition  to  the  family  life
           which  the  appellant  maintains  with  his  son  (referred   to
           variously as [MM] and [MH]) the appellant  was  also  contending
           for family life with his current partner, Salam  [B]  (Mrs  [B])
           with whom he lives and whom, that the date of  the  hearing,  he
           was intending to register as his spouse according to an  Islamic
           ceremony. At paragraph 8 of her decision the judge  remarked  of
           the appellant, "his entire case is about his  relationship  with
           his son".  Indeed, nowhere in the judge's decision did the judge
           refer to the relationship with Mrs [B] for which  the  appellant
           contended in the skeleton argument, in the witness statement  by
           way of closing remarks made by the appellant's representative at
           the hearing. That the appellant did  rely  on  the  relationship
           with Mrs [B] at the hearing was surely conveyed by  the  judge's
           Record of Proceedings,  the  judge  noting  in  the  penultimate
           paragraph of her Record  of  Proceedings,  "current  marriage  -
           Salam [B]  -  10.8.17  via  Islamic  ceremony.  Living  together
           10.8.7. She has  ILR  -  see  her  witness  statement".  It  was
           arguably incumbent upon the judge to arrive at findings of  fact
           in respect of the appellant's relationship with Mrs [B] and  the
           judge did not do so. The Judge's decision disclosed an  arguable
           error of law but for which the outcome of the appeal might  have
           been different. The application for permission is granted."

    6. In his Rule 24 response dated 20 March 2019 the respondent states:

       "2.    In granting permission to appeal, First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           (FTTJ) Keane found that the grounds prepared  by  the  Appellant
           did not disclose an arguable error of law  in  the  decision  of
           FTTJ Mensah. However, FTTJ Keane  considered  it  arguable  that
           FTTJ Mensah had erred in failing  to  consider  the  Appellant's
           relationship with Ms Salma [B].


       3.     The Respondent notes that the decision letter of  13  December
           2017 does not mention Ms [B], indicating that the Appellant  did
           not raise this relationship in his application.


       4.     The Respondent relies on the recent  decision  in  AK  and  IK
           (s.85 NIAA 2002 -new matters) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00067 (IAC), in
           which the Upper Tribunal approved the earlier decision in Mahmud
           (s.85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters') [2017] UKUT 000488  (IAC).  The
           headnote of AK and IK reads:


                "If an appellant relies  upon  criteria  that  relate  to  a
                different category of the Immigration Rules to make good his
                Article 8 claim from that relied upon  his  application  for
                LTR on human rights grounds or in his s.120  statement  such
                that a new judgement falls to be made as to whether  or  not
                he satisfies the Immigration Rules, this constitutes a  "new
                matter" within the meaning of s.85(6)  of  the  Nationality,
                Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which requires the Secretary
                of State's consent even if the facts  specific  to  his  own
                case (for  example,  as  to  accommodation,  maintenance  et
                cetera) remain the same."


       5.     In the Respondent submission, the Appellant's reliance on  his
           relationship with Ms [B] constituted a "new matter".  Since  the
           Respondent was not represented at the hearing, consent  was  not
           given by the Secretary of State for the FTTJ  to  consider  this
           "new matter". In the circumstances, the FTTJ had no jurisdiction
           to consider the "new matter". Consequently, no material error of
           law arose from the fact that  the  FTTJ  did  not  consider  the
           relationship between the Appellant and Ms [B]"





Error of law


    7. Section 85 of the 2002 Act prevents the Tribunal considering  a  "new
       matter" unless the respondent gives consent.
    8. There have been a number of  recent  authorities  providing  relevant
       guidance including Mahmud (S85 NIAA 2002 - "new matters") [2017] UKUT
       488 (IAC) in which it was held:

        i) Whether something is or is  not  a  'new  matter'  goes  to  the
           jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the  appeal  and  the
           First-tier Tribunal must  therefore  determine  for  itself  the
           issue;


       ii) A 'new matter' is a matter which constitutes a ground of  appeal
           of a kind listed in section 84, as required by section  85(6)(a)
           of the 2002 Act.  Constituting a ground of appeal means that  it
           must contain a matter which could raise or  establish  a  listed
           ground of appeal.  A  matter  is  the  factual  substance  of  a
           claim.  A ground of appeal is the legal basis on which the facts
           in any given matter could form the basis of a challenge  to  the
           decision under appeal;


      iii) In practice, a new matter is a  factual  matrix  which  has  not
           previously been considered by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
           context of the decision in section 82(1) or a statement made  by
           the appellant under section 120.  This requires the matter to be
           factually distinct from that previously raised by an  appellant,
           as opposed to further or better evidence of an existing  matter.
           The assessment will always be  fact  sensitive.   Examples  were
           given.  Where a relationship had previously been relied  on  and
           considered by the SSHD then the  fact  the  couple  had  married
           would be new evidence but not a new matter.  Conversely the fact
           the couple had a child was likely to be a  new  matter.   Actual
           consideration in a decision letter of  the  new  factual  matrix
           relied upon is required for a matter not to be a "new matter".

    9. AK and IK (S.85 NIAA 2002 - new matters)  Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  00067
       (IAC) published on 19 February 2019 is the latest judgement  on  this
       issue.
   10. The appellant's application for leave sought leave to remain  on  the
       basis of family life as a parent (10-year route) and on the basis  of
       family/private life outside the Immigration Rules. In the sections of
       the application form where the appellant is asked to provide  details
       of his application he refers to a  covering  letter  from  his  legal
       representatives.  At  12.2  he  claims  his  son  will  not  have   a
       relationship with his dad if he is removed but at  no  point  in  the
       application form is Ms [B]  mentioned.   In  the  letter  from  Reiss
       Solicitors Limited dated 6 March 2017 there is reference only to  the
       proceedings concerning the child and a request for a  further  period
       of leave to pursue proceedings in the Family Court with no mention of
       the person named in the grounds granting permission to appeal.
   11. The respondent's refusal dated 13 December 2017 notes the application
       has been made on the basis of family life with the child. The refusal
       considered the  merits  of  the  application  on  the  basis  of  the
       information provided in the application form which  was  refused  and
       against which the appellant appealed.
   12. In section [3] of the application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
       First-Tier Tribunal, received on  28  December  2017  entitled  Human
       Rights Decision, the following is written:

           3. Please explain why the decision to refuse your  human  rights
           claim is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.
           You should specify which article of the Human Rights Act you are
           appealing under.


           "The decision is wrong as no information was requested:  further
           information was sent to Home Office regarding  children  matters
           and also change of circumstances as  the  appellant  has  a  new
           partner and documents were sent  in  support  as  was  extensive
           correspondence with Social Services. Breach of  human  rights  -
           article 8."

   13. There is reference to the relationship in the skeleton  argument  and
       in submissions made to the Judge.
   14. It is not disputed in the  appellants  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
       relationship with his new partner is an issue that was not raised  in
       the application for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds.  That
       was, as the Judge correctly records  at  [8],  an  application  based
       solely upon the relationship with his son.
   15. The appellant was  represented  at  the  hearing  by  Mr  M  Anwar  a
       solicitor. The Judge's record of  Proceedings  does  not  record  any
       application being made for permission to add in a new matter  or  any
       arguments  relating  thereto  on  the  appellant's  behalf.  No  such
       permission was therefore granted meaning the only obligation upon the
       Judge  was  to  consider  matters  in  relation  to  which  she   had
       jurisdiction which was the refusal of the application in relation  to
       the child.
   16. Mr Diwnycz confirmed at  the  hearing  that  the  appellant's  appeal
       bundle was served upon the Secretary of  State  on  1  November  2018
       where, for the  first  time,  there  is  reference  in  the  skeleton
       argument relied upon by the appellant of  the  relationship  with  Ms
       [B]. There is no evidence of any application having been  made  prior
       to the hearing seeking the respondent's permission to  introduce  the
       new matter and, as the  Judge  noted,  as  there  was  no  Presenting
       Officer such could not be sought at the hearing.
   17. The submission made on the appellant's behalf that section 85(4) made
       out the appellant's case as the obligation  upon  the  Judge  was  to
       consider all issues at the date of the hearing in a human  rights  of
       appeal, not at the date  of  decision,  does  not  assist,   for  the
       matters the Judge was required to consider are only those the  First-
       tier Tribunal had jurisdiction to lawfully  consider.  Section  85(6)
       creates a statutory bar to a new matter being considered without  the
       permission  of  the  Secretary  of  State.  Jurisdiction  cannot   be
       conferred by mistake, desire or what a person may  believe  to  be  a
       'Robinson obvious' point. The remedy available to  the  appellant  in
       relation to  his  relationship  with  Ms  [B]  is  to  make  a  fresh
       application in which he can set out the points  he  believes  entitle
       him to leave on that basis which can  be  considered  by  a  decision
       maker.
   18. After further discussion it was accepted by Mr  Casswell  that  there
       was a jurisdictional bar upon the Judge considering the  relationship
       with Ms [B] which constituted a "new matter" of the type envisaged by
       section 85(6) of the 2002 Act.
   19. No arguable legal error is made out.

Decision

   20. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


  Anonymity.


   21. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27th March 2019

