
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01347/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th August 2019                  |On 23rd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  SALIM [P]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown, instructed by Michaels Stevens
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. For reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on  6th  June  2019,
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego allowed Mr [P]'s  appeal  against
         the refusal of his human right claim made subsequent to the signing
         of a deportation order following various criminal convictions which
         included a sentence of four years imprisonment for  drugs  offences
         in March 2004.

      2. The SSHD sought and was granted limited permission to appeal by the
         Upper Tribunal on 12th July 2019 namely that it was  arguable  that
         the judge had failed to make a clear finding on the ability of  his
         partner to provide appropriate  care  for  the  couple's  son;  had
         failed to consider/provide  adequate  reasons  in  respect  of  the
         possibility of support for the child  and  or  partner  from  other
         agencies; had failed to provide adequate reasons for the conclusion
         that there were no other family members in a position to offer  any
         practical assistance to his partner or son if he were removed  from
         the  UK  and  that  it  was  arguable  that   the   references   to
         rehabilitation indicated a failure to have adequate regard to  what
         was said in RA (s117C: "unduly harsh",; offence: seriousness)  Iraq
         [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC).

      3. The SSHD was refused permission to appeal the findings of the judge
         that he did not have to apply  s117D  Nationality  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 - it was irrelevant because the judge had  in  fact
         reached  a  decision  on  whether  there   were   very   compelling
         circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2 in any  event.  The
         SSHD was also refused permission on a claimed contradiction in  the
         decision on whether Mr [P] had never gone to Nigeria (he  was  born
         there and lived there until he was 5); the judge had also  referred
         to him living there until he was 5 in any event and the finding  he
         had no family connections in Nigeria was  a  finding  open  to  the
         judge on the evidence before him.

      4. Mr Tarlow did not make  submissions  other  than  to  rely  on  the
         grounds.

      5. In so far as alternative family or other support is concerned if Mr
         [P] were to be deported, the judge sets out in detail  the  serious
         medical conditions of the child which although now mitigated  to  a
         certain extent because of serious and lengthy medical intervention,
         still requires  intervention  and  support  from  Mr  [P]  and  his
         partner, the serious health conditions  of  the  child's  mother/Mr
         [P]'s partner and her need  for  daily  assistance  from  him,  the
         medical evidence in support of the submissions made of the need for
         his care  and  support,  and  her  likely  need  for  two  shoulder
         replacements. Her nearest relatives are in Leicester. As Mr  Tarlow
         said, even if family can travel to where she and the child live  it
         could easily take two hours  during  which  time  the  intervention
         required could well be too  late.  Similarly,  social  services/NHS
         ambulance interventions would be a last resort and would  arise  in
         emergency  situations,  such  emergency  situations  being  avoided
         because of Mr [P]'s presence. There is no error of law by the judge
         finding it would be unduly harsh for the child and the  partner  to
         remain in the UK without Mr [P].

      6. Given  the  length  of  the  prison  sentence  imposed,  the  judge
         considered whether there were very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and above it being unduly harsh on the  partner/child  to  separate
         hem. In reaching  his  conclusion  on  that,  the  judge  correctly
         considered,  inter  alia,  the  nature  of  Mr  [P]'s   criminality
         including the very serious offence he committed in 2004, the length
         of time since the last offence (in 2013), that none  of  the  other
         offences  committed  resulted  in   imprisonment,   that   he   was
         rehabilitated, length of time in the UK, the extent  to  which  his
         partner and child required care and support  over  and  above  that
         which rendered separation unduly harsh.  The  full  extent  of  the
         considerations is set out in the decision between paragraphs 54 and
         58.

      7. The issue taken in the grounds on which permission  to  appeal  was
         granted was that the  judge  took  improper  account  of  Mr  [P]'s
         rehabilitation.  Whilst  little  weight  should  be   placed   upon
         rehabilitation it is incorrect to  characterise  that  as  being  a
         significant factor or of major import in the judge's  decision.  It
         was a factor and no more, as acknowledged by Mr Tarlow.

      8. There is no error of law in the decision by the First-tier Tribunal
         such that the decision is set aside to be remade.

      9. I dismiss the SSHD's appeal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal by  Mr  [P]
    against the refusal of his human rights claim stands.


     Date 21st August 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
