
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01412/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2019                  |On 27 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                              Jaskaranjeet [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, counsel instructed by Prime Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Juss, promulgated on 30 July 2019. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 1 October 2019.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  5  September  2007,  with
    leave to enter as a Tier 4 student. She extended her leave until 24 May
    2016 by way of a series of in-time applications. On  9  May  2016,  the
    appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  1  migrant.
    That application was refused on 10  July  2017,  with  the  appellant's
    application for administrative review being refused on 21 August  2017.
    On 4 September 2017, the appellant sought indefinite  leave  to  remain
    under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the appellant's application in a  letter
    dated 9 January 2019. It was accepted  that  the  appellant  had  valid
    leave from 5 September 2007 until 10 July 2017 and that her  leave  was
    extended by Section 3C of the Immigration  Act  1971  until  21  August
    2017. Consequently, the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B(1)(a) of the Rules because she had not  demonstrated  10
    years' continuous residence in the United  Kingdom.  In  addition,  the
    respondent declined to exercise discretion in  the  appellant's  favour
    because her case also fell for refusal under paragraph  322(5)  of  the
    Rules owing  to  discrepancies  between  the  income  declared  to  the
    respondent in the appellant's Tier 1 applications submitted in 2011 and
    2013 and that declared to HMRC. The appellant, her spouse and children,
    aged 2 and 4 at the time of the application, were found not to meet the
    requirements of Appendix FM. Nor could the appellant satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE (1) of the Rules nor advance any exceptional circumstances.

The decision the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal judge concluded that the appellant had not been
    disadvantaged by the interview process, that she had acted dishonestly,
    that she did not meet the requirements of 276ADE  (1)  and  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued, firstly, that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    application of the burden of proof and failed to apply the  three-stage
    test that applied in cases of dishonesty, applying SM and Qadir (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC). Secondly, the  judge
    failed to take into account material factors and  reached  inadequately
    reasoned or  irrational  conclusions.  Thirdly,  the  judge  failed  to
    recognise that there was  a  two-stage  discretion  process,  following
    Balajigari v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civ  673  and  did  not  undertaken  the
    necessary balancing exercise. Lastly, the judge made a mistake of  fact
    as to the ages of the children,  there  was  no  consideration  of  the
    evidence provided of their ties  to  the  UK  and  nor  did  the  judge
    undertake a balance-sheet approach.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent filed no Rule 24 response.



The hearing

 9. Mr Gajjar relied on all four grounds of appeal. He said  the  following
    in relation to the first  ground.  The  judge  twice  gave  a  standard
    direction in relation to the burden of proof, whereas this  was  not  a
    standard case.  The only requirement on the appellant was  for  her  to
    provide an innocent explanation. He further  argued  that  the  judge's
    reliance on the appellant's inability to answer  questions  during  her
    interview with the Home Office was irrational.

10. As for the second ground, Mr Gajjar focused on the judge's  failure  to
    take into account a letter from HMRC which informed the appellant  that
    her conduct, in failing to declare her entire income for the  years  in
    question, was viewed as a failure to take reasonable care with her  tax
    affairs. He also  drew  my  attention  to  the  attempts  made  by  the
    appellant to complain about her previous accountants, none of which was
    mentioned by the judge.  Mr  Gajjar  relied  on  the  third  ground  as
    expressed in the application  for  permission  to  appeal.  Lastly,  Mr
    Gajjar criticised the judge's mistake of fact as to  the  ages  of  the
    children (4 and 6 at the time of the hearing) as well as  the  lack  of
    mention of the substance of the children's private and family lives, as
    set out in the witness statements of the appellant and her sister.

11. Ms Everett accepted that there was an arguable point in relation to the
    judge's application of the burden of proof however, she submitted  that
    the error was not material, given the large discrepancies  between  the
    sums declared to the respondent and HMRC.  The respondent had  a  prima
    facie case. It was not  clear  that  the  judge  reversed  the  burden,
    however he looked at the appellant's  explanation  at  [21-24]  of  the
    decision and reasons.  While agreeing that it  would  be  difficult  to
    respond to questions about transactions, Ms  Everett  argued  that  the
    appellant's  application  was  based  on  certain  earnings   and   the
    discrepancies went  to  the  heart  of  the  matter.  The  respondent's
    questions were not unreasonable however,  it  was  plausible  that  the
    appellant could not remember the transactions. Nonetheless,  the  judge
    did not accept that response and gave cogent findings.

12. As for the HMRC letter, Ms Everett  argued  that  while  there  was  no
    mention of dishonesty, HMRC were not looking at  the  totality  of  the
    evidence. The judge did not misdirect himself by placing no  weight  on
    it. In terms of the third ground, Ms Everett stated that there had been
    no complaints regarding the judge's findings set out  from  [21-24]  of
    the decision. Ms Everett noted that the  judge  got  the  ages  of  the
    children  wrong  but  argued,  in  essence,  that  there  was   nothing
    significant in the  evidence  which  would  have  led  to  a  different
    outcome.

13. In response, Mr Gajjar emphasised that the judge did not show awareness
    of the HMRC letter  and  furthermore,  that  HMRC  were  aware  of  the
    appellant's  initial  declaration,  subsequent   amendments   and   the
    difference in the figures. He clarified that there was a  challenge  to
    the judge's findings on the basis that  he  got  the  burden  of  proof
    wrong, which coloured the judge's findings on the appellant's interview
    responses and oral evidence at the hearing.

14. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made material errors of law and that the decision was set aside.

Decision on error of law

15. The judge failed to direct himself appropriately regarding  the  three-
    stages to the burden  of  proof  which  applies  in  cases  of  alleged
    dishonesty.

16. In SM and Qadir, the Upper Tribunal concluded that the respondent bears
    an evidential burden of demonstrating that there is a case  to  answer,
    after which an appellant  bears  the  burden  of  raising  an  innocent
    explanation. Where an innocent  explanation  is  produced,  the  burden
    shifts back to the respondent.

17. At [2] of the decision  and  reasons  the  judge  directed  himself  as
    follows; "In immigration appeals, the  burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
    appellant and the standard of proof is on a balance of  probabilities."
    Further, at [18] he said "I have given careful consideration to all the
    documents before me and to the oral evidence and submissions. I am  not
    satisfied that the Appellant discharges the burden  of  proof  that  is
    upon her."

18. There is no recognition by the judge of the differing test in deception
    cases nor any indication  that  it  was  applied,  notwithstanding  the
    misdirection. This is a material error given the low threshold for  the
    appellant to provide an innocent explanation and  calls  into  question
    whether the judge considered whether that explanation met  the  minimum
    level of plausibility or, in fact,  applied  a  higher  standard.  That
    concern is amplified given the judge's somewhat harsh criticism of  the
    appellant  for  being  unable  to  recall  from  memory  bank   account
    transactions which  were  over  a  year  old  during  her  Home  Office
    interview.

19. The appellant submitted a comprehensive bundle of evidence of over 200-
    pages. The judge mentioned that he had seen the bundle at  [6],  adding
    that he had taken it  into  account,  even  if  he  made  "no  specific
    reference to  it."  Indeed,  he  made  no  specific  reference  to  any
    supporting document in it, other than the Home Office interview record.
    There are several important documents which received  no  attention  in
    the decision and reasons, all of which could  be  said  to  be  in  the
    appellant's favour. The most serious omission was in  relation  to  the
    letter from HMRC dated 24 June 2016, in which it was decided  that  the
    appellant "failed to take reasonable care with (her) tax affairs."  The
    judge does not mention the HMRC letter at all and shows no  recognition
    that HMRC considered the appellant's culpability. At  [21],  the  judge
    considered that the grounds of appeal emphasised that  no  penalty  had
    been imposed by HMRC,  dismissing  this  as  being  "neither  here  nor
    there." That approach was erroneous given what  was  said  at  [74]  of
    Balajigari:

         "We further bear in mind that there would be nothing to prevent the
         applicant from drawing attention to the fact that HMRC had enquired
         into a matter and had decided  not  to  impose  a  penalty  or  had
         decided to impose a penalty at a lower rate, which  signified  that
         there had been carelessness rather than dishonesty.  That  would-be
         information which was within an applicant's own knowledge and  they
         could draw this to the attention of the Secretary of State."

20. That the judge was unaware of the  existence  of  the  HMRC  letter  is
    underlined at [25] when the judge states, "I find the appellant did act
    deceitfully or dishonestly. There is no basis for saying that  she  had
    been merely careless." Such a finding could not have been made had  the
    HMRC letter been considered.  The judge also neglected  to  assess  the
    evidence of the complaints  made  by  the  appellant  to  her  previous
    accountant as well as to ACCA or  the  detailed  explanation  from  her
    current accountants as to how the previous errors came to light.

21. The third area in which the First-tier Tribunal materially erred was in
    failing to recognise that there is a  two-stage  analysis  in  deciding
    cases involving a refusal under paragraph 322(5),  applying  Balijigari
    at [33]. Firstly, there must be a consideration of  the  undesirability
    of granting leave and  secondly,  where  undesirability  is  identified
    there must be the exercise of  discretion  as  to  whether  there  were
    factors which outweigh the presumption that leave  should  be  refused.
    In this case there were a number  of  factors  which  could  have  been
    considered under the exercise of  discretion  which  include  that  the
    appellant is paying back taxes, that HMRC considered her to  have  been
    careless rather than fraudulent and that the appellant and  her  family
    had developed ties to the United Kingdom.

22. In view  of  these  material  errors,  the  Upper  Tribunal  cannot  be
    satisfied that the judge, if properly directed, would have reached  the
    same conclusion.

23. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her immigration appeal at  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of  such
    consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Birmingham IAC, with a time estimate of  3  hours  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 26 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

