
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01887/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd August 2019                  |On 18th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                            Mohammad Wasif Sayem
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chowdhury, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  7  April  2000.   He
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Eldridge
    promulgated on 5 April 2019 dismissing his appeal against  the  refusal
    of entry clearance as the child of a person settled in the UK.

 2. The Appellant  appealed  on  the  following  grounds.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in:

      i) failing to make adequate  or  clear  findings  on  the  Appellant's
         evidence, the Sponsor's evidence (the Appellant's father)  and  the
         evidence of the Appellant's grandmother;

     ii) effectively imposing a requirement that responsibility needed to be
         demonstrated before 2017 and corroboration was required;

    iii) by effectively rejecting the Appellant's evidence as  self-serving;
         and

     iv) failing to rule that Article 8 was engaged.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Keith  on  18
    July 2019 on the grounds that: "The FTT arguably erred in the  adequacy
    of his reasoning at [31] of the Decision that family life did not exist
    between the minor appellant and his father, which arguably resulted  in
    the  FTT  then  failing  to  consider  the   proportionality   of   the
    respondent's refusal. While the other grounds appear to be weaker,  and
    in essence, a disagreement with the FTT's findings (with the FTT giving
    reasons for his concerns about the evidence of the  appellant  and  his
    grandmother at [22] and  [23];  and  dealing  with  the  issue  of  the
    apparent brevity of the  claimed  dependency  at  [27]),  nevertheless,
    permission is granted on all grounds."



Submissions

4.   Mr Chowdhury, the Sponsor, clarified that two copies  of  one  document
    were submitted in March 2017 and there had been a mistake by his lawyer
    in indexing those documents. He went on to state that the Appellant had
    documents that had not been  submitted  with  the  application  or  put
    before the judge. This had been a mistake by his  lawyer  and  although
    the Sponsor was present at the appeal he did not notice at the time.

5.   Mr Chowdhury submitted an email dated 2 July 2017  and  copies  of  his
    passport showing that he had made visits to Bangladesh in November 2015
    and February 2018 and a further visit in 2019.  He  accepted  that  his
    passport was not put before the judge.  Mr Chowdhury submitted that all
    the documents submitted were served with the application and  were  not
    for the purpose of the appeal. He accepted that the declarations of non-
    responsibility were dated December 2017 after the refusal. However, the
    letter from the Appellant's teachers was before  the  refusal  and  had
    been submitted with the application.

6.   Mr Chowdhury taught maths and  physics  privately  and  had  started  a
    teacher training course but because of the Appellant's circumstances he
    could not concentrate and could not  submit  assignments  on  time.  If
    there was insufficient evidence of  sole  responsibility,  he  was  the
    Appellant's father and he was helping other people in the UK.   He  was
    distressed by the fact that he could not do anything for  his  son  and
    asked the court to allow the  Appellant's  appeal  notwithstanding  any
    lack of evidence. His mother was old and had engaged a servant. He  was
    worried that his son would be derailed.

7.   Ms Fijiwala dealt with  the  four  grounds  of  appeal  upon  which  Mr
    Chowdhury relied in addition to his oral  submissions.   She  submitted
    that the judge  had  considered  all  the  evidence  in  the  round  in
    concluding that the Sponsor  did  not  have  sole  responsibility.  The
    declarations of non-responsibility postdated the decision but,  in  any
    event, the judge took into account the other letters from  doctors  and
    teachers, the telephone records and statements. The failure to refer to
    the letter from the Bangladeshi lawyer was  not  material  because  the
    factual position was the relevant one.  The Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review made it clear that there was no evidence before  2017  submitted
    with the application and most of the evidence that  was  submitted  was
    from around the time of the application.

8.   The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  documents  had  been
    contrived for the purposes of the application and for  the  appeal  and
    the Sponsor accepted in his evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that he had specifically asked for documents to support the appeal.  Ms
    Fijiwala submitted that the judge was well aware of  the  tests  to  be
    applied which he set out at paragraphs 18 to 20.  He did not limit  the
    test of sole responsibility to the production of evidence before  2017.
    The judge decided the case on the evidence  before  him  and  concluded
    that the Appellant had not provided any evidence prior to 2017 that his
    father had sole responsibility for his upbringing.

9.   The judge did not require corroboration but was  entitled  to  rely  on
    evidence which the Appellant failed to produce. The Appellant's further
    evidence submitted by  the  Sponsor  at  this  hearing  should  not  be
    considered. There had been no complaint that his lawyer had  failed  to
    submit evidence previously but, in  any  event,  the  content  of  that
    evidence did not show  that  the  Sponsor  was  a  regular  visitor  to
    Bangladesh, as he claimed. There was no evidence prior to 2017 save for
    a visit to Bangladesh in 2015.

10.  The judge found that the Appellant had failed to show that the  Sponsor
    made all the important decisions in his life and the Appellant had,  at
    the time of the appeal hearing, a relationship with his grandmother and
    uncles. He had been living with his grandmother with the assistance  of
    his uncles and, on that evidence, family life with his father  did  not
    exist.  Even if it did, it was so limited that  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was proportionate.

11.  In response, Mr Chowdhury submitted the  judge  did  not  consider  the
    Sponsor's statement or the  remittances.  He  had  sent  money  to  his
    brother with instructions to give it to the  Appellant's  teachers  and
    any  medical  people  concerned.   He  agreed  that  he  did  not  have
    sufficient evidence before 2017, but that is because he had  been  away
    from Bangladesh for ten to  eleven  years  and  he  did  not  have  the
    opportunity to go to school and attend functions. Bangladesh was not  a
    developed country and prior to  2017  documents  did  not  exist.   The
    Sponsor submitted that he had  always  taken  care  of  the  Appellant,
    controlling him from the UK and instructing his  brother,  friends  and
    teachers.  There was also an insurance policy which was dated 2006.



Conclusion and Reasons

12.  The judge concluded  that  the  issues  before  him  were  whether  the
    Sponsor, the  Appellant's  father,  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant and whether there were serious and  compelling  circumstances
    or considerations that would warrant entry to the UK.  The  application
    was made on  31  August  2017.   In  support  of  the  application  the
    Appellant submitted documents, most of which failed to cover the period
    before 2017.  The application was refused on 28 November 2017.

13.  The judge made the following relevant findings:

      i)  The  declarations  of  non-responsibility  from  the   Appellant's
         grandmother and two of his uncles were dated December 2017 and were
         not credible because it was not until the decision  to  refuse  the
         Appellant's application was made known that these  declarations  of
         non-responsibility emerged.

     ii) The emails from a teacher in Bangladesh were dated April, July  and
         August 2017;

    iii) The doctor's notes, issued in  March  2017,  did  not  suggest  the
         Sponsor had paid for any treatment or had commissioned it.

     iv) The telephone records covered the first half of 2017,  but  it  was
         impossible to see which of these were between the Appellant and the
         Sponsor as his telephone account showed a multitude of calls  to  a
         great variety of numbers;

      v) The Sponsor visited the Appellant between 25 January and 5 February
         2019 for the occasion of a medical emergency following a call  from
         the family doctor. The letter from Dr Reza dated 28  November  2018
         seemed to suggest a diagnosis of a depressive illness  and  apathy.
         It did not demonstrate any chronic condition or any problems  while
         the Appellant was a  minor  or  up  until  the  time  he  made  his
         application;

     vi) The Sponsor failed to provide any  of  the  conventional  evidence,
         such  as  copies  of  flight  bookings  or  receipts  for   flights
         undertaken, to show that he had been a regular visitor to  see  his
         son in Bangladesh;

    vii) There was nothing beyond assertion to show any intervention in this
         Appellant's life by the Sponsor before 2017, a  few  months  before
         the application was made;

   viii) The Appellant has lived for most of his life with  his  grandmother
         and has had the assistance of his uncles;

     ix) The Appellant's mother has not been a part of  his  life  for  very
         many years;

      x) The Sponsor has not had sole responsibility for the  Appellant  for
         any significant period;

     xi) The Appellant continued to live with his grandmother and there  was
         other family support available;

    xii) The documents were produced entirely for the purpose of the  appeal
         and were not credible;

   xiii) The requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f) were not met;

    xiv) The Appellant had lived all  his  life  in  Bangladesh  with  close
         family and continued to enjoy their support and continued to be  in
         education;

     xv) The Sponsor had failed to  demonstrate  'sole  responsibility'  and
         Article 8 was not engaged;

    xvi) The Respondent's decision did not breach Article 8.

14.  I am not persuaded that the judge failed to take into account  all  the
    evidence that was before him.  It is quite  clear  that  he  took  into
    account  the  documentary  evidence  in  the  Appellant's  bundle,  the
    Appellant's  statement  and  the   Sponsor's   statement.   There   was
    insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  that  the  Sponsor   had   sole
    responsibility for the Appellant who, for the last ten years, had  been
    living with his grandmother with the assistance of his uncles.

15.  The evidence of the Sponsor's involvement  with  the  Appellant's  life
    was limited, the documentary evidence was limited  to  matters  arising
    after 2017 save for a stamp in the Sponsor's passport showing  a  visit
    to  Bangladesh  in  2015.  The  assertions  in  the  Sponsor's  witness
    statement were vague and were not  supported  by  documentary  evidence
    which the Sponsor ought to have been able to produce if his account was
    true.

16.  The Sponsor claimed, after coming to the UK, he tried to  see  his  son
    at least every four to seven weeks, every time he went  to  Bangladesh.
    The further evidence he produced was not before the judge and the judge
    cannot be criticised for failing to take it into account, but  even  if
    it had been produced, it would not have taken matters any further.  The
    evidence did not support the assertion that the  Sponsor  made  regular
    visits to Bangladesh.

17.  The Sponsor accepted in his witness  statements  that  his  mother  was
    looking after his son during his absence  and  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to show that he had day-to-day control of his son's life.  The
    judge assessed the totality of this evidence and concluded that it  was
    insufficient to establish sole  responsibility.  The  judge  took  into
    account all relevant information and his findings were open to  him  on
    the evidence before him.

18.  The family life that exists between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  is
    that of father and son.   The  refusal  of  entry  clearance  does  not
    interfere with that family life because the position remains the  same.
    There were no compelling circumstances to  warrant  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance outside  the  Immigration  Rules  because  at  the  time  the
    application  was  made  the  Appellant  was  still  living   with   his
    grandmother with the assistance of his uncles.  The declarations of non-
    responsibility postdate  the  decision  and  the  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for why he attached little weight to them.

19.  The Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules and  the  refusal
    of entry clearance did not breach Article 8. I find that there  was  no
    material error of law in the decision promulgated on 5 April 2019 and I
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 16 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances
Signed   Date: 16 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

