

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
                                     Number: HU/01217/2015     HU/01219/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal|Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 May 2017                         |On 11 May 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              MARY ACHIENG OOKO
                                    [W A]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFCER (1221771)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: No appearance.
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A
        J Parker ('the Judge') who in a decision promulgated on  16  August
        2016 dismissed the appellants' appeal against the refusal of  their
        applications for  settlement  pursuant  to  paragraph  297  of  the
        Immigration Rules.
     2. On 8 May 2017, the sponsor's solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal
        advising that the sponsor of the appellants' has  indicated  in  an
        enclosed witness statement that the hearing is to  proceed  in  her
        absence, that no new or additional evidence is available, and  that
        "their representation is to rely on the reasons for  appealing  for
        permission to appeal". Reference is made to the  sponsor's  witness
        statement further below.



Background


     3. The appellants are citizens of Kenya born on 28 May 1999  and  [  ]
        2005.
     4. The application for entry clearance to settle in the UK was refused
        by an Entry Clearance Officer ('ECO') for the following reasons:


    . Effectively, you have been separated from your sponsor for over  seven
      years. During this period your sponsor has travelled to Kenya at least
      once, as demonstrated by the photographs that you have submitted.
    . I am satisfied that your grandmother has been responsible for your day-
      to-day care since January 2008, when your sponsor travelled to the UK.
      I also note that your father has written a letter in support  of  your
      application. This letter serves as evidence that he  plays  an  active
      part in your upbringing.
    . You have submitted your school report and receipts  as  evidence  that
      your school fees have been paid. However there is no evidence  of  any
      contact between your school and your  sponsor  with  regards  to  your
      education. There is no evidence of any contact  between  your  sponsor
      and any responsible authority with regards to your health.
    . I appreciate that there is evidence that your sponsor has  sent  money
      and on one occasion clothes and shoes to Christina Onyango  in  Kenya.
      Whilst the  funds  sent  may  have  been  used  to  assist  with  your
      upbringing, financial support does not mean that the person  providing
      the funds has sole responsibility for this  child.  I  note  that  the
      earliest of the money transfers was in  2013,  more  than  five  years
      after your sponsor arrived in the UK.
    . I am not  satisfied  that,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  sole
      responsibility for you lies with your sponsor. I am satisfied that  it
      is your grandmother who has sole responsibility for you  since  it  is
      she that you have lived with and who has cared for you for over  seven
      years.
    . I am also not satisfied, on the evidence that there  are  serious  and
      compelling reasons which make the exclusion of the child  undesirable.
      There is no evidence of any reason why you cannot continue to live  in
      Kenya as you have done for your whole life.
    . I have therefore refused your application because I am not  satisfied,
      on the balance of probabilities, that you meet all of the requirements
      of the relevant Paragraph of the United Kingdom Immigration Rules.


     5. The Judge considered the decision  and  the  documentary  and  oral
        evidence provided before noting at [21] that the appellants' mother
        came to the UK in 2008 and that the appellants  have  resided  with
        their grandmother ever since, mainly in Nairobi until January  2016
        when they went back to live  in  the  village  and  that  they  are
        currently at boarding school. At [22] the Judge writes:


              "22.     The main issue in relation  to  this  case  is  sole
                  responsibility  and  whether  there   are   serious   and
                  compelling reasons which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
                  undesirable. The law  on  sole  responsibility  above  is
                  noted. I now set out the relevant parts of the rule."


     6. The Judge's analysis of the issues in the appeal  is  not  disputed
        and having considered the material by reference to the decision  in
        the case of TD, and specifically at paragraph 34 of that  decision,
        the Judge noted at [27] that the crux of the issue  was  about  who
        makes significant decisions about the child's upbringing and  whose
        obligation it is to make those decisions and where only one  parent
        has an involvement with the child's life, it is likely to  be  that
        parent who alone is "responsible" for  the  child,  providing  that
        responsibility has not been relinquished or  abdicated.  The  Judge
        found  there  was  little  evidence  that  the  sponsor  makes  the
        significant decisions in this case, that although financial support
        is provided which may be an indication of an obligation it  is  not
        conclusive, and that it was  normal  to  expect  considerably  more
        evidence to  support  the  claim  the  UK-based  sponsor  has  sole
        responsibility than had been presented in the appeal. At  [31]  the
        Judge noted the money transfer receipts mainly post-date  the  date
        of decision as did evidence of contact, that the Judge would expect
        considerably more evidence of  the  sponsor's  involvement  in  the
        children's lives, that there was no evidence from the  school  that
        the mother does in fact make  key  decisions,  that  there  was  no
        evidence from the medical authorities that there are problems  with
        the grandmother and no evidence that  important  medical  decisions
        have  been  made  by  the  grandmother.  At  [32]  that  there  was
        conflicting evidence regarding [WA]'s father who appears to have  a
        role in the  children's  lives  and  who  it  was  found  has  some
        involvement,  partially  emotional  and  partially  financial.  The
        evidence suggested the sponsor has a reduced role in the upbringing
        of the children.
     7. At [34] the Judge found the grandmother is reasonably fit and  well
        and can look after the grandchildren as she has done since 2008, as
        there was no credible evidence she could not look after herself and
        nothing to indicate the children are destitute. The Judge refers to
        an email from  the  sponsor's  sister  suggesting  the  appellants'
        grandmother has done an excellent job in raising the  children  and
        questioning the sponsor's involvement.
     8. The Judge noted inconsistencies in the  sponsor's  evidence  before
        concluding at [37] "I  find  on  the  balance  of  probability  the
        sponsor does not have sole responsibility and  that  there  are  no
        serious and compelling reasons which make exclusion  of  the  child
        undesirable.




Grounds of appeal



     9. The appellant maintains in  the  grounds  there  was  no  evidence,
        written  or  implied,  that  the   sponsor   transferred   parental
        responsibility to relatives or indicated they were  to  look  after
        the appellants for an indefinite period,  as  the  grandmother  was
        simply a "caretaker".   It  is  submitted  that  due  to  distances
        involved immediate day-to-day decisions were made by the  sponsor's
        relatives but the ultimate decision about their upbringing was that
        of the sponsor.
    10. Reference is made in the grounds to earlier decisions including the
        more recent decisions of the Upper  Tribunal  and  it  repeats  the
        sponsor's assertion that she has maintained  parental  control  and
        responsibility for the appellants'.
    11. The Grounds also refer to the best interests of  the  children  and
        claim that permission should be  granted  on  the  basis  the  sole
        responsibility test was not applied correctly  and  that  the  best
        interests of the children were not given primary consideration.
    12. Permission was granted by another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
        on the following basis:


              "4.      It is arguable that the very brief consideration  of
                  the best interests of the children  at  [36]  is  legally
                  inadequate in that it fails to even  mention  the  normal
                  starting point, namely  that  it  will  be  in  the  best
                  interests of children to live with one or both  of  their
                  parents;  and  fails  to  consider  the  wishes  of   the
                  children. On the sole responsibility point it is arguable
                  that the judge, despite having set out the nature of  the
                  test at [34 - 30] well, then applies a different test, in
                  referring to the  children  being  'fit  and  well',  not
                  'destitute', and being  housed  by  their  mother.  These
                  factors are arguably suggestive of a test akin to that of
                  showing that the applicants were suffering in exceptional
                  compassionate circumstances, or were destitute or in poor
                  health. It is also of note that at [33] the judge appears
                  to  omit  making  findings  on  the  credibility  of  the
                  mother's  oral  evidence.  Given  the  gravity   of   the
                  consequences of children remaining separated  from  their
                  mother, it is  arguable  that  these  matters  considered
                  together would amount to legal errors  requiring  further
                  consideration of the appeals.


              5.  The first appellant will turn 18 on 28 May 2017  and  the
                  representatives should give careful  consideration  to  a
                  further application before this date (as suggested by the
                  judge at [38]), since the points above are separate  from
                  the question of  any  evidential  deficiencies;  and  the
                  eventual outcome of these appeals  cannot  be  predicted,
                  and will almost certainly  stretch  beyond  the  relevant
                  date."


    13. The respondent  in  her  Rule  24  reply  opposes  the  application
        asserting the Judge directed himself appropriately. At [3]  of  the
        reply it is written:


              "The judge's findings with regard to sole responsibility  and
              the best interests of the children are properly based on  the
              evidence and the law. At paragraph 33 the  judge  finds  that
              the submission that the oral evidence and statement from  the
              sponsor  shows  that  she  has  sole  responsibility  is  not
              supported by the documentary evidence. There were significant
              inconsistencies in the evidence for example  the  involvement
              of the father and a lack of documentary  evidence  supporting
              sole responsibility. Clearly the level of involvement of  the
              sponsor in the appellants' lives will be a significant  issue
              feeding into the section 55 consideration."


    14. The sponsor's witness statement attached to the solicitor's  letter
        received on 8 May 2017 is in the following terms:


              "I, [CO], [ ] Birmingham, and sponsor and mother of Mary Ooko
              and [WA], the appellants, make this statement below.


              Firstly, I am grateful for the  permission  to  appeal  being
              granted.


              I however wish  that  the  further  hearing  is  held  in  my
              absence.


              The emotional trauma that the application and appeals process
              has had on me has  been  immense.  I  was  in  tears  at  the
              hearing.


              I am a professional nurse and need to  be  able  to  function
              properly.


              I read the response from  the  Home  Office  to  the  Judge's
              decision and I am not prepared any more for any more grilling
              as if I were a criminal. Everything I have  stated  regarding
              my children have been true. After the  last  hearing,  I  was
              emotionally drained and felt  that  this  was  unfair  to  go
              through.


              I came in lawfully, remained lawfully and have settled  here,
              working hard and paying taxes, so that I can prepare a future
              for my  children.  Purchased  a  property  to  live  with  my
              children, so that they can enjoy the  privilege  of  my  hard
              work. Now the hope of them joining me keeps being dashed.


              They kept asking if they had done  something  wrong  for  not
              being allowed to join me.


              The effect of leaving them behind has been damaging to  their
              mental health, and the hopes of joining me  dashed  over  and
              over again, that one of them lost a year from school.


              I haven't informed them of this further development as  I  do
              not want to raise their hopes again.


              The agony of baring all, struggling to be  reunited  with  my
              children, being taken for a  liar  is  too  traumatic  to  go
              through. I wish the Home Office would  consider  my  children
              and myself with great consideration to allow us to unite  one
              with another.


              I have informed my representative to forward  this  statement
              on my behalf


              I also  confirm  that  there  is  no  new  evidence  that  is
              available to submit.


              Yours sincerely"




Discussion



    15. The representatives have no doubt explained to the sponsor that the
        purpose of this hearing is to consider whether the Judge  has  made
        an error of law material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
        based upon  the  evidence  that  was  provided  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. It is only if such arguable material legal error is  made
        out at the Upper Tribunal has the power to remake the decision.
    16. The separation of the appellants from their mother appears to  have
        come about as a result the mother's choice in coming to the  United
        Kingdom in 2008 and  leaving  the  children  in  Kenya  with  their
        grandmother.
    17. In relation to the test of 'sole responsibility' In  TD  (Paragraph
        297(i)(e): "sole responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049  the
        Tribunal said that "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to  be
        decided upon all the evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in
        the child's  upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned  or
        abdicated responsibility, the issue may arise between the remaining
        parent and others who have day-to-day care  of  the  child  abroad.
        The test is whether the parent has continuing control and direction
        over the child's upbringing, including  making  all  the  important
        decisions in the child's life.  However,  where  both  parents  are
        involved in a child's upbringing, it will be exceptional  that  one
        of them will have "sole responsibility".
    18. In NA (Bangladesh) v SSHD 2007 EWCA Civ 128  the  Court  of  Appeal
        said that, where a natural parent continued to  live  in  the  same
        country as the child, it was a necessary part of the  reasoning  on
        sole responsibility to consider the  position  of  that  parent  to
        determine whether that parent  had  partial  responsibility  (which
        would of course preclude the parent in  the  UK  from  having  sole
        responsibility).  The Court of Appeal  said  that  the  Immigration
        Judge was wrong to conclude that the requirements of the Rules were
        met where the parent effectively  shared  responsibility  with  his
        sons here.  However, the Court of Appeal also said that the  parent
        could have sole responsibility notwithstanding that  the  financial
        consequences of this were shared with his sons. The parent may,  as
        head of the household, be regarded as controlling  the  disposition
        of those contributions.
    19. In Buydov v ECO Moscow [2012] EWCA  Civ  1739,  as  part  of  their
        written divorce agreement, the parents had agreed that  the  mother
        would have sole responsibility for the claimant's  upbringing.  The
        judge found that in practice the claimant's  father  retained  some
        responsibility. It was held that the judge had misdirected  himself
        when he found that it was necessary to show  that  the  father  had
        abdicated responsibility for the child before the mother could have
        sole responsibility. The finding that the father had not  abdicated
        responsibility was clearly relevant but that was not  the  same  as
        treating the finding as conclusive. The  residence  order  for  the
        child was clearly evidence but it would be wrong  to  treat  it  is
        necessarily sufficient evidence to prove sole  responsibility.  The
        Upper Tribunal's conclusion that it  could  not  derive  assistance
        from the IDI could not be characterised as an  error  of  law.  The
        Upper Tribunal was entitled to find that the mother  did  not  have
        sole responsibility.
    20. The Judge was clearly aware of the requisite test set  down  in  TD
        but did not find the evidence  available  supported  the  sponsor's
        claim that she had sole responsibility for the children. Whilst  it
        is accepted that the relative with actual care would have  to  make
        day-to-day  decisions  with  regard  to  the  children,  the  Judge
        examined the evidence to ascertain  whether  it  demonstrated  that
        even though the grandmother exercised such power it could be  shown
        that the sponsor had retain sole responsibility for the appellants'
        by continuing to maintain an  interest  and  involvement  in  their
        lives, including the making or being consulted about involvement in
        important decisions about the children's upbringing.  The  lack  of
        evidence to show the sponsor maintain such a role arguably entitled
        the Judge to reach the conclusions that he did,  that  the  sponsor
        had not established that her claim to  retain  sole  responsibility
        was credible.
    21. The  reference  in  the  grant  of  permission  to  the  children's
        presentation is not an arguable misdirection in law  by  the  Judge
        but rather a comment from the judge that the children are,  on  the
        face of it, in good health and being properly cared for.
    22. The Judge also noted an email from the sponsor's sister  suggesting
        the sponsor had a reduced role in the upbringing  of  the  children
        and that the maternal grandmother was the person  who  had  brought
        the children up. The issue of destitution related to whether series
        and compelling  reasons  which  would  make  exclusion  undesirable
        arose, which were not arguably made out on the evidence.
    23. Whilst the grant of permission refers to the benefit to children of
        remaining with their natural parents there is  nothing  to  suggest
        that the sponsor could  not  return  to  Kenya  to  live  with  the
        children if this was something that she  thought  was  critical  to
        their upbringing. The sponsor clearly left in 2008  and  only  made
        the application shortly before the eldest child attained  her  18th
        birthday, at which point the route to settlement  pursued  will  no
        longer be available.
    24. In relation to section 55, no arguable error is made out. The Judge
        was aware of the  need  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
        children. There is no need for a judge to set out chapter and verse
        decided authorities unless there is a real purpose.  It is safe  to
        assume that an experienced judge will  be  aware  of  the  need  to
        consider  the  best  interests  of  the  children  as   a   primary
        consideration.
    25. In this case, it was not made out that the best  interests  of  the
        children are  such  that  it  established  serious  and  compelling
        reasons which made the exclusion of the  children  undesirable.  It
        has not been made out that the best interests of the  children  are
        the determinative factor. The Judge noted the inability to  satisfy
        the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to  settlement  and   thereafter
        considered section 55 as part of the Article 8  assessment,  before
        concluding that the decision is proportionate.
    26. On the facts known to the  Judge  and  findings  made,  this  is  a
        decision that falls  within  the  range  of  those  the  Judge  was
        permitted to make on the evidence such that no legal error material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal has been made out.


Decision

    27. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10th of May 2017
