
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01581/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|5th November 2018                    |On 28th January 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     RB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S. Vokes, Counsel instructed by Maya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of  Congo  (DRC)
    born in 1962.  He appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge James) to dismiss his  human  rights  appeal.  The
    effect of the First-tier Tribunal decision is that the Appellant is  to
    be deported.




    Anonymity Order

 2. The Appellant is a foreign criminal and as such  would  not  ordinarily
    benefit from an order protecting his identity. The appeal turns however
    on the presence in the United Kingdom of his British child. Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013:  Anonymity  Orders  we
    are  concerned  that  identification  of  the  Appellant  may  lead  to
    identification of his child and we therefore consider it appropriate to
    make an order in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal the parties' respective  cases  were  as
    follows.

 4. The Respondent submitted that it was strongly in the public interest to
    deport the Appellant.  He has criminal convictions in respect  of  four
    dishonesty offences and  between  the  years  1998  and  1999  received
    sentences of imprisonment totalling 6 years and  4  months  in  prison.
    In addition he is a serial immigration offender who has never held  any
    form of leave to remain in the 27 years that he has spent in the United
    Kingdom, and who has shown a flagrant disregard for immigration control
    in that he re-entered the United Kingdom in  breach  of  a  deportation
    order

 5. The Appellant does not deny the Respondent's assertions  as  to  either
    his criminal record or immigration history. He submits however that  in
    the particular circumstances of his case it would be a disproportionate
    interference with his Article 8 rights if he were to  be  removed  from
    the  country  today.   He  asked  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to   place
    particular weight on the presence in the United Kingdom of his  partner
    and daughter, both British nationals.  The salient points  to  be  made
    about those relationships are that:

      a. The Appellant has been in a relationship with his  partner  for  15
         years;

      b. Their daughter A was born in 2005 and she  has  always  lived  with
         both parents;

      c. In 2015 the Appellant's partner was diagnosed with  incurable  bone
         cancer. The  medical  evidence  indicates  that  her  treatment  is
         finished and she must now live with, and manage the condition;

      d. Her illness has meant that it has fallen to the Appellant to act as
         primary carer for A;

      e. It is submitted that in the circumstances it would strongly  be  in
         the child's best interests if her father  were  to  be  allowed  to
         remain in the United Kingdom;

      f. Neither mother or daughter could safely live in the DRC, nor  would
         it be reasonable to expect them  to  do  so,  given  A's  level  of
         integration here, and her mother's illness.

    The Appellant relied on these facts to submit that it would be  'unduly
    harsh' for A if he were to be removed; he further  submitted  that  the
    particular circumstances arising from his partner's illness  mean  that
    there are 'exceptional' and 'compelling' circumstances over  and  above
    that matter.




    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The 'findings and conclusions' section of the determination  begins  by
    setting out the Appellant's history of non-compliance and  criminality.
    It then  records  and  considers  the  five  reasons  advanced  by  the
    Appellant to demonstrate that there are compelling circumstances in his
    case.

 7. First, he has not re-offended since he re-entered the United Kingdom in
    November 2001 and there is a low risk of him re-offending. The Tribunal
    finds this to be a neutral factor since not committing crime is what is
    ordinarily expected of any resident.

 8. Second, the Appellant relied on the  fact  that  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  he  had  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 26 years.   In his  first  9  years  of  residence  he  was
    waiting for resolution of his initial asylum claim.  The  Tribunal  was
    not satisfied that this was a factor that carried any  weight  at  all,
    given that the Appellant has not had any leave at any point during  his
    residence here.

 9. Third, the Appellant had to wait four and half years for his revocation
    application to be dealt with. The Tribunal was not satisfied that  this
    delay in any way diminished the weight to be  attached  to  the  public
    interest. That was because the Appellant had entered the United Kingdom
    in breach of the deportation order.

10. Fourth, the Appellant's partner  has  been  diagnosed  with  IgG  kappa
    multiple myeloma. The determination records at paragraph  32  that  she
    has responded well to treatment and that  she  has  been  in  remission
    since 2015. The Appellant's partner gave evidence that she  needs  help
    with certain tasks, but she is currently working in a  healthcare  role
    at a hospital. The Tribunal does not accept that she would be  able  to
    do that work if she was in need of help herself.  The Tribunal  further
    notes that there  was  no  evidence  produced  in  respect  of  whether
    assistance could be offered by public authorities.

11. Fifth, the Appellant  has  a  child.  The  Tribunal  notes  the  report
    prepared by an independent  social  worker  and  accepts  that  it  was
    "undertaken  in  a  professional  manner"  but  does  not  accept   its
    conclusion that the Appellant is his daughter's  primary  carer,  since
    little detail is provided.  The comments made by  the  child  regarding
    her father are those you would expect to hear from a young person whose
    father is facing deportation.

12. At paragraphs 34-35 the Tribunal reaches its  overall  conclusions.  It
    refers to the 'undue harshness test' and  directs  itself  as  follows:
    "clearly a measure of harshness can be anticipated and for the purposes
    of s117C(6) I must go over and above  that  test".  The  Appellant  has
    breached  a  deportation  order  and  shown  flagrant   disregard   for
    immigration law.  In the time that he established his  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom he knew that he had no right to be here.   While  it
    is wrong to punish his daughter for his mistakes it  is  equally  wrong
    that the Appellant should be rewarded with being  permitted  to  remain
    here by virtue of his non-compliance.  Even considered cumulatively the
    factors identified by the Appellant do not amount to  "very  compelling
    reasons"; nor are the circumstances exceptional. For those reasons  the
    appeal was dismissed.




    'Error of Law'

13. At a hearing before Judge Bruce on the  3rd  July  2018  the  Appellant
    challenged the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  following
    grounds:

      i) The finding that it would not be unduly harsh for  A  to  have  her
         father deported is unsafe because the Tribunal  did  not  begin  by
         making a finding on  whether  or  not  it  would  be  in  her  best
         interests for her father to remain in this country;

     ii) The determination does not  follow  the  appropriate  structure  in
         terms of the relevant legal framework;

    iii) The Judge erred in declining to treat the delay  as  a  significant
         factor. The Appellant made his application for revocation  in  July
         2012 and waited approximately four and half years for  a  decision.
         This should have been treated  as  diminishing  the  weight  to  be
         attached to the public interest. Reliance is placed on the Court of
         Appeal decision in MN-T (Colombia) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 893.

14. By a 'rule 24  response'  dated  the  28th  June  2018  the  Respondent
    indicated  that  she  accepted  that  ground  (i)  was  made  out.  The
    determination does not address A's best interests, and as a result  any
    findings on the 'exception' - i.e. whether it would be unduly harsh  on
    her to deport her father - cannot have been safely made.

15. Before Judge Bruce Mr Clarke resisted the remaining grounds. Whilst  he
    agreed that the determination had not followed an  orthodox  structure,
    he did not accept that this was a  material  error.  The  Tribunal  had
    considered all relevant factors and it was open to it on the  facts  to
    hold that the  Appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  compelling,  or
    exceptional factors.  As for ground (iii) the Respondent  submits  that
    delay can only logically be held to diminish the weight to be  attached
    to the public interest where the individual concerned  was  waiting  to
    have his status issues resolved. There was  no  'waiting'  involved  in
    this case since the Appellant has been well aware, since 1999, that  he
    is subject to a deportation order. The Secretary of State relied on the
    decision in SU v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA
    Civ 1069.

16. By a written decision dated the 13th July  2018  Judge  Bruce  set  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside in the following terms:

         "I need not deal with ground 1 in  any  detail  at  all  since  the
         Respondent finds it to  be  made  out.    The  First-tier  Tribunal
         determination contains no findings at all on which of the  possible
         outcomes might be in  A's  best  interests.    Section  55  of  the
         Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 imposes a duty on  all
         decision makers to consider  the  welfare  of  the  child  in  such
         circumstances. Without a finding of where her best  interests  lay,
         the Tribunal's balancing exercise, when assessing 'undue harshness'
         was  incomplete.  Without  a  proper  assessment  of  that,  it  is
         difficult to see how the Tribunal could have undertaken a  holistic
         evaluation of whether there were compelling circumstances over  and
         above that matter, or indeed whether the  facts  were  exceptional.
         This brings me to ground (ii), which must be read with ground  (i).
         Had the Tribunal set  out  the  appropriate  legal  framework,  and
         adopted a methodical approach to each  stage  of  its  enquiry,  it
         would not, perhaps, have omitted to comply with the statutory  duty
         upon it to conduct a careful analysis of A's circumstances.   I  am
         satisfied that grounds (i) and (ii) are made out and that  they  go
         to the heart of the decision in the appeal.  It  follows  that  the
         determination must be set aside for error of law.

         Ground (iii) is without merit. In MN-T (Colombia)  the  court  held
         that lengthy delay in taking a decision to deport can constitute an
         'exceptional circumstance' within the framework  of  s117C  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   That  was  in  the
         context of a woman convicted  in  1999  and  not  notified  of  her
         liability to deportation until 2008. This case is quite  different.
         The Appellant was made subject to a deportation order in 1999, very
         quickly re-entered the country when he knew that he  was  forbidden
         by law from so doing, and remained  here  unlawfully  for  some  11
         years before bringing himself to the attention of  the  immigration
         authorities.  He was fully aware at all times that  he  should  not
         have been here. The delay cannot logically be held  to  lessen  the
         public interest in deporting him. It can only be  relevant  to  the
         length of time that he has developed his family life and looking at
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I am unable to say that the
         Tribunal was under any misapprehension as to  the  length  of  time
         that the Appellant has been living with his partner and A".




    The Re-Made Decision

17. The hearing was resumed for remaking on the  1st  October  2018  before
    this panel. We heard evidence from the Appellant's  daughter  'A',  and
    from his partner, 'N'. At the close of their live evidence we indicated
    to the representatives that we considered it necessary to  adjourn  the
    proceedings. Whilst we were given  a  good  deal  of  medical  evidence
    relating to N there  was  no  recent  indication  from  her  Consultant
    Haematologist about her current prognosis. A letter from the family  GP
    indicated that he was not aware that N  had  been  given  a  'life-span
    prognosis'  whereas  N  herself  testified  that  she  had.    A  short
    adjournment  followed  before  the  hearing  was  resumed   for   final
    submissions. During the hiatus the decision of the Supreme Court in  KO
    (Nigeria)(FC) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  UKSC
    53 became available, so that upon resumption of the hearing the parties
    were able to address us on the effect of that decision, if any, on  our
    own.

18. We reserved our decision which we now give.




    The Legal Framework

19. The legal framework is uncontroversial.

20. On the 12th November 1998 the Appellant was convicted of conspiracy  to
    defraud and sentenced to 5 years imprisonment, with the court making  a
    recommendation that he be deported. The Secretary  of  State  signed  a
    Deportation Order on the 20th September 2001 pursuant  to  s3(5)(a)  of
    the Immigration Act 1971:

         '(5)     A person who  is  not  a  British  citizen  is  liable  to
         deportation from the United Kingdom if-

             (a) the  Secretary  of  State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
             conducive to the public good; or

             (b) another person to whose family he belongs is or  has  been
             ordered to be deported'

         (emphasis added)

21. On the 4th July 2012 the Appellant applied, on  human  rights  grounds,
    for that Order to be revoked. By the time that a decision  was  reached
    on that application on  the  16th  January  2017[1],  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was in force, having  been
    introduced by s19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.   This  provided  a
    definition of the term 'foreign criminal':

         '117D Interpretation of this Part


         ...

         (2)      In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a) who is not a British citizen,

             (b) who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and

             (c) who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)      is a persistent offender.'

    And set out the public  interest  considerations  to  be  applied  when
    considering the deportation of a 'foreign criminal':

         '117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of

             C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted.'

22. The provisions of s117C are reflected in Part  13  of  the  Immigration
    Rules at paragraphs 398 and 399:

         '398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)   it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

               i) the relationship was formed at  a  time  when  the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

              ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported, because  of
                  compelling circumstances over and above those described in
                  paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)      it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to
                  remain in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

23. The high threshold of 'compelling circumstance over  and  above'  those
    identified in  paragraphs  399  and  399A  is  to  be  applied  in  two
    circumstances. First, where a foreign criminal cannot invoke any of the
    'exceptions' because he does not have the requisite Article 8 family or
    private life in the United Kingdom. Second, as  in  the  instant  case,
    where such relationships exist but the foreign criminal has received  a
    sentence of at least four years imprisonment. In respect of the  former
    category of deportee, there are no family members to consider. The term
    "over and above" can therefore only be read to mean that the individual
    must establish a greater than equivalent level of  detriment  to  those
    who can rely on paragraphs 399 or  399A.   In  respect  of  the  latter
    category, it is open to the deportee to demonstrate that  the  'greater
    then equivalent' level of detriment is established  with  reference  to
    those 'baseline' tests in the Rules. Before us Mr Vokes  accepted  that
    in this case his starting point must  be  to  show  that  it  would  be
    'unduly harsh' for A if the Appellant were to be deported.  It  is  for
    this reason that we must have regard to the recent guidance provided by
    the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria):

         "the word 'unduly' implies an element  of  comparison.  It  assumes
         that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness', that is a  level  which
         may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant context.  'Unduly'
         implies something going beyond that level. The relevant context  is
         that set by section 117C(1), that is the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking for  a  degree  of
         harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any
         child faced with the deportation of a  parent.  What  it  does  not
         require in my view (and subject to the discussion of the  cases  in
         the next section) is a balancing of relative levels of severity  of
         the parent's offence, other than is  inherent  in  the  distinction
         drawn by the section itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor
         (contrary to the view of the Court of  Appeal  in  IT  (Jamaica)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  932,
         [2017] 1  WLR  240,  paras  55,  64)  can  it  be  equated  with  a
         requirement to show "very compelling reasons".  That  would  be  in
         effect to replicate the additional test applied by section  117C(6)
         with respect to sentences of four years or more.

         [at 23].

24. This makes it clear that 'undue harshness' is a high  test.  Any  child
    who loses a parent will likely suffer detriment as a result,  but  here
    "one is looking for a degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
    necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation  of  a
    parent".  That underlines that  the  public  interest  in  deporting  a
    criminal who  has  received  a  sentence  of  four  years  or  more  is
    substantial indeed. It is likely that only a very few cases would  meet
    that threshold, and it is in that context that the courts have  adopted
    the use of the term 'exceptional': Huang v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  To succeed the Appellant need not show
    unique or extraordinary  facts,  simply  that  the  circumstances  are,
    unusually, so compelling as to outweigh  the  very  substantial  public
    interest in his removal from this country.

25. Because this was an  application  to  revoke  an  existing  deportation
    order, the Rules provide that  additional  requirements  must  be  met.
    Paragraphs 390-391A of the Immigration Rules state:

         390.     An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
         be considered in the light of all the circumstances  including  the
         following:

             (i) the grounds on which the order was made;

             (ii)      any representations made in support of revocation;

             (iii)      the  interests  of  the  community,  including  the
             maintenance of an effective immigration control;

             (iv)       the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including  any
             compassionate circumstances.

         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.

         391.     In the case of a person who has  been  deported  following
         conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the   continuation   of   a
         deportation order against that person will be the proper course:

             (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
             4 years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of  the
             deportation order when, if an application  for  revocation  is
             received, consideration will be given on a case by case  basis
             to whether the deportation order should be maintained, or

             (b) in the case of a conviction for an offence for  which  the
             person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
             years, at any time,

         Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol Relating  to
         the  Status  of  Refugees,   or   there   are   other   exceptional
         circumstances  that  mean  the  continuation   is   outweighed   by
         compelling factors.

         391A.    In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
         be authorised unless the situation  has  been  materially  altered,
         either by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or by
         fresh  information  coming  to  light  which  was  not  before  the
         appellate authorities or the Secretary of  State.  The  passage  of
         time since the person was deported may also  in  itself  amount  to
         such a change of circumstances as  to  warrant  revocation  of  the
         order.

26. The rules understandably underline the very great  public  interest  in
    deporting persons who have entered the United Kingdom in  breach  of  a
    deportation order:

         399D.    Where a foreign criminal has been deported and enters  the
         United Kingdom in breach of a deportation order enforcement of  the
         deportation order is in the public interest and will be implemented
         unless there are very exceptional circumstances.

    In SU the Court of Appeal held that  this  test  of  "very  exceptional
    circumstances" (at paragraph 399D) was more  stringent  than  that  the
    "very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
    paragraphs 399 and 399A" in paragraph 398.

27. Drawing this together, we direct ourselves that it is for the Appellant
    to show the following on the balance of probabilities:

      i)    That it would be 'unduly harsh' for his daughter A if he were to
         be deported;

     ii) That there are in the case very compelling circumstances  over  and
         above that matter;

    iii) There are, further, very exceptional circumstances  such  that  the
         (re-)deportation should not be implemented.




    The Evidence

28. In respect of the Appellant himself the evidence before us was limited.
     Beyond the bare facts of his convictions the Secretary  of  State  was
    unable, due to the passage of time, to supply  the  Tribunal  with  any
    further information about  the  offending  behaviour.  There  are  four
    convictions, all arising from  offences  committed  in  1997-1998.  The
    first was on  the  8th  May  1998  at  Oxford  Magistrates  Court:  the
    Appellant was convicted of 'going equipped to cheat' and  sentenced  to
    28 days imprisonment. On the 12th November 1998 Snaresbrook Crown Court
    sentenced the Appellant to  5  years  in  prison  for  the  offence  of
    'conspiracy to defraud'. The  Court  made  a  recommendation  that  the
    Appellant be deported. On  the  same  date  the  Appellant  received  a
    concurrent sentence of 9 months imprisonment for 'obtaining property by
    deception'. Finally, on the 8th January 1999 the  Appellant  was  again
    brought before Snaresbrook Crown Court to receive a further sentence of
    6 months imprisonment for 'obtaining property by deception'. Mr  Clarke
    accepted that there was nothing to  indicate  that  the  Appellant  had
    committed any further criminal offences after 1998.

29. Following the 'error of law' hearing in July 2018  the  parties  agreed
    that the Appellant had first entered the United Kingdom in  1991,  when
    he fraudulently obtained leave to enter by using a Cameroonian passport
    to which he was not entitled. He claimed asylum and  subsequently  made
    an application for leave to remain as a spouse. Both applications  were
    ultimately rejected and his asylum appeal dismissed in  November  2000,
    paving the way for his  deportation  on  the  15th  October  2001.  The
    Appellant illegally entered the United Kingdom approximately one  month
    after he was deported to the DRC.  He has remained here ever since.  It
    is therefore the case that apart from  that  one  month  in  2001,  the
    Appellant has lived in this country for 27 years: he has  not,  at  any
    time, had lawful leave to do so.

30. The Appellant's partner N is a British citizen of Congolese origin.  We
    were not told how long she has lived  in  this  country  but  from  her
    medical records we assume it to have been approximately 16  years.   It
    is not in dispute that N and the Appellant have been in a  relationship
    akin to marriage since 2003.   Apart  from  a  brief  period  when  the
    Appellant was taken into immigration  detention,  they  have  cohabited
    since then.   They have one child together, a daughter A, who was  born
    in 2005.  It is N's evidence that she did not know that  the  Appellant
    was 'illegal' until the relationship had already commenced: by the time
    she found out they were already committed to each other and she  didn't
    want to give up the relationship.

31. N was diagnosed with cancer in October  2015,  more  specifically  'IgG
    kappa multiple myeloma with significant kappa  light  chain  ISS  Stage
    III'.  We were provided with a good deal of medical evidence concerning
    this diagnosis, and N's treatment, dating from 2015 to the present day.
    It is not necessary that we refer to, or summarise here,  all  of  that
    material, save to mention the following, to which we were  specifically
    referred in submissions:

      i)    A letter from Dr Ashutosh Wechelekar,  Honorary  Consultant  and
         Reader in Medicine and Haematology  at  University  College  London
         Hospital to Dr Rabin on the  26th  October  2015  in  which  it  is
         confirmed inter alia that N suffered from acute heart failure  soon
         after receiving her first couple of doses of chemotherapy.

     ii) Correspondence between Dr Rabin, doctors at UCLH and N's GP in May-
         June 2016 discussing her treatment and her plans to visit the  DRC.
         At that stage she had completed six cycles of chemotherapy but  was
         expressing reluctance to  continue  because  she  was  experiencing
         nausea and fatigue.   There had been a successful initial stem cell
         harvest  but  N  wanted  to  travel  before  continuing  with  that
         treatment. Dr Rabin had told her that any delay was not advisable.

    iii)  A  letter  from  Dr  Maria  Cuadrado,  Specialist   Registrar   in
         Haematology at UCLH dated 5th October 2016 to N's GP.  Dr  Cuadrado
         records that N had gone on  her  trip  to  the  DRC  without  first
         attending the  North  Middlesex  hospital  as  planned  to  receive
         further chemotherapy. Dr Cuadrado writes:

             "[N] explained to us that it  had  been  a  personal  decision
             because she believes that as the  myeloma  is  going  to  come
             back, she would prefer to wait for it rather  than  have  more
             chemotherapy or transplant. She  is  worried  about  the  side
             effects and she doesn't understand why she should  go  through
             that if she is currently in remission.  We  explained  to  her
             that the best treatment she should have now that  the  myeloma
             is in remission is an  auto-transplant  because  even  if  the
             disease is going to come back anyway, with the  transplant  we
             are going to  delay  the  relapse  and  to  prolong  the  good
             response. This is the standard treatment currently given".

     iv) A letter from Dr Rabin to N's GP dated 22nd November 2016 in  which
         Dr Rabin states that he had a long talk with N trying  to  persuade
         her to have stem cell therapy, but she refused.

      v) A letter from Dr Rabin dated the 24th  January  2017  in  which  Dr
         Rabin  informs  N's  GP  that  she  continues  to  refuse   further
         chemotherapy.

     vi) A letter from N's GP dated 28th August 2018 which confirms  that  N
         has reported various  symptoms  over  the  preceding  three  years,
         primarily tiredness/lack of energy, bone, hip and lower back  pain.
          As far as the  GP  is  aware  N's  only  support  comes  from  the
         Appellant, who helps her by carrying shopping,  attending  hospital
         appointments with her, and when necessary he assists her with self-
         care such as bathing and dressing.   N continues to be monitored by
         the haematology clinic where she also receives three-monthly  renal
         assessments  (when  admitted  to  hospital  in  October  2015   she
         presented with an acute renal injury).

32. It will be noted that none of this  material  gave  us  a  particularly
    clear picture of what N's prognosis might be. It was  for  that  reason
    that we adjourned the hearing on the  1st  October  2018  in  order  to
    receive further information from her lead  clinician,  Dr  Neil  Rabin,
    Consultant Haematologist at the North Middlesex University Hospital. Dr
    Rabin provided the following  update  on  the  10th  October  2018.  He
    confirmed that N is suffering from a type  of  cancer  that  has  "good
    treatment but no cure". She is currently  in  remission  but  Dr  Rabin
    expects her myeloma to relapse within the next year to 18 months.  Life
    expectancy would be in the range of 5 to 10 years. Asked to comment  on
    N's refusal to accept stem cell therapy Dr Rabin writes:

         "The significance of this is I would imagine that her myeloma would
         come back sooner than other patients who went ahead with  the  stem
         cell transplant. As said, I would imagine her  myeloma  would  come
         back within the next year to 18 months. There  would  be  good  and
         effective treatment at this stage. As mentioned before, there is no
         cure for her myeloma".

    Dr Rabin does not specify what the "good and effective treatment" might
    be once the cancer returns, but the parties agreed that in light of  Dr
    Cuadrado's  letter  [at  31(iii)  above]  he  is  likely  referring  to
    chemotherapy and/or stem cell transplant, which Dr Cuadrado  refers  to
    as "standard treatment".

33. N confirmed Dr Rabin's evidence that she is not currently receiving any
    formal medical treatment. Her  last  round  of  chemotherapy  had  been
    completed in Spring 2016. After that the doctors did discuss 'stem cell
    transplant' with her but she is reluctant to do this and  as  Dr  Rabin
    mentions in his latest letter, she has so far refused. N believes  that
    98% of people who have this therapy die after it. She  is  afraid.  She
    has also been told that  she  will  need  to  have  further,  intensive
    chemotherapy if she goes for the stem cell treatment. She does not want
    to do this. She felt very unwell when she had chemotherapy and in  fact
    at one point suffered heart failure as a result. She  has  read  online
    that chemotherapy is actually poison and she does not want to  do  that
    to her body. She has ordered natural remedies on the  internet  and  is
    taking those. At the moment, her interaction  with  her  clinicians  is
    limited to appointments once every three months.    Although  Dr  Rabin
    continues to try and persuade her to try stem cell therapy he has  also
    told her that if she did it she would become very ill and have to  stay
    in hospital. She just wants to be at home.

34. N stated her written evidence that she depends  on  the  Appellant  for
    care. He helps her with household duties such as shopping and  cleaning
    but he also looks after her. When she is experiencing cramps  he  lifts
    her up so that she is in a more comfortable position.   She  constantly
    suffers from pain in her hips and lower  back,  but  sometimes  she  is
    seized with crippling leg pains.  On some days she can manage,  but  on
    others she is debilitated and must go to  bed.    The  Appellant  looks
    after N and manages the  household  when  she  is  exhausted.   In  her
    statement  N  explains  that  when  the  pain  is  severe  it  is  very
    distressing for A to witness. She becomes upset seeing  her  mother  in
    this state and is only calmed down with her father's reassurance.

35. N confirmed that despite her fatigue she is still working - she has to.
     She has been employed at Chase Farm  hospital  for  9  years.  In  her
    statement it says that she has had to give up 'jobs' because  of  being
    ill but in her oral evidence she said that this is incorrect.  In  fact
    she has changed jobs only once. She was  previously  working  about  16
    hours as a cleaner but was finding that too difficult to manage so  she
    has now got a  job  as  a  'healthcare  assistant'.  She  sits  in  the
    outpatients' ward and she does "obs" (i.e. recording observations) such
    as taking blood  pressure.  She  started  her  training  last  year  in
    September and has been doing that since then. She works around  4  days
    per week. There is another mistake in her statement where it  says  she
    only does 4 hours. Altogether she  does  about  16  hours,  in  4  hour
    shifts.  Her employers know that she is sick so she is not required  to
    do any heavy tasks such as lifting. She travels there by bus as she  is
    no longer able to drive.   She was unable to say how many days she  has
    been off as a result of illness this year but said  that  when  she  is
    sick she calls them and lets them know.  She said that the Appellant is
    not working. When she refers to his 'work' in her statement  she  means
    the work he does at home.  This includes  things  like  the  housework,
    taking her to appointments,  going  to  the  school  if  necessary  and
    helping her when she is cramping.

36. Mr Clarke asked N if she had investigated whether she would be able  to
    get help "from the community" if the Appellant were to be deported. She
    said that she had applied for 'PIP'  (personal  independence  payments)
    but had been refused.

37. N was asked by Mr Clarke about a trip to Congo she took  in  2016.  She
    explained that she went because Dr Rabin had made  it  clear  that  she
    "didn't have a lot of years to come" and she wanted to see her children
    again. She has two adult  sons  in  Kinshasa,  and  at  the  time,  her
    daughter E was also there.   N decided that although she considers  the
    DRC to be dangerous, she would be happy to die there if  it  meant  she
    could see her children again. She used another name  (a  name  she  was
    previously known under there) and did not go out. Mr Clarke put  it  to
    her that in her statement she had said that she was afraid of living in
    the DRC but had not disclosed that she had taken this  trip.  N  agreed
    and said that maybe the omission was her mistake; she had however  told
    the Judge at the (First-tier Tribunal) hearing that she and A had  gone
    there. She wasn't trying to conceal anything.   Asked  to  explain  the
    name she is using now N said that the component parts of her  name  (as
    it is known to the British authorities) are  her  Christian  name,  her
    tribal name and her grandmother's name.      N confirmed that when  she
    was in the DRC the Appellant was still in the United  Kingdom.  In  his
    absence she was assisted by female relatives such as  her  sisters  and
    cousins.  N stated that since that trip her elder daughter E  has  come
    to the United Kingdom and now lives with N, A and  the  Appellant.  She
    was granted indefinite leave to enter  on  the  8th  May  2017  and  is
    learning English.    She was born in 1999: "she looks  12  but  she  is
    actually 19".

38. In response to questions put by the Tribunal N said that her two  adult
    sons remain living in Kinshasa. They are now aged 27 and 25.  She  also
    has sisters living there, her stepmother and cousins.  Outside  of  the
    city she has a number of other relatives: uncles, aunts and cousins.

39. There is no dispute that the Appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his daughter A.    This much  was  confirmed
    by the Appellant and his partner N, but before us the most  significant
    evidence in respect of that relationship came from A herself, and  from
    independent social worker Diana Harris.

40. In November 2015 when she  was  just  11,  A  wrote  a  letter  to  the
    Respondent in which she described her father as "very good and  caring,
    protectable, understanding and he is always there when I need him".  On
    the 9th August 2018 A, now 13, wrote a second letter, this time to  the
    Tribunal.  In it she details how much he  helps  her  mother,  and  how
    afraid she is of her mother's cancer returning. She describes how, when
    her mother was particularly bad, she wasn't even allowed  to  see  her.
    Her mother became so fragile she thought that she had already lost her.
    Throughout this time it was her father who was there to support her:

         "When I started secondary school in September 2016 I felt  suicidal
         and I became depressed. Because my dad was my best friend he  helps
         me with everything. We talk about everything and he advice  me  all
         the time"

    In the same statement A explains that she is afraid of living in  Congo
    because of what she has seen on the television about how violent it  is
    there. She says that the weather is nice there, although the people and
    the environment are not. Here, she and her parents are happy:

         "We don't have a lot of money, but we're a happy  family.  We  play
         games together like scrabble, dominos, cards also we go walking and
         my dad tells me stories, so my dad is the best dad in the world"

    In response to Mr Vokes' first question in chief A confirmed  that  she
    had written both of these letters herself and that she wished to  adopt
    them as her evidence.

41. A was asked some supplemental  questions.   Asked  how  often  her  mum
    becomes unwell, she said very often. Her mother will be fine  and  will
    suddenly suffer very painful cramping, particularly in  her  legs.  For
    instance, the day before the hearing she had suffered such  an  attack.
    The cramps usually last for a short while, like 2 minutes, but they are
    so bad that she is exhausted afterwards. She usually just goes  to  bed
    and sleeps after an event like that. After a few hours she will wake up
    and call out, and A and the Appellant attend to her.   Mr  Clarke  then
    asked A some questions arising from her letter. He read to her the part
    where she says that her mother is now "somewhat  recovered"  and  asked
    what she meant by that. A said that she was here thinking of the period
    towards the end of her time at primary school and  going  into  year  7
    when her mother was receiving chemotherapy. She was  really  ill  then.
    A was asked if her mother was taking any treatment,  or  receiving  any
    further medication; she said that she did not know.  A stated  that  at
    home her father does the housework as her mother is too tired. He takes
    her mother to shower, and if she has cramps he helps her  exercise  her
    legs. If she can't move, he lifts her up, to ease her mobility.

42. A was asked about the trip that she and her mother made to the  DRC  in
    July 2016. They had gone for about a month to stay with relatives. They
    had stayed at an uncle's house and had not really gone out  much.  When
    her mother was unwell, or needed help  dressing  and  bathing  she  was
    assisted by A's sister. N's stepmother was also there.

43. A confirmed what she said in her statement about feeling very depressed
    at the time that she moved to secondary school. She said that  she  had
    not told anyone at school about this. As far as she is  aware  none  of
    her teachers know that her mum is ill, but she does intend to speak  to
    the school counsellor about this. Her first appointment  was  scheduled
    for the week after the hearing. This had been arranged  by  the  school
    nurse.

44. Diana Harris is an independent social worker who assessed the family on
    a single visit lasting just  over  three  hours  in  October  2017.  In
    addition to her own observations of, and conversations with, the family
    members, she had access to documents including medical records, letters
    from A's school and the Respondent's refusal letter. She also  received
    information from, and was able to interview, three family friends.   Ms
    Harris also used diagnostic tools such  as  the  Department  of  Health
    'Adolescent Wellbeing Scale' and the 'Welfare Checklist - section 1  of
    the Children Act 1989'.

45. The central conclusion reached by Ms Harris was that on  every  measure
    it was strongly in A's best interests for her father to  remain  living
    with her their  home  in  London.   The  'Adolescent  Wellbeing  Scale'
    indicated  that  A  was  suffering  from  depression  and   Ms   Harris
    recommended that referral be  made  to  an  appropriate  mental  health
    professional.   She expressed concern that A's mental health  could  be
    adversely affected if her father were to be deported. At  her  age  and
    stage of development enforced change can, in the  short  term,  include
    anxiety, depression, self-harm or eating disorders. In the longer  term
    such disruption would be likely to have an  impact  on  her  education,
    reducing her self-esteem,  self-confidence  and  emotional  well-being.
    This would have a detrimental impact on her long-term life choices  and
    chances.

46. Ms Harris observed a close interaction between the Appellant and A, and
    recorded the opinion of family friends that she was closer to him  than
    to her mother.  That the Appellant has  been  A's  'primary  carer'  is
    borne out by the letters from A's schools (primary and secondary) which
    have him named as the parent contact; the primary school confirmed that
    it was he who would bring A to and  from  school.  When  A  experienced
    bullying at her primary school, over a number  of  years,  it  was  the
    Appellant who addressed the matter with the  school.   Ms  Harris  adds
    that N is not confident in English (her first language is Lingala, then
    French) and for this reason  it  has  always  been  the  Appellant  who
    undertakes external interactions such as attending  parents'  evenings.



47. Ms Harris also expressed concern that  if  the  Appellant  were  to  be
    removed from the  home  A  would  end  up  performing  the  chores  and
    household tasks currently undertaken by her father; she would in effect
    end up caring for her mother.  Ms  Harris  notes  that  A  has  a  very
    limited support network, consisting of her parents, and members of  her
    mother's family who live close to them in London. She sees  this  aunt,
    and her cousins, regularly. A also has siblings in the DRC but she  has
    only ever spoken to them "on special occasions". A told Ms Harris  that
    she is fearful of her father going to live in the DRC.

48. In her 'summary of conclusions' Ms Harris finds that both N and A  will
    experience feelings of grief and loss should the Appellant  be  removed
    from the household. This is likely to impact on their coping mechanisms
    and mental health and put strain on N's parenting ability.




    Discussion and Findings

49. The Appellant's task is an extremely difficult one. Not  only  must  he
    show that his deportation would be unduly harsh for his  daughter,  but
    he  must  prove  that  there  are  very  compelling,  and  indeed  very
    exceptional, circumstances beyond that which mean that the  deportation
    order, properly imposed and implemented in  2001,  should  not  now  be
    maintained.  It is self-evident that the  overwhelming  presumption  in
    such cases must be that the order is upheld and enforced. The right  of
    the Secretary of State to identify and remove persons with no right  to
    reside in this country is clear; the deportation of  foreign  criminals
    is at the heart of  that  duty  to  maintain  immigration  control  and
    protect the public.  Any  attempt  to  subvert  that  process  must  be
    strongly resisted.  That is our starting point.

50. In respect of the Appellant himself it is accepted that he has lived in
    this country for 27 years. He has not been convicted of a  crime  since
    1999. As Mr Vokes sensibly acknowledged, neither this long residence or
    lack of re-offending  would  come  close  to  making  this  deportation
    disproportionate. The case for the Appellant therefore centres  not  on
    himself, but on his family, his partner of 15 years N, and his 13 year-
    old daughter A.

51. Every family is different. It cannot be said,  for  instance,  that  it
    will uniformly be contrary to a child's  best  interests  to  deport  a
    criminal parent. Where for instance a child has limited or  no  contact
    with that parent - or perhaps shouldn't have -  it  cannot  be  assumed
    that there will be any degree of 'harshness' involved  in  deportation.
    Even where parents  live  with  their  children  the  'best  interests'
    calculus may be marginal. Where however there is no reason to doubt the
    quality of the relationship, it will usually be contrary to the child's
    best interests if that parent is removed. Following the 'error of  law'
    decision in this appeal the Respondent has accepted that this is such a
    case.

52. That deportation can be contrary to the best interests of the child  is
    expressly accepted within the statutory scheme.   We read the  guidance
    in KO to mean that where, for instance, a child will  be  left  feeling
    sad, confused, or abandoned, that is a degree of harshness that  is  to
    be expected, and  is  deemed  acceptable  by  parliament,  taking  into
    account the strong public interest in deporting foreign criminals.   As
    such the view expressed by social worker Ms Harris, that N and A  would
    experience "feelings of grief  and  loss"  were  the  Appellant  to  be
    deported, does little to advance his  case.   Those  are  the  ordinary
    emotions one would expect to find in an ordinary family:  in  Secretary
    of  State  for  the  Home   Department   v   AJ   (Zimbabwe)   and   VH
    (Vietnam) [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 Elias LJ used the term 'commonplace' in
    this context.

53. What we find here, however, is not an ordinary family. This is a family
    that has already been subject to significant stress  in  the  past  few
    years: since 2015  they  have  lived  with  the  knowledge  that  N  is
    extremely unwell. Although N has tried to shield A - and the  Appellant
    - from the reality of her situation, A has  demonstrated  that  she  is
    well aware of the extent of her mother's illness. It is the  impact  of
    that awareness with which we begin our consideration.

54. In her letter to the Tribunal N writes of her  constant  fear  for  her
    mother. Seeing her frailty  and  dramatic  weight  loss  following  the
    initial diagnosis it was to her father that she turned for comfort:  "I
    thought she was already dead and I was crying and my dad was  there  to
    help me". It is in this context that we read the evidence  that  it  is
    the Appellant with whom A has formed the  strongest  bond.   A  herself
    describes how at the age of 11 she was feeling "suicidal" as  a  result
    of the stress that she was under, but her father was at that  time  her
    "best friend".   We find that this recent history of family  trauma  is
    enough to lift this child, and  her  emotional  response,  out  of  the
    'ordinary'.   We are satisfied that for A,  who  has  lived  for  three
    years with this threat of losing  her  mother,  the  prospect  of  also
    losing her father is "severe" and "bleak". Her  circumstances  are  not
    commonplace.  We are accordingly satisfied that  it  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" for A if her father were to be deported.

55. We need not consider the  alternative  proposition  in  paragraph  399,
    namely whether it would be unduly harsh for A to move to the  DRC  with
    her father, since before us Mr Clarke  indicated  that  the  Respondent
    considers that test (at paragraph 399(a)(i)(a)) to be met.  He  further
    accepted that the same must be said of N.

56. In order to assess whether the Appellant can show  a  "very  compelling
    circumstances" over and above that history, and further  whether  those
    circumstances  can  be  said  to  meet  the  yet  higher  threshold  of
    exceptionality, we must look to the future.

57. The medical evidence in respect of N is as follows.   In  October  2015
    she was diagnosed with 'IgG kappa  multiple  myeloma  with  significant
    kappa light chain ISS Stage III', or more  colloquially,  bone  cancer.
    The condition was identified after N  was  admitted  to  hospital  with
    fatigue, nausea and high temperatures. She was  treated  for  a  kidney
    injury and once the cancer was identified, was immediately started on a
    course of chemotherapy.  Although some of her clinicians have  referred
    to her 'responding well' to that treatment, that was not the assessment
    of N herself. She told us that  she  found  the  side  effects  of  the
    chemotherapy very difficult to deal with. She felt weak and sick all of
    the time. We know from Dr Ashutosh Wechelekar, Honorary Consultant  and
    Reader in Medicine and Haematology at  UCLH,  that  one  point  at  the
    beginning of the treatment N suffered from acute heart failure and  had
    to be resuscitated.  It seems that by spring 2016, six months into  her
    treatment, N started to express doubts to her clinicians about  whether
    she wished to continue  it.   Although  the  doctors  had  successfully
    harvested stem cells and wished to use these to combat  the  cancer,  N
    was reluctant. She was afraid of the immediate consequences and of  the
    side effects. Correspondence between Consultant Haematologist Dr  Rabin
    and his colleagues confirm N's increasing insistence that  she  receive
    neither stem cell transplant nor any further chemotherapy.  By November
    2016 her doubts had hardened into resolve that she would not  agree  to
    any more of what Dr Maria Cuadrado, Specialist Registrar in Haematology
    at UCLH described as this "standard treatment".

58. Before us N was adamant that this  remained  the  case.  She  has  read
    online that chemotherapy is poison. She  believes  that  she  would  be
    better to accept her fate and to treat the symptoms of her cancer  with
    natural remedies that she orders from the internet. She  believes  that
    only a  very  small  percentage  of  patients  who  receive  stem  cell
    treatments  survive.  We  are  quite  satisfied   that   N   has   here
    misunderstood the advice she is being given by  doctors.  We  think  it
    extremely unlikely that the NHS would be  providing  a  treatment  that
    killed 98% of its recipients. We are  however  equally  satisfied  that
    this is a belief that N genuinely holds. It is clear from  the  various
    letters from her doctors that  she  has  consistently  expressed  these
    views; we would observe that some of those letters, in particular those
    of Dr Rabin, betray some  degree  of  frustration  with  N's  "personal
    choice" to refuse further treatment.

59. It is against that background that  we  must  read  Dr  Rabin's  latest
    letter. On the 10th October 2018 he wrote to the Tribunal to  say  that
    he expects N's myeloma  to  return  within  12-18  months.   Whilst  he
    stresses that there is no cure for this type of cancer, he states  that
    there is good treatment available, so she  could  expect  to  live  for
    between 5 to 10 years. What he  does  not  explain  is  what  her  life
    expectancy might be if she continues to refuse treatment. We proceed on
    the assumption, we think uncontroversially, that it will be  less  than
    if the treatments were administered.

60.  In  our  forward  looking  assessment  of  whether  there  are   "very
    compelling" and yet further "very exceptional"  circumstances  in  this
    case we find there to be two possible outcomes.  The first  is  that  N
    will, in the immediately foreseeable future, succumb  to  her  illness,
    leaving the Appellant with sole  parental  responsibility  for  A.  The
    second is that N manages  to  survive  until  A  reaches  majority.  We
    consider each in turn.

61. Dr Rabin leaves us in no doubt that N is dying.   Although this is  not
    apparently an aggressive form of cancer, it is an incurable one. In his
    expert opinion, offered in October 2018, Dr Rabin believes that it will
    return within 12 to 18 months.    We see no reason to  believe  that  N
    will change her mind about accepting treatment. It is  clear  from  the
    medical evidence that she gave careful consideration  to  her  decision
    over a period of some months in 2015-2016 and it is a decision she  has
    maintained ever since, despite the best endeavours of  her  clinicians.
    There is therefore a very strong possibility that N will die  from  her
    illness in the immediately foreseeable future,  whilst  A  is  still  a
    young teenager.

62. Should N be, at that point, the only parent A has in this  country,  we
    are quite satisfied that this would be a catastrophe for A  that  would
    meet the very high test set out in the Rules. This is a  child  who  is
    already experiencing the psychological consequences of  the  threat  of
    losing her parents: she has described the anxiety she feels, and how it
    has left her  at  worse  feeling  "suicidal".  We  are  satisfied  that
    actually losing both parents in a short time frame would unquestionably
    amount to "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above"  it  simply
    being  "unduly  harsh".    Whilst  parliament  and  the   courts   have
    emphasised the very  great  public  interest  in  deporting  those  who
    receive sentences of over four years, we are unable to accept that this
    would extend to leaving children effectively orphaned.

63.  We  are  further  satisfied  that  having  regard   to   the   overall
    circumstances of the family, it would  amount  to  a  very  exceptional
    situation,  and  unusually,  a  reason  to  justify  revocation  of   a
    deportation order, even where the deportee had  flouted  the  terms  of
    that  order  and  re-entered  the  country.    In   addition   to   the
    psychological trauma experienced by A, we must  further  weigh  in  the
    balance the very real personal anguish likely to be experienced by  the
    Appellant, and by N herself.

64. The Appellant has lived with N for 15 years. They have,  we  accept,  a
    close and loving relationship as exemplified by his care for her  since
    her diagnosis and the view of their daughter that theirs is a happy and
    close-knit family. Any husband losing a wife will experience  the  pain
    of intense  grief.  When  N  dies,  however,  those  feelings  will  be
    exacerbated for the Appellant by the fact that he cannot  be  with  her
    when she goes. Those emotions of guilt and helplessness will in turn be
    eclipsed by his concerns and fears for his  daughter,  left  without  a
    parent in the United Kingdom.  We recognise that N has made a  personal
    choice  about  her  treatment,  and  how  to  deal  with  her  terminal
    diagnosis. As early as 2016 when she went to the DRC to, in effect, say
    goodbye to her elder children she had  recognised  the  inevitable.  We
    note that she is a woman of faith and that this has given her  comfort.
    We  find  however  that  this  stoicism  will  likely  be  dramatically
    undermined if she is facing death knowing that  her  daughter  will  be
    left without either of her parents, who have until now been her world.

65. We conclude that both parents,  and  A  herself,  are  likely  to  face
    extreme levels of mental suffering if N is to die without the Appellant
    being in this country to comfort her at the end, and to look after  his
    daughter and give her the psychological support that  he  has  hitherto
    provided.   We cannot think that the statutory framework, and the Rules
    that reflect it, mandate  an  outcome  that  betrays  such  a  lack  of
    humanity.

66. The second potential outcome is that N manages to survive A's minority.
    On the evidence of Dr Rabin this is possible, since with treatment  she
    could have a life expectancy of between 5  and  10  years.   Whilst  we
    accept that N has consistently refused treatment since  the  Spring  of
    2016 we consider, in the alternative, the  possibility  that  she  will
    change  her  mind  and  agree  to  stem  cell  transplant  and  further
    chemotherapy, and so manage to live longer.

67. Even in that scenario,  N  will  still  have  stage  III  cancer.   Her
    condition will not improve.  The  evidence  before  us  indicates  that
    currently her symptoms are intermittent.  Some  days  are  better  than
    others. Her main complaints are overwhelming fatigue, joint pain and at
    worse, the debilitating intense cramps in her legs which result in  her
    losing mobility and having to take to her bed.  The consistent evidence
    of N, A, the Appellant and the family GP is that it  is  the  Appellant
    who is providing assistance to N when she  needs  it.  This  assistance
    includes lifting her into more comfortable positions to ease the  pain,
    lifting her in and out of bed or the shower, helping her dress, as well
    as undertaking household duties such as cooking, cleaning and shopping.
     One concern, as we indicated at hearing, is that if the  Appellant  is
    removed from the home it will be A who takes up this role. There  is  a
    danger that she would in effect become her mother's  carer.  Mr  Clarke
    agreed that this would be manifestly contrary to A's best interests but
    asked that we consider two matters before reaching such  a  conclusion.
    First, that N does not at present need a 'carer' as such. She continues
    to work, albeit in a modified way, and on her own  evidence  still  has
    days where she is able to lead a relatively normal life. Second,  there
    is now a fourth member of the household: N's adult daughter E  who  has
    recently settled in this country.

68. Mr Clarke is quite right to point to the fact that N is still  working:
    it was this employment which  led  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  doubt
    whether she needed any assistance at all.  She has  told  us  that  she
    travels, four times a week, to Chase Farm hospital where she manages to
    do a four-hour shift before travelling home on her own.  She is clearly
    not therefore at the stage of her illness where she is  housebound  and
    entirely dependent on the care of others. We accept Mr  Clarke's  point
    that at the moment N plainly does not need full time care. Having heard
    the totality of the evidence, however, we accept that she does  require
    assistance throughout the average week.  She  told  us  that  she  only
    continues to work because she has to: the Appellant cannot, of  course,
    undertake any lawful employment. She has changed jobs so  that  she  is
    able to sit for much of the day and is not now  required  to  undertake
    physical tasks such as cleaning. She takes the bus to work because  she
    is no longer able to drive.  When she is too weak to work she calls  in
    sick.   When she gets home from work she is often exhausted and  it  is
    then that the Appellant 'picks up the slack', making  dinner,  cleaning
    the house etc. We conclude that whilst N is not yet in need of a  full-
    time carer,  she  does  require  the  level  of  support  and  physical
    assistance currently provided by the Appellant, and that  someone  will
    have to fill his shoes once he is deported.

69. That someone could potentially be N's daughter E. We are  given  little
    information about E.  She was born in the DRC  in  1999.  In  2003  her
    mother left the infant  E  and  her  elder  brothers  in  the  care  of
    relatives and came to the United Kingdom. As far as we are  aware  they
    did not see each other again until 2016 when N returned to Congo  on  a
    month-long visit. We know from A's evidence that E was present  in  the
    house that they stayed in during that trip, and that  she  helped  look
    after N. We have no information about what she might currently be doing
    in that regard.  None of the witnesses before us made any mention of  E
    taking any significant role in assisting N. The family GP stated in his
    letter of 28th August 2018 that it  is  the  Appellant  who  undertakes
    tasks such as helping N with washing, dressing and  looking  after  the
    house, but we accept that this may be simply because he  has  not  been
    made aware of, or asked to comment upon, any input from E, who had been
    living in the family home less than a year at that  point.    We  think
    that it would be extraordinary if E, now a 19 year-old young woman  who
    has come to join her mother in this country, would have no  involvement
    at all in her care.  We would further find it to  be  extraordinary  if
    she did not increase her involvement upon the Appellant's deportation.

70. We are therefore satisfied that if the Appellant were  to  be  deported
    the responsibility of caring for N would not fall to  A  alone.  E  has
    been living in the  house  since  sometime  in  mid-2017.  She  attends
    language college full time but this would not preclude her from helping
    out in the mornings, evenings and weekends.

71. That is not to say that we find A will be entirely  excluded  from  the
    process of looking after her mum. Having had the opportunity of hearing
    directly from A ourselves we would be very  surprised  if  she  allowed
    that to be the case. She is, perhaps  as  a  result  of  the  difficult
    circumstances in which she has found herself, a  relatively  mature  13
    year-old, with a clear  sense  of  responsibility.  The  impression  we
    gained from her evidence, and that of Diana Harris, is that although  A
    has a small group  of  school  friends  her  life  centres  around  her
    parents.   Given her mother's illness,  and  her  father's  immigration
    status, it is understandable that she would be drawn inward just at the
    time that many young women  of  her  age  would  be  starting  to  look
    outward, and to move away from their families: A very  much  wishes  to
    preserve what she has at home.  It is with that in  mind  that  we  are
    unable to find that A will play no part in her mother's  care.   Whilst
    it is not necessarily contrary to the best interests of a  teenager  to
    be involved in helping relatives, or in chores around the house,  there
    are three matters which concern us.

72. First, that A is approaching a key stage in her  education.  This  term
    she will choose her GCSE options and study for  those  important  exams
    begins this September.   We are therefore satisfied that the  care  and
    support required of A, and which in the absence of her father  her  own
    sense of love and responsibility would compel her to give, is going  to
    place her in some difficulty in the next few years, when she should  be
    concentrating on nothing but her education.

73. Second, we note that at present the Appellant is the only adult in  the
    house who is able to communicate effectively in English. N told us that
    she can speak some English but she is not confident in it and  that  is
    why the Appellant is required to go to medical appointments  with  her.
    It is the Appellant who attends at A's school to raise issues with  her
    teachers (for instance when she was being bullied in primary school) or
    simply attend parents evenings.  E is at college but remains unable  to
    speak anything other than very basic English.  As  such  she  would  be
    unable to interact with A's school, or with  N's  doctors  should,  for
    instance, N be readmitted to hospital.  Although  A  has  an  aunt  and
    cousins who also live in London, and who could presumably  with  notice
    help with such matters, we are concerned that day  to  day  this  is  a
    factor which will lead to increased demands on A.

74. Third, in the alternative scenario that we are considering N has agreed
    to resume treatment for her cancer. The evidence before us is that last
    time she underwent chemotherapy she became extremely unwell.  She  felt
    nauseous and fatigued all of the time: she was in fact so weak that she
    suffered acute heart failure. She became entirely  dependent  upon  the
    Appellant to manage the household.  We are therefore satisfied that N's
    care needs, and  the  demands  of  the  household,  would  increase  in
    parallel to the ever greater need for A  to  be  concentrating  on  her
    school work.     At this crucial stage in her education  we  find  that
    this would be strongly contrary to her best interest.

75. This brings us to a further concern about the impact upon A should  her
    father be deported.   A has made clear in her evidence  that  her  love
    and devotion for her father  is  not  simply  the  affection  that  the
    average child might feel for the average father. It is  a  relationship
    that has been cemented by the collective challenge of living  with  N's
    terminal illness. A tells us that when she felt suicidal in  her  first
    year at secondary school, it was to her  father  that  she  turned  for
    emotional support and reassurance.  The consistent evidence before  us,
    from all three family members, is that when N is seized by the cramping
    pain it is very severe, and distressing for A to observe.   N  told  us
    that when A becomes upset by these incidents it is to her  father  that
    she turns for comfort. We have no reason to doubt that evidence, having
    heard from A herself about how horrible it is for her to see her mother
    suffer. She says that after these attacks her mother  will  very  often
    fall asleep and remain in bed: when she wakes up she calls to A and the
    Appellant and they attend her together.  Again, it was clear  from  her
    evidence that she valued being able to participate  in  supporting  her
    mother, alongside her father.

76. We are extremely concerned about A's ability to cope with her  mother's
    illness, and the practical challenges that brings, without her father's
    emotional support. He has been there for A throughout  these  difficult
    years, and we do not think we need any formal psychiatric  evidence  to
    conclude that she will find it more  stressful  to  face  these  issues
    without him. We note that Ms  Harris  expressed  similar  concerns.  In
    applying the standardised questionnaire[2] she found that A is  already
    suffering from depression; A told us as much herself and that  she  had
    arranged to see a counsellor at  school.  Whilst  such  a  referral  is
    hopefully  a  positive  one  for  A,  we  are  satisfied  that  in  the
    circumstances described the absence of her father is likely to  have  a
    profound impact  on  A's  emotional  wellbeing.   We  are  not  at  all
    satisfied that A would derive the same  level  of  support  from  other
    family members. We note in particular that E and A  do  not  appear  to
    have a close relationship.  The two half-sisters  did  not  meet  until
    2016 when E was 17 and A was 11. Until that time contact was limited to
    telephone calls on special occasions, i.e. A being asked  to  wish  her
    sister happy birthday over the phone. They spent a few  weeks  together
    in the DRC in 2016 and the next time they met was when E arrived  here.
    We were told that E speaks only very limited English.  When  she  spoke
    with Ms Harris A told her that she was not close to her  siblings  from
    the Congo. Whilst it is to be hoped that this is a  relationship  which
    will grow with time, we do  not  accept  that  E  -  until  recently  a
    complete stranger - can  offer  A  the  solace  and  support  that  she
    currently receives from her father.

77. Having considered all of the available evidence we are  satisfied  that
    even on the second scenario the facts in this case  do  meet  the  very
    high threshold required by paragraph  399D,  and  therefore  the  lower
    threshold of the still arduous test in 399.  A  is  child  who  has  an
    unusually close relationship with her father, borne out of  the  tragic
    circumstances in  which  this  family  find  themselves.  Whatever  the
    immediately foreseeable future brings for N, we find  the  interference
    with that bond to be disproportionate: we do so having had full  regard
    to the very, very substantial weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest in deporting the Appellant.




    Decisions

78. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that it is set aside.

79. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows: "we allow the  appeal
    on human rights grounds".

80. There is an order for anonymity.


    [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                     Dated 13th January 2019


                                                     -----------------------
[1] An initial decision to refuse to treat the application to revoke as a
'fresh human rights claim' was challenged by way of judicial review, and
subsequently withdrawn by the Secretary of State.

[2] Department of Health 'Adolescent Wellbeing Scale'

