
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/01712/2019
                                                               hu/00356/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2019                    |On 02 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr Shashidar Mandalozu
                           mrs Jhansi Rani Chaloju
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                       Respondents/Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms N Wilocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Gajjar of Counsel, instructed on a Direct
Access basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. For ease  of  reference  I  shall  refer  to  the  Appellant  in  these
    proceedings as the Secretary of State and to Mr Mandalozu and his  wife
    Mrs Chaloju as the Claimants.

 2. This is a challenge by the Secretary of State to the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Housego ("the judge"), promulgated on 14 June 2019,
    by which he allowed the Claimant's appeals  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decisions of 11 January 2019, which had  refused  human  rights
    claims made on 27 December 2017.

 3. The basis of the Secretary of State's decisions had been the  assertion
    that the first Claimant had acted dishonestly in  respect  of  his  tax
    affairs. In particular that he  had  dishonestly  underdeclared  income
    from self-employment to the HMRC and had subsequently failed to provide
    any tax returns whatsoever.  Amendments to these  omissions  were  only
    made in the run up to an application for indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  paragraph  322(5)  of   the
    Immigration Rules applied.



The judge's decision

 4. The judge ultimately reached the conclusion that the first Claimant had
    not been dishonest in respect of his conduct towards either HMRC or the
    Secretary of State.  Whilst it is implicit  in  his  decision  that  he
    accepted that the Secretary of State had met the evidential burden, the
    judge went on to conclude  that  the  first  Payment  had  provided  an
    innocent explanation and that the Secretary of State had not discharged
    the legal  burden  of  showing  dishonesty.   The  crux  of  the  first
    Claimants explanation was that he had been careless in respect  of  his
    tax affairs, whether in respect of the under  declaration  in  the  tax
    year 2010/2011 or in respect of the failure to file returns at  all  in
    the years 2011/2012 and 2012/2013.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal assert that  the  judge  had
    misdirected himself in respect of the Court of  Appeal's  guidance  set
    out in Balijigari WLR(D) 232, and that this misdirection  was  material
    to the outcome of the appeal.  In  addition,  the  Secretary  of  State
    asserts that the judge had unduly speculated in respect  of  the  first
    Claimants explanation and had taken what  were  effectively  irrelevant
    matters into account.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes  on
    19 July 2019.



The hearing

 7. Ms Wilocks-Briscoe relied on the grounds of appeal.  She submitted that
    the judge had been wrong to rely in any way on the "minded  to  refuse"
    point set out in Balajigari.  This process related to judicial  reviews
    and not to statutory appeals.  In any event, the Secretary of State had
    undertaken such a procedure in the  present  appeal  in  respect  of  a
    decision made in 2017.  The judge had been wrong to take  into  account
    the fact that HMRC had decided not to take any specific action  against
    the first Claimant.  He was wrong to have taken account of the  absence
    of a "reminder" system from HMRC in respect of the non-payment of  tax.
    He was also wrong to have speculated about poor internet connections in
    India and that the HMRC system was apparently notoriously difficult  to
    navigate.  There was a failure to have  taken  proper  account  of  the
    timing of the amended declarations,  and  on  a  cumulative  basis  the
    judge's errors rendered his decision as a whole unsafe.

 8. Mr Gajjar relied on his rule 24 response.  In essence he submitted that
    there were no errors, that the judge  had  accepted  the  evidence  put
    forward by the first Claimant as he was entitled to do,  and  that  the
    Secretary of State's challenges failed to have  proper  regard  to  the
    judge's reasoning as a whole.

 9. In reply Ms Wilocks-Briscoe pointed that out in respect of paragraph 24
    of the decision, a previous declaration made by the first Claimant  for
    the tax year 2010/2011 had in fact been incorrect.



Decision on error of law

10. Whilst the judge's decision cannot be  said  to  be  exemplary  in  all
    respects, I conclude that there are no material errors of law.

11. The judge was clearly  fully  aware  of  the  crucial  question  to  be
    answered, namely whether, given the fact that the  Secretary  of  State
    had discharged the evidential burden, the first Claimant could  provide
    an innocent explanation for his conduct.   In  this  case,  as  in  all
    others, answering that question  involves  an  intensely  fact-specific
    approach.

12. The judge was entitled to rely on the relevant parts of Balajigari  (as
    they relate to statutory appeals).  It is correct that in paragraph  72
    he makes reference to the "minded to refuse" procedure and states  that
    this should have been used in the present case.  I would agree with  Ms
    Wilocks-Briscoe that such a procedure would not  be  mandatory  in  the
    context of a statutory appeal.  However, it  is  clear  from  what  the
    judge then goes on to say that this had  no  material  bearing  on  his
    overall approach.  Indeed, the final  sentence  of  that  paragraph  is
    entirely unobjectionable.  It reads: "I revisit it [the decision  under
    appeal] from the beginning."  This was saying nothing  more  than  that
    the judge was conducting a merits-based appeal, which of course he was.



13. The grounds also suggest that the judge was "distracted" from the issue
    of dishonesty  and  discrepancies  in  earnings  by  what  is  said  in
    paragraph 71 of his  decision.   It  is  right  that  the  judge  makes
    reference to national security and criminal  convictions,  is  but  the
    grounds fail to have proper regard to that paragraph as a  whole.   The
    judge has clearly accepted that conduct relating  to  tax  affairs  can
    potentially come within the ambit of paragraph  322(5).   There  is  no
    error here.

14. In respect of paragraph 73, it may be the case that the judge was wrong
    to have attributed relevance to the fact that HMRC had  not  sought  to
    impose any penalty upon the first Claimant.  Having said that,  I  have
    been referred to a letter from  HMRC  at  page  12  of  the  Claimants'
    supplementary bundle which indicates that they regarded  the  amendment
    to the tax return for 2010/2011 as being a "failure to take  reasonable
    care".  In  any  event,  I  do  not  regard  the  judge's  position  as
    constituting a material error.  I agree with the submission made by  Mr
    Gajjar that the observation really had the effect  of  not  undermining
    the nature of the first Claimant's explanation as a whole  and  nothing
    more than that.

15. Paragraph 74 has not been specifically challenged by the  Secretary  of
    State.  I make reference to it because the judge therein relies on what
    was said by Lord Justice Underhill at paragraph 179  of  Balajigari  to
    the effect that the failure to have filed any tax  return  at  all  may
    carry less evidential value in respect of an allegation  of  dishonesty
    than an under declaration.   Whilst  every  case  is  of  course  fact-
    specific, this was a consideration that the judge was entitled to  take
    into account.  Further on in the same paragraph the judge  states  that
    the first Claimant had not always hidden self-employed income from HMRC
    having declared it previously.   Ms  Wilocks-Briscoe  makes  the  valid
    point that one of the declarations was said by the Secretary  of  State
    to have been not simply wrong, but dishonest.   However,  I  also  take
    into account the fact,  as  I  find  it  to  be,  that  prior  to  that
    particular  tax  return,  the  first  Claimant  had  made  an  accurate
    declaration to HMRC in respect of self-employed earnings.

16. I turn to paragraph 75, which is of central importance.  The  Secretary
    of State's grounds assert  that  the  judge  engaged  in  impermissible
    speculation about the quality of internet connections in internet cafes
    in India.  Reading the judge's  decision  sensibly,  in  my  view  this
    rather misses the point.  It is clear from the second sentence of  that
    paragraph that the judge was accepting the  evidence  provided  by  the
    first Claimant.  This evidence was contained in the  witness  statement
    in the supplementary bundle and made  specific  reference  to  internet
    connection problems when he was attempting to file tax  return.   Thus,
    whilst the judge in the next  sentence  goes  on  to  comment  on  poor
    internet connections in that country in general terms, the fact is that
    he was in truth accepting specific evidence given by the Appellant, and
    was not simply basing his finding on some unknown  source  of  evidence
    known only to himself.  The reference  later  on  in  paragraph  75  to
    people having experienced problems with what is  described  as  a  "big
    system"  website,  in  this  case  relating  to  HMRC,  may  indeed  be
    speculative, but in my view it cannot be said to  be  material  to  the
    judge's decision when it is read holistically.

17. In respect of paragraph 76, the judge would have been wrong if  he  was
    relying on the absence of an HMRC "reminder system"  to,  as  it  were,
    bolster the first Claimant's explanation.  However, on a proper reading
    of this passage, that is not the case.  The judge  was  simply  stating
    that as a matter of fact no such system existed and that this  did  not
    go to materially undermine the explanation put forward.

18. I note that  at  paragraphs  77  and  then  80,  which  have  not  been
    specifically challenged, the judge makes additional  positive  findings
    in respect of the credibility of the first and second  Claimants,  both
    in respect of their marriage, the first Claimants needs  to  return  to
    India and look after his unwell mother, and also in  respect  of  their
    jobs.  These were matters that the judge  was  entitled  to  take  into
    account as part of the overall picture with which he was concerned.

19. In terms of paragraph 79, the judge took account of  the  Secretary  of
    State's submission but was cognisant of the difference in respect of  a
    collection of tax as between PAYE and self-employed earnings.  That was
    a distinction that the judge was entitled to have regard to as it  went
    to the question of dishonesty.  In my view the judge was well-aware  of
    the Respondent's case against the first Appellant.  There is nothing to
    suggest that he was either ignorant or dismissive  of  the  particulars
    set out in the reasons for refusal letter, or indeed the timings of the
    amendments and/or submissions of tax returns in respect of  the  making
    of the application for indefinite leave to remain.

20. Whilst it may be that another judge  would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion, in light of the fact that these cases  turn  very  much  on
    their own particular circumstances and on the assessment of evidence by
    the fact-finding tribunal, the judge's findings  and  conclusions  were
    open to him and the Secretary of State's appeal must be dismissed.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall therefore stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 21 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

