
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01195/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the paper                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2020                  |On 2 December 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              ABOO SAWLEY HYDA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Grimes who dismissed the appeal on 21 April  2020,  in
       light of the appellant's failure pursuant to the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (First-tier Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014  to
       provide grounds of appeal in support of the notice of appeal filed.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal the operative part of which is in the following terms:

           "2.    The grounds assert that the Judge  erred  in  determining
                the appeal without an  oral  hearing  and  not  listing  the
                appeal for a CMR in circumstances where the  Judge  did  not
                have the  Appellants  grounds  of  appeal  before  him.  The
                grounds assert that the Appellant did not receive a  request
                for the grounds of appeal on 3 February 2020 but did receive
                a request on 5 March 2020 and submitted grounds on  6  March
                2020 by post.


           3.     It is arguable that  there  was  procedural  irregularity
                leading  to  unfairness.  The  Appellants  solicitors   have
                provided a copy of the  letter  sent  by  recorded  delivery
                submitting grounds of  appeal  dated  6  March  2020.  These
                grounds were clearly not before the Judge. Proof of recorded
                delivery should be provided at the hearing."

    3. Having considered the judgment of the High Court in The Joint Council
       for The Welfare of Immigrants (Applicant)  v  The  President  of  the
       Upper Tribunal (IAC) (Respondent) and The Lord Chancellor (Interested
       Party) [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin), in which neither the Pilot  Practice
       Direction issued by the Senior President of  Tribunals  on  19  March
       2020 nor Rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 were declared unlawful, consideration can still be given to  the
       appropriate venue for the next hearing of this matter in light of the
       overriding objectives.
    4. Paragraph 4 of the Practice Direction reads as follows: "Decisions on
       the papers without a hearing. Where a Chamber's procedure rules allow
       decisions to be made without a hearing, decisions should  usually  be
       made in this way, provided this is in accordance with the  overriding
       objective, the parties' ECHR rights and the Chamber's procedure rules
       about notice and consent."
    5. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    6. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    7. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34. -


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper
                Tribunal to-


                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to rule 8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an application for permission to bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)    make a consent order disposing of proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

    8. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to  exercise  the
       discretion provided in Rule 34 by enabling the error of law  question
       to be determined on the papers in this case.  Nothing on the facts or
       in law makes consideration  of  the  issues  on  the  papers  not  in
       accordance with the overriding objectives at this stage.

Error of law

    9.  The  chronology  shows  the  respondent  refused   the   appellant's
       application for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds,  dated  19
       March 2019, on 3 January 2020 with a right of appeal.
   10. The appellant lodged his appeal by email on 17 January 2020.
   11. It appears a request for grounds of appeal which were  not  with  the
       appeal filed should have been sent to the parties on 3 February 2020,
       but a subsequent communication recorded by the appellant's  solicitor
       indicates  it  was  not  in  fact  sent.  On   6   March   2020   the
       representatives did receive a request for the grounds of appeal.
   12. The representatives state they send the same to  the  Arnhem  Support
       Centre by post with recorded delivery reference KS 9797 3901 6GB.
   13. On 29 April 2020, the appeal was dismissed by the Judge.
   14. It is not clear why documents submitted by post  did  not  reach  the
       Judge although the first Covid-19 lockdown occurred  in  England  and
       Wales from the 23 March 2020.
   15. I find, with it being recognised the Judge is not at  fault,  that  a
       procedural error has occurred in the appeal being  dismissed  without
       giving proper consideration  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  submitted.
       Hence denying the appellant a fair  hearing  of  the  appeal  on  its
       merits. I find the procedural irregularity to be material.
   16. I therefore set aside the decision and direct  that  this  appeal  be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal nearest to the appellant's  place
       of residence for it to be heard afresh  by  judge  other  than  Judge
       Grimes.

Decision

   17. The First-tier Judge materially erred in law. I set aside the Judge's
       decision and direct that this appeal be remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal nearest to the appellant's place of residence for it  to  be
       heard afresh by judge other than Judge Grimes.

  Anonymity.

   18. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson     Dated the 18 November 2020
