
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/01428/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 November 2019                |On 3 December 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                  AVTAR [S]
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission  to
          appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on  2  September
          2019 against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
          Traynor, promulgated on 20 June 2019 following a hearing  in  the
          appellant's absence at Taylor House on 3 April 2019.

       2. The appellant is an Indian national born on 8 February  1951.  He
          entered the UK on  12  August  2013  (according  to  Home  Office
          records and not 15 July 2014) with a visit visa  valid  until  15
          January 2015 (not 19 January 2014). On 12 January 2015,  he  made
          an application for leave to remain on  private  and  family  life
          grounds. That was refused on 4 March 2015. Following a subsequent
          hearing, at which the appellant was represented, and he  and  his
          daughter gave oral evidence, the appeal was dismissed  by  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Woodward by way of a determination  dated  25
          August 2015. The appellant did not embark. A year  later,  on  30
          August 2016, another application was made. That was refused on 11
          February 2017. The present application was made  on  28  February
          2017. Prior to the appellant's arrival here, he lived  in  India.
          He was widowed in 1995. He has numerous health issues.

       3. The appellant did not attend the hearing  of  his  appeal  before
          Judge Traynor on 3 April 2018. The judge was satisfied  that  the
          appellant had been properly served with the notice of hearing and
          that no explanation for non-attendance had been  forthcoming.  In
          the circumstances, he proceeded to deal with the  appeal  in  the
          appellant's   absence.   He   took   the   previous    Tribunal's
          determination  as  his  starting  point  and   noted   that   the
          family/private life issues had already been  taken  into  account
          and remained the same. He accepted that  the  appellant  suffered
          from Parkinson's Disease and  that  he  had  other  physical  and
          mental illnesses. He found, however, that the appellant had  been
          treated for his conditions in India prior to arrival and that  he
          could  continue  to  receive  treatment  in  India,  funded,   if
          necessary, by his  daughter,  the  sponsor.  He  found  that  the
          appellant's ill health did not meet the article 3  threshold.  He
          also found that there were no very significant obstacles  to  his
          reintegration.  He also found that the sponsor had not taken  any
          steps to make arrangements for his care in India or to show  that
          this could not be done. He found, like Judge Woodward,  that  the
          appellant had the option of making  an  entry  clearance  in  the
          proper manner from India. He dismissed the appeal.

       4. In his grounds of  appeal,  the  appellant,  or  someone  on  his
          behalf, maintained that there had been a mistake over the date of
          the hearing and that he and  his  family  had  attended  for  the
          hearing the next day. Reliance was placed on the medical evidence
          and it was argued that the appellant had  established  a  private
          and family life with his daughter and grandchildren in the UK.

       5. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  given  the
          accepted conditions of the  appellant,  the  judge  had  arguably
          erred in proceeding with the appeal in  his  appeal  and  without
          making any enquiries as to the reasons for non-attendance.

       6. There has been no Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State.




          The Hearing

       7. The appellant was in attendance but was unable to take  any  part
          in the proceedings due to his ill health. His  daughter  and  her
          cousin attended. They explained that the daughter had confused  a
          medical appointment with the hearing date and so they turned up a
          day late for the appeal hearing.

       8. Ms Cunha submitted that it would have made no difference  to  the
          outcome of the appeal even if the parties  had  attended  as  the
          appellant would not have been able to give evidence  and  in  any
          event the law was  such  that  his  article  8  claim  could  not
          succeed.

       9. At the conclusion of the hearing, I indicated  that  I  would  be
          setting aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  I
          now give my reasons for so doing.




          Discussion and Conclusions

      10. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made.

      11. It is plain that the appellant has a great many health issues and
          that these were accepted by the judge. It is also a fact that the
          appellant was unrepresented  but  that  he  had  sought  an  oral
          hearing.  There is no dispute over the fact  that  the  appellant
          failed to attend the hearing, although he turned up the following
          day with his family apparently having  confused  the  dates.  The
          judge on the date of hearing was satisfied  that  the  notice  of
          hearing had been properly served  and  that  there  had  been  no
          explanation for the non-attendance. In most cases, I  would  have
          considered that to be a fair and satisfactory approach.  However,
          in the circumstances of this case,  where  there  are  clear  and
          obvious serious health issues, I consider that the judge erred by
          proceeding in the appellant's absence.   Fairness  dictates  that
          the appellant should have been given another chance to attend and
          that the appeal should have been adjourned.   Whether the  appeal
          can succeed is another matter, but it  is  in  the  interests  of
          justice  that  the  appellant  and/or  his   daughter   has   the
          opportunity to put his case to the Tribunal.

      12. In the circumstances, I set aside the determination of the First-
          tier Tribunal. The matter shall be remitted back to the  Tribunal
          for another judge to hear  the  evidence  and  to  make  a  fresh
          decision.







          Decision

      13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and a  fresh
          decision shall be made by another judge of that Tribunal.




          Anonymity

      14. No request for an anonymity order was made.




          Directions

      15. No later than 7 days prior to the date of hearing, the  appellant
          shall  serve  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Presenting
          Officers' Unit a statement of evidence setting out his claim  and
          a statement from his daughter which explains his  health  issues,
          the care and support he receives in the UK and why  he  would  be
          unable to receive care in India.

      16. An up to date letter from the appellant's doctor should  also  be
          filed within the same time frame. This should include information
          as to the appellant's fitness to attend court.

      17. If it is envisaged that the appellant will be fit  to  give  oral
          evidence, then an interpreter must be requested no later  than  7
          days prior to the date of hearing.




    Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 28 November 2019


