
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01604/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2019                           |On 29th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  KYEI [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Siaw, KPP Oplex Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the Appellant is the Secretary of State I refer to the parties
    as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 6th November 2018 I decided that there was
    an error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McIntosh
    who allowed the Appellant's appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  25th
    May 2018 and I set  that  decision  aside.   My  decision  is  appended
    hereto.  There was a resumed hearing on 9th January  2019  at  which  I
    heard oral evidence from the Appellant and submissions from Ms  Everett
    and Mr Siaw with a view to  re-making  the  decision.   I  reserved  my
    decision which I now give with reasons.

 3. At the hearing the Appellant  confirmed  the  contents  of  his  second
    witness statement dated 7th January 2019.  He was not subject to cross-
    examination.  I asked him a number of questions and he said that he  is
    currently paying for the medical  treatment  he  receives  in  the  UK.
    Since 2010 he has been paying  �100  per  month  to  the  international
    patients' department at King's College Hospital.  He produced a  number
    of receipts in relation to these payments.  He said  that  he  received
    this money from his mother who is in the UK.  He  said  that  he  lives
    with his mother and his younger sister.  He said that his mother  works
    as a care assistant and supports him financially.   He  said  that  his
    younger brother and his father live in Ghana.

 4. I heard submissions from Ms Everett and Mr Siaw.  In her submissions Ms
    Everett relied on the reasons for refusal letter of 16th January  2017.
    She submitted that the Appellant has not demonstrated that there  would
    be very significant obstacles  to  his  reintegration  in  Ghana  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  She submitted  that  he  has  family  members
    there, he spent his formative years  there.   She  submitted  that  the
    Appellant has been to Ghana and that his medical  condition  would  not
    have an impact on his integration there.  In relation to the Article  3
    claim, Ms Everett submitted that the medical evidence provided does not
    meet the Article 3 threshold.  In  these  circumstances  she  contended
    that the medical evidence  could  not  meet  the  Article  8  threshold
    either.  She submitted that the  recent  case  law  suggests  that  the
    decision in the case of Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR  867  has  a
    mitigating effect on the Article 3 test.  However, she  submitted  that
    in this case the medical evidence does not suggest that  the  Appellant
    meets the test set out in Paposhvili of demonstrating that there  would
    be a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in  his  state  of  health
    resulting in intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life
    expectancy as set out in Paposhvili.  She accepted  that  the  evidence
    suggests that treatment is probably not available to the  Appellant  in
    Ghana and she accepted that  the  evidence  suggests  that  those  with
    similar health issues have had to obtain treatment elsewhere.  However,
    she submitted that there is support and treatment there and it has  not
    been shown on the evidence that the Appellant would suffer a decline as
    set out in the test.  She accepted that the  Appellant  would  like  to
    stay in the UK for treatment but contended that he does  not  meet  the
    Rules or Article 3.  In relation to Article 8  she  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is having treatment in the UK and that he is paying for  that
    treatment but contended that his private and family life was  in  Ghana
    and that he could search for treatment elsewhere or apply  to  re-enter
    the UK to seek treatment here.  She accepted  that  the  Appellant  has
    been paying for treatment in the UK.

 5. In his submissions  Mr  Siaw  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument.   He
    contended that in the reasons for refusal  letter  the  Respondent  was
    mistaken in the assessment of the Appellant's medical condition as  the
    information at page 4 of the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  refers  to
    cancer, whereas this Appellant has a  tumour.   He  accepted  that  the
    decision made by the First-tier Tribunal in 2014 was based on different
    criteria but highlighted that that Tribunal had accepted that there was
    no treatment in Ghana for the Appellant.  Mr Siaw referred to page 9 of
    the Appellant's bundle which highlights that there  is  a  facility  in
    India where someone with a similar condition to the  Appellant  had  to
    seek treatment.  He submitted that there is no treatment in Ghana.   In
    his submission the Appellant would run the risk of losing his  life  on
    return to Ghana.  He relied on page 15 of the Appellant's bundle  which
    contains an article setting out details  of  a  woman  with  a  similar
    condition who lost her life and submitted therefore that  it  has  been
    established that treatment is not available in Ghana.  In  relation  to
    Article 3 he contended that a shift in the threshold  as  a  result  of
    Paposhvili means that Article 3 covers a case where a  patient  runs  a
    real risk of a significant reduction in their health.  He  referred  to
    the medical evidence, in particular the letter from King's  College  at
    page 1 of the Appellant's bundle which states that the Appellant's case
    is due to be reviewed and it  is  anticipated  that  further  treatment
    would be required.  He referred to  the  document  at  page  3  of  the
    Appellant's  bundle  which  states  that  the  Appellant   has   "quite
    significant residual meningioma which continues to creep and grow".  It
    states that the options for further  treatment  are  limited  but  that
    there is one option which is "of somewhat  experimental  nature",  this
    involves chemotherapy and is a treatment which is being pioneered for a
    select group of patients.  Mr Siaw submitted  that  the  Appellant  has
    been prescribed medication including painkillers and that if he were no
    longer taking those painkillers he would suffer intense  pain.   In  Mr
    Siaw's submission the Article 3  test  has  been  met  by  the  medical
    evidence provided.  He submitted that there is no  facility  in  Ghana,
    there is a lack of treatment in Ghana and patients with similar  issues
    have been referred outside of the country.  In  relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE he pointed out that the Appellant has been in the UK  for  eight
    years and accepted that he cannot meet the criteria of the  Immigration
    Rules as he does not have the required length of residence.   In  terms
    of consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules, he submitted that  the
    Appellant would have  difficulty  settling  in  Ghana  where  he  would
    receive no treatment for his medical condition.

My Findings

 6. In reaching my findings I note that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cockrill
    considered the Appellant's appeal against a previous decision  on  22nd
    July  2014.   However,  that  appeal  addressed  the  requirements   of
    paragraph 54 of the Immigration Rules and addressed different questions
    from those to be addressed in this appeal.

 7. In  considering  this  appeal  I  start  with  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Although Mr Siaw conceded that the Appellant  could
    not meet paragraph 276ADE(1) and failed  to  make  any  submissions  in
    relation to 276ADE(1)(vi) I consider that provision nonetheless  as  it
    does  not,  contrary  to  Mr  Siaw's  submission,  have   a   residence
    requirement.

 8. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) requires an Appellant to  show  that  they  are
    aged 18 or above and that there would be "very  significant  obstacles"
    to their integration into the country to which they would have to go if
    required to leave the UK.

 9. In considering whether there are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's  integration  in  Ghana,  I  take  into  account  that  the
    Appellant resided in Ghana until he entered the UK in December 2010  as
    a visitor when he was 22 years old.  He therefore spent the majority of
    his life in Ghana.  The Appellant's father and younger  brother  remain
    in Ghana.  No evidence has been put  forward  as  to  any  difficulties
    integrating there upon his return in  terms  of  culture,  language  or
    other related matters.  I take into account the evidence in relation to
    the Appellant's medical condition.  It was accepted by Ms Everett  that
    the  evidence  shows  that  there  is  no  specific  medical  treatment
    available in Ghana for the Appellant's condition.  I take into  account
    the letter from Dr George Kojo Wepeba, consultant neurosurgeon at Korle
    Bu Teaching Hospital in Accra.  Dr Wepeba notes that the Appellant  has
    a recurrent atypical meningioma.  I note that he stated:

         "Challenges for his treatment  and  follow  up  routine  are  quite
         enormous in our environment.  We lack focal radio surgery resources
         such as the linear accelerator and other adjuvant therapy which  he
         needs.  Also the Intensive Care Unit is  not  readily  equipped  to
         take care of his condition.  There is a lack of equipments like the
         Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical  Aspiration  (CUSA)  as  well  in  our
         system which he needs.  There  is  also  a  recurrent  pre  pontine
         tumour extension that is challenging for us to treat.  In  summary,
         he has a complex ongoing medical needs and  our  system  lacks  the
         resource to cope with that".

    It is clear from this that there may not be adequate medical  treatment
    available to the Appellant to deal with his medical condition.  I  also
    take into account that the Appellant has  lost  one  eye  through  this
    condition.   However,  there  is  no  specific  evidence  as   to   any
    limitations this damage to his sight would place on his integration  in
    Ghana.  Whilst I accept on the basis of the evidence before me that the
    Appellant is likely to face difficulties upon his return to Ghana, I do
    not accept that the evidence before me demonstrates that  these  amount
    to "very significant obstacles" to his integration in Ghana.  In all of
    the circumstances, in my view the Appellant has not  demonstrated  that
    he meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

10. I have considered the medical evidence in the context of Article  3  of
    the ECHR.  Guidance on the decision in Paposhvili was provided  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64 where Sales LJ said at paragraph 38:

         "So far  as  the  ECtHR  and  the  Convention  are  concerned,  the
         protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
         confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
         applicant is in the removing country. It  extends  to  cases  where
         "substantial grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  [the
         applicant], although not at imminent risk of dying,  would  face  a
         real risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in
         the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy" (para. [183]). This means cases where
         the applicant faces a real risk  of  rapidly  experiencing  intense
         suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the  receiving  state
         because  of  their  illness  and  the  non-availability  there   of
         treatment which is available to them in the removing state or faces
         a real risk of death within a short time in the receiving state for
         the same  reason.  In  other  words,  the  boundary  of  Article  3
         protection has been shifted from  being  defined  by  imminence  of
         death in the removing state  (even  with  the  treatment  available
         there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely  "rapid"
         experience) of intense suffering or death in the  receiving  state,
         which may only occur because of the non-availability in that  state
         of the  treatment  which  had  previously  been  available  in  the
         removing state."

11. This interpretation of the protection provided  by  Article  3  against
    removal in medical cases shows some expansion  of  the  test  to  cover
    those who would be  exposed  to  a  "serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
    decline" in his state of health resulting in intense suffering or to  a
    significant reduction in life expectancy.

12. I have considered the medical evidence in the context of this test.  In
    the letter from Mr  Nick  Thomas,  Consultant  Neurosurgeon  at  King's
    College Hospital, dated  5th  November  2018,  the  background  to  the
    surgery performed in 2011 is set out and radiotherapy  carried  out  in
    2012 which has "debulked but not completely removed  the  tumour".   It
    stated that since 2012 the Appellant's condition has been  followed  up
    with regular  imaging  and  "there  remains  an  extensive  skull  base
    meningioma".  It states that this is a grade 2 tumour which means  that
    it is atypical in its growth pattern which may mean that its growth  is
    more  rapid.   It  states  that  he  is  under  regular   review   from
    ophthalmologists and that he appears to have satisfactory vision at the
    present time.  He is reviewed in the neurology  clinic  for  his  known
    epilepsy.  The report states that at his last review, along with recent
    imaging,  showed  that  the  tumour  had  slightly  increased  in  size
    comparing imaging from 2016 with that of October 2017  and  that  since
    that time the appearances have remained stable.  It states that  it  is
    anticipated that further treatment will be required at some time but it
    is not required presently and that further treatment might  be  in  the
    form of additional surgery or a form of radiotherapy.  It  states  that
    the  tumour  the  Appellant  has  is  complex  requiring   a   sizeable
    multidisciplinary team of skull base surgeons  and  radiotherapists  as
    well as ophthalmology, neuro-radiology, clinical nurse specialists  and
    endocrinologists.

13. The letter from Dr Omar Al-Salihi, Consultant  Clinical  Oncologist  in
    the Neuro/Oncology clinic in Guy's Hospital, dated 26th November  2018,
    states that the Appellant has  quite  significant  residual  meningioma
    "which continues to  creep  and  grow".   It  goes  on  to  state  that
    unfortunately for the Appellant "the options of further  treatment  are
    limited but we have discussed one option which we are trying with  some
    patients in  his  situation  and  which  is  of  somewhat  experimental
    nature".  This is said to be a process involving chemotherapy.

14. There is also a letter dated 19th November 2018 from  Hayley  Cheetham,
    skull base clinical nurse specialist at the Department of  Neurosurgery
    at King's College Hospital which states that the plan for the Appellant
    is for active surveillance, for consideration  of  off-license  use  of
    Gemcitabine for disease management.

15. In my view it is clear from the  medical  evidence  provided  that  the
    Appellant has a skull base meningioma.  It appears  that  he  is  under
    regular review and that further treatment will be required at some time
    but  is  not  required  presently.   Further  treatment  might  involve
    additional surgery or radiotherapy.  In my view this evidence does  not
    demonstrate that if the Appellant were to be returned to Ghana he would
    face a real risk in the  absence  of  appropriate  treatment  of  being
    exposed to a "serious, rapid and irreversible decline" in his state  of
    health resulting in intense suffering or to a significant reduction  in
    life expectancy.  The evidence provided simply does not show that  this
    would be the case.

16. In these circumstances it has not been demonstrated that removal of the
    Appellant would breach Article 3 of the ECHR.

17. In relation to Article 8 no submission has been made that the Appellant
    has established a family life in the UK.   Whilst  he  lives  with  his
    mother  and  sister,  no  evidence  has  been  put  forward  that   the
    relationship is one where there are more than the normal emotional ties
    between an adult and his sibling or parent.

18. I accept, however, as he has been  in  the  UK  since  2010,  that  the
    Appellant has established a private life in the UK and that his removal
    would  interfere  with  that  private  life.   I   accept   that   such
    interference would be sufficient to engage Article 8.  Any interference
    would be in accordance with the law as it would be in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules as set out above.

19. In considering proportionality I note that there  is  limited  evidence
    before me as to the nature and extent of any private life developed  by
    the Appellant in the UK.  He has been in receipt of  medical  treatment
    for which he has been paying.  However, there is little  evidence  over
    and above the period of time spent in the UK and his assertion that  he
    resides with his mother and sister.   I  take  into  account  that  his
    medical treatment to date has not  incurred  any  cost  to  the  public
    purse.  I take into account also the fact that the  Appellant's  father
    and brother reside in Ghana and that he  would  therefore  have  family
    support there as he has in the UK.  Of significant weight is  the  fact
    that the Appellant cannot meet the private  life  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules as encapsulated in paragraph 276ADE.

20. In considering the public interest I take account of  the  factors  set
    out in section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002. The Appellant speaks English. Although he says  that  his  mother
    pays for his  medical  treatment  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  is
    financially independent  (section  117B  (3)).  Any  private  life  was
    developed when his status was precarious (section 117B (5)).

21. I take into account the medical evidence and, whilst I accept that  the
    Appellant has a significant medical condition and has restricted vision
    as a result of the removal of his eye, I  also  accept  that  there  is
    limited medical provision available in Ghana to treat the Appellant.

22. However, in weighing the public interest I find that  the  decision  to
    refuse the application is proportionate to  the  Appellant's  right  to
    private life.

Notice of Decision

23. I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

24. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 28th January 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed, therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28th January 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

                                  APPENDIX
                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01604/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th October 2018                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Kyei [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr K Siaw of KPP Oplex Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Ghana, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 16th January  2017
    to refuse his application for indefinite leave to remain in the  UK  or
    discretionary leave to receive medical treatment.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McIntosh allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 25th May
    2018.  The Secretary of State now appeals against  that  decision  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup on  30th  August
    2018.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on
    8th December 2010 as a visitor with a visa valid from 6th December 2010
    until 6th June 2011.  He made applications for further leave to  remain
    as a visitor for private medical treatment  and  leave  to  remain  was
    granted until 24th April 2013. The Appellant submitted  an  application
    for a further extension of stay on 3rd April 2013.   The  Secretary  of
    State refused that application and the Appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 22nd July 2014  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill allowed the appeal under paragraph  54  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant met the  requirements
    of that paragraph. The judge noted that in future a full set of  papers
    should be obtained to show an up-to-date diagnosis and prognosis and  a
    clear description of what the proposed or continuing  treatment  is  so
    that in any future application the decision maker could know  precisely
    what is involved, that is regarding the frequency of consultations, the
    likely duration of the treatment  and  details  as  to  the  costs  and
    confirmation that the cost is being met properly.

 4. On the basis of that decision the Appellant was granted  further  leave
    to remain as a visitor to receive private medical treatment  until  6th
    May 2015. He was subsequently granted further leave to  remain  in  the
    same category until 22nd March 2016.

 5. The Appellant's application for discretionary leave to  remain  outside
    the Rules/indefinite leave to remain was made on 17th March  2016.  The
    Secretary of State made a decision on 16th January 2017.  The Secretary
    of State considered the application under paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) and
    under Article 3 of the ECHR.  In considering paragraph 276ADE (1)  (vi)
    the Secretary of  State  did  not  accept  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration  in  Ghana  if  he
    were required to leave the UK. In looking at Article 3 the Secretary of
    State considered the medical evidence and concluded;

         "The NHS documents you have provided do not specify  that  you  are
         unable to travel,  or  that  you  are  currently  receiving  urgent
         treatment.  Your condition is not life threatening, and no evidence
         has been provided to show that undertaking a journey  or  having  a
         short break in treatment whilst relocating  is  likely  to  have  a
         hugely detrimental effect on your condition".

 6. The Secretary of State took into account the fact  that  treatment  may
    not be free at the point of delivery in Ghana and that he  may  not  be
    able to afford to pay for treatment there but considered that this  did
    not make his situation exceptional.  The Secretary of State  considered
    that suitable medical treatment is available  in  Ghana  and  that  the
    Appellant had not produced any evidence that  the  Appellant  would  be
    denied medical treatment or that he would be unable to travel to obtain
    such treatment.  The Secretary of State considered that  the  Appellant
    had not shown that he had a terminal illness or that he would be unable
    to continue to access treatment in his home country.

 7. In her decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the  evidence  at
    paragraphs 9 to 15.  This includes the Appellant's oral evidence  about
    the history of his condition and ongoing treatment and a letter from Mr
    Nick Thomas, Consultant Neurosurgeon, dated 8th  September  2017.   The
    judge's findings are at paragraphs  23  to  25  of  the  decision.   At
    paragraph 23 the judge said that she took the previous determination of
    Immigration Judge Cockrill as the starting point and said "there is  no
    additional evidence from the Secretary of  State  since  that  previous
    decision.  In relation to this appeal, the Appellant has produced up-to-
    date evidence of his ongoing treatment for his very serious condition".

 8. The judge said at paragraph 24 that the Appellant suffers from  a  very
    serious condition which "without treatment would be life  threatening".
    The judge noted that the  Appellant  was  diagnosed  with  a  malignant
    meningioma of  the  brain  and  remains  under  the  treatment  of  the
    neurological team at King's College Hospital.  The judge  said  "it  is
    apparent  from  the  facts  that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules".

 9. The judge went on to consider Article 3 and quoted from the letter from
    the Consultant Mr Thomas which  stated  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    unable to receive appropriate treatment for the tumour in  Ghana.   The
    judge also noted that there was the oral evidence  from  the  Appellant
    that when he travelled to Ghana in 2015  the  medication  he  had  been
    prescribed was not available in Ghana,  medication  without  which  his
    health would  deteriorate  significantly  resulting  in  his  premature
    death.

10. In conclusion the judge said at paragraph 25;

         "I find that there is no evidence that the treatment the  Appellant
         requires to  treat  his  condition  is  available  in  Ghana.   The
         evidence from the Appellant and Consultant, Nick Thomas is that the
         necessary  medication  is  not  available   in   Ghana.    In   the
         circumstances in the absence of evidence contrary  that  which  was
         relied upon before Judge Cockrill I allow this appeal".

11. At paragraph 27 in considering a fee award the judge said  "as  I  have
    allowed this appeal under the Rules and I have  considered  whether  to
    make a fee award", the  judge  found  that  "there  was  no  change  of
    circumstances since the matter was before First-tier Immigration  Judge
    Cockrill in July 2014 and consider it appropriate therefore to  make  a
    fee award in favour of the Appellant".

Grounds of appeal

12. In the grounds the Secretary of  State  contends  that  there  are  two
    material errors in the decision.   It  is  firstly  contended  that  in
    allowing the Appellant's appeal  under  Article  3  the  judge  made  a
    material misdirection in law by failing to have regard to the  relevant
    authorities of the higher courts, in particular M v the UK [2008]  ECHR
    453 and GS (India) and  Others  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40.  It is  further  pointed  out  that  the
    Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) v the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64,  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered  the
    recent ECHR decision in Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867 and that
    even following Paposhvili and AM the Article 3 threshold had  not  been
    lowered to the extent that this case could meet it.

13. In the second ground the Secretary of State  contends  that  the  judge
    gave inadequate reasons for accepting the evidence from the Consultant,
    Mr Thomas, as to the availability of medication in Ghana.

Error of Law

14. In my view there are a number of clear errors of law in this  decision.
    The first is in the whole approach made by the judge to  the  decision-
    making process in this case.  At paragraph 23 the judge states that she
    took the decision of Judge Cockrill as the starting point and  went  on
    to say that there was no additional  evidence  from  the  Secretary  of
    State since that previous decision.

15. That was an erroneous approach, firstly because the  decision  made  by
    Judge Cockrill was in the context of an appeal against a decision based
    on paragraph 54 of the Immigration Rules.  Accordingly  Judge  Cockrill
    was addressing a completely different question which  was  whether  the
    Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 54, set out at paragraph 13
    of Judge Cockrill's decision. This required an analysis of a number  of
    factors, including the nature of  the  illness,  the  duration  of  the
    treatment, details of cost of the treatment  and  details  of  progress
    being made.  Judge Cockrill allowed the appeal because he was satisfied
    that the requirements of paragraph 54 were  met.   In  addition,  Judge
    Cockrill attached significant weight to what he considered to be faults
    in  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision.  Further,   Judge   Cockrill
    highlighted that there were inadequacies in the medical evidence  which
    the Appellant would need to address when the case came to be considered
    again.

16. Judge McIntosh was considering an  appeal  on  a  completely  different
    basis, that  is  on  human  rights  grounds  and  in  particular  under
    paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  Article  3.  There  are  very  different
    criteria and factors to  be  considered  in  the  assessment  of  these
    provisions. However Judge McIntosh appeared to  wrongly  consider  that
    the decision of Judge Cockrill  was  determinative  of  some  of  those
    issues.

17. At paragraph 25 Judge McIntosh  said;  "in  the  circumstances  in  the
    absence of evidence contrary that which was relied  upon  before  Judge
    Cockrill I allow this appeal".  Here the judge misstated the burden  of
    proof and the proper approach to the  previous  judge's  decision.   In
    this case the burden of proof was on the Appellant to demonstrate  that
    he met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) or Article 3 of the
    ECHR.

18. The second error in  the  Judge  McIntosh's  decision  relates  to  her
    treatment of the evidence. At paragraph 24  the  judge  said  that  the
    Appellant  suffers  from  a  very  serious  condition  which   "without
    treatment would be life threatening".  Later in paragraph 24 the  judge
    said that, without medication  he  requires,  "the  Appellant's  health
    would deteriorate significantly resulting in his premature  death".   I
    have looked at the medical evidence before the judge and see nothing to
    support those conclusions.

19. Further, the judge gave no reasons for the conclusion in  paragraph  24
    that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules.

20. The judge considered Article 3 of the ECHR with reference to the letter
    from the Consultant, Nick Thomas, dated 8th September 2017 saying  that
    the Appellant  has  complex  ongoing  medical  needs  relating  to  his
    multidisciplinary input into his extensive skull  base  meningioma  and
    that further treatment for the future is likely.  The judge  also  took
    into account the Appellant's evidence that in 2015  the  medication  he
    had been prescribed was not available in Ghana.  However I see  nothing
    in the evidence before the judge as to the nature  or  the  purpose  of
    this medication and nothing to support  the  judge's  conclusion  that,
    without this  medication,  the  Appellant's  health  would  deteriorate
    significantly, resulting in his premature death.

21. Further the judge said at paragraph 25 that there was no evidence  that
    the  treatment  the  Appellant  requires  to  treat  his  condition  is
    available in Ghana. The judge misstated the evidence  from  Mr  Thomas,
    saying "the necessary medication is not available in Ghana".  There  is
    nothing in the evidence before me from Mr Thomas to that effect.

22. In considering Article 3  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    relevant case law.  The most recent statement of the law in this regard
    is by the Court of Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) where the  Court  of  Appeal
    said that until the Supreme Court rules on the effect of Paposhvili the
    law is as set in N v the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    At paragraph 38 Sales LJ said;

         "So far  as  the  ECtHR  and  the  Convention  are  concerned,  the
         protection of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now not
         confined to deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the
         applicant is in the removing country.  It extends  to  cases  where
         "substantial grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  [the
         applicant], although not at imminent risk of dying,  would  face  a
         real risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in
         the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy" (paragraph [183]).  This means  cases
         where the applicant faces  a  real  risk  of  rapidly  experiencing
         intense suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the receiving
         state because of their illness and the  non-availability  there  of
         treatment which is available to them in the removing state or faces
         a real risk of death within a short time in the receiving state for
         the same reason.   In  other  words,  the  boundary  of  Article  3
         protection has been shifted from  being  defined  by  imminence  of
         death in the removing state  (even  with  the  treatment  available
         there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely  "rapid"
         experience) of intense suffering or death in the  receiving  state,
         which may only occur because of the non-availability in that  state
         of the  treatment  which  had  previously  been  available  in  the
         removing state".

23. In this case Judge McIntosh undertook no analysis  in  accordance  with
    the guidance given in AM or elsewhere.

24.  Moreover,  the  evidence  before  the  judge  as  to  availability  of
    appropriate  treatment  in  Ghana  (one  line  in  a  letter  from  the
    Consultant), without more was insufficient to reach any conclusion that
    there is no treatment available to the  Appellant  in  Ghana.   Further
    there was insufficient evidence before the judge as to the consequences
    to the Appellant of there being no treatment or being unable to  access
    any treatment in Ghana.  The conclusions of the judge at  paragraph  24
    in relation to the consequences to the Appellant  of  being  unable  to
    access treatment were speculative and not based on the evidence.

25. In the circumstances  I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis  that  there  are  the  material  errors  of  law
    identified above.

26. Although Mr Siaw asked that I consider  remitting  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I considered that this was not  appropriate  given
    that there are no further findings of fact to be  made.   Remaking  the
    decision in this case is a matter of applying the facts  found  to  the
    requirements of the Rules and the case law in relation to Article 3. In
    this case the Appellant has not been deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  or
    opportunity to put his case in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  nature
    and extent of fact-finding is not such that it  is  necessary  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be remade.

27. In these circumstances I adjourn the appeal for a resumed  hearing  for
    submissions to be made with a view to remaking the decision.

28. I give the following directions:

      a) The resumed hearing is to be heard on 6th December 2018.

      b) All further evidence to be relied upon by either  party  is  to  be
         served on the Tribunal and the other party no later than seven days
         before the resumed hearing.

      c) The Appellant's representative is to provide  a  skeleton  argument
         addressing the relevant provisions forming the basis of the appeal.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 1st November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

