
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
HU/01302/2015

                                                       HU/01305/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2017                           |    On 5 July 2017                |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                            NN (first appellant)
                           aea (second appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Ariyo (Apex Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The  first  appellant  is  the
    mother of the second appellant.  The first appellant was born in  1975.
    Her daughter was born in May 2007.  The first appellant arrived in this
    country in August 2004 on her account.

2.   The immigration history shows that the appellants applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card on 12 June 2012 which was rejected  in  August  of  that
    year.  A further application was made on  2  July  2014  for  leave  to
    remain on family and private life grounds but this was  refused  on  24
    September 2014.  However, following  judicial  review  proceedings  the
    matter was reconsidered and a further decision was  taken  on  16  June
    2015.  The application was again refused and it is this  decision  that
    gives rise to the appeal proceedings herein.   The  appellants'  appeal
    against the decision came before a First-tier Judge on 25 August  2016.



3.   It was common ground  as  the  judge  stated  in  paragraph  2  of  his
    decision  that  the  appellants'  applications  did  not  fall  to   be
    considered under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  the
    applicable provisions were paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, Article 8  of
    the ECHR and Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act, 2002.  The judge stated:

         "In these contexts the  critical  question  for  consideration  is
         whether it would be unreasonable to expect the minor child  of  the
         appellant to leave the United Kingdom".


4.   The judge set out the legislation and the relevant  Rules.   The  judge
    heard oral evidence from the first appellant who told  the  judge  that
    she had formed a durable relationship with an EEA national -  she  said
    her partner had mental health difficulties.  Her  daughter  was  bonded
    with him.

5.   The judge noted that  the  issue  had  recently  been  the  subject  of
    authoritative consideration by the Court of Appeal in a  similar  legal
    context as the present case in MA Pakistan and Others [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705 and set out paragraphs 45 to 47 of the decision as follows:

         "45.     However, the approach I favour is  inconsistent  with  the
             very recent decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  MM  (Uganda)
             where the court came down firmly in  favour  of  the  approach
             urged upon us by Ms Giovannetti, and I do not  think  that  we
             ought to depart from it.  In my judgment, if the court  should
             have regard to the conduct of  the  applicant  and  any  other
             matters relevant to the  public  interest  when  applying  the
             'unduly harsh' concept under section  117C(5),  so  should  it
             when considering the question of reasonableness under  section
             117B(6).  I recognise that the provisions in section 117C  are
             directed towards the particular considerations which  have  to
             be borne in mind in the case of foreign criminals, and  it  is
             true that the court placed  some  weight  on  section  117C(2)
             which states that the more serious the offence, the greater is
             the interest in deportation of the prisoner.  But the critical
             point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a  free-standing
             provision in the same way as section 117B(6), and even so  the
             court  in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that  wider   public   interest
             considerations must be taken into account  when  applying  the
             'unduly harsh' criterion.  It seems to  me  that  it  must  be
             equally so with respect to  the  reasonableness  criterion  in
             section 117B(6).  It would not be appropriate  to  distinguish
             that decision simply because I have reservations whether it is
             correct.  Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case,
             I will analyse the appeals on the basis that the Secretary  of
             State's submission on this point is correct and that the  only
             significance of section 117B(6) is that where the  seven  year
             rule is satisfied, it is a factor of some  weight  leaning  in
             favour of leave to remain being granted.


         Applying the reasonableness test


         46.      Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the  fact
             that a child has been here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise.  Indeed, the Secretary of State  published  guidance
             in  August  2015  in  the  form  of  Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled 'Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10 year Routes' in  which  it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  'strong  reasons'  for  refusing
             leave (para. 11.2.4).  These instructions were  not  in  force
             when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,  but  in
             my view they merely confirm what is  implicit  in  adopting  a
             policy of this nature.  After such a period of time the  child
             will have put down roots and developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get older.   Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.


         47.      Even if we were applying the  narrow  reasonableness  test
             where the focus is on the child alone, it would not in my view
             follow that leave must be granted whenever  the  child's  best
             interests are in favour of  remaining.   I  reject  Mr  Gill's
             submission that the best interest's  assessment  automatically
             resolves  the  reasonableness  question.   If  Parliament  had
             wanted the child's best interests to dictate  the  outcome  of
             the leave application, it would have said so.  The concept  of
             'best interests' is after all a  well-established  one.   Even
             where the child's best interests are to stay, it may still  be
             not unreasonable to require the child  to  leave.   That  will
             depend upon a careful analysis of the nature and extent of the
             links in the UK and in the country where  it  is  proposed  he
             should return.  What could not be considered,  however,  would
             be the conduct and immigration history of the parents".


    The judge then noted what the Court of Appeal had said about the weight
    to be attached to the fact that a  child  had  at  least  seven  years'
    continuous residence in the UK in paragraph 71 to 74 of its decision:


         "71.     Second, it is alleged that the  FTT  failed  to  have  any
             regard to, and did not purport to apply, the guidance given by
             the UT in Azimi-Moayed (Decisions Affecting  Children:  Onward
             Appeal)  [2013]   UKUT   197   (IAC)   for   determining   the
             reasonableness of removal in cases involving children  present
             for more than 7 years in the UK.  That was a  case  determined
             after the policy in DP5/96 had been repealed  and  before  any
             other rules had been put in place.  Blake J held that after  a
             period of lengthy residence,  which  he  took  from  past  and
             previous policies to be seven years, it would be inappropriate
             to disrupt the child's life in  the  UK  'in  the  absence  of
             compelling  reason  to  the  contrary'.   No  such  compelling
             reasons were identified here.


         72.      I have already stated why I reject the contention  that  a
             court is obliged as matter  of  law  to  adopt  a  two  staged
             approach (see paras 56-57 above) even though it  will  usually
             be a sensible way of proceeding.


         73.      I would not either grant leave on the second ground.   The
             appropriate test can no longer be compelling reasons; that  is
             not the language of section 117B(6) or paragraph 276ADE and it
             sets the bar too high.  It may be reasonable  to  require  the
             child to leave where there are good cogent  reasons,  even  if
             they are not compelling.


         74.      It was also suggested that in any event the judge did  not
             give sufficient weight to the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
             resided here for over seven years and that his best  interests
             were to remain here with his family.  I  do  not  accept  that
             submission.  The judge made specific reference  to  the  seven
             year rule and its significance.  It may be that  other  judges
             would have struck the balance differently, but the question is
             whether this judge reached a conclusion which was not open  to
             him.  Given that he was required to have regard to  the  wider
             public interest in effective immigration  control,  I  do  not
             think that he did".


6.   The judge summarised the respondent's position in paragraph 10  of  his
    decision as follows:

         "In support of your application you have raised the fact that your
         child is aged 8.  She has been living in the United Kingdom all her
         life.  This has been carefully considered.  However, you  would  be
         returning to Nigeria with your child and would be able  to  support
         her whilst she became used to living there and she would have  full
         rights as a citizen  of  Nigeria.   Your  child  may  be  currently
         enrolled in education in the United Kingdom, but it is  clear  from
         the objective information available that Nigeria has a  functioning
         education system which your child would be able to enter.  You have
         not provided any evidence which indicates that you would be  unable
         to maintain your child in Nigeria or that you would  be  unable  to
         provide for their safety and welfare.


         You and your child would return to Nigeria.  As a family unit  and
         continue to enjoy your  family  life  together.   Whilst  this  may
         involve a degree of  disruption  to  your  private  life,  this  is
         considered proportionate to the legitimate aim  of  maintaining  an
         effective immigration control and is in accordance with our section
         55 duties".


7.   The judge concluded his determination as follows:

         "11.     It is common ground that a consideration of the merits  of
             the  appellant's  article  8  appeal,  whether  it  be   under
             paragraph 276 ADE, or,  under  article  8  with  reference  to
             section 117B(6), turns essentially, on the question whether it
             would be unreasonable to expect of the minor children to leave
             the United Kingdom.


         12.      In respect of the first appellant's claim to private  life
             under paragraph 276 ADE, I find that  she  clearly  failed  to
             establish that she meets the requirements,  as  it  cannot  be
             said,  even  on  her  own  case,  that  there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria, save, to  the
             extent, that it is contended  that  the  difficulties  in  her
             child integrating into Nigeria, would place her  in  the  same
             situation.


         13.       I  turn  therefore  to  consider  whether  it  would   be
             unreasonable to expect the appellant's daughter to  leave  the
             UK.   I  am  satisfied  the  appellant  and  her  child   have
             established private and family  life  United  Kingdom.   I  am
             further  satisfied,  that  the  respondent's   decision   does
             constitute interference with the rights of both appellants, to
             private and family life under article 8 of the ECHR.


         14.      In considering whether interference with the  family  life
             of the appellants is proportionate, I must first  have  regard
             to the best interests of  the  minor  child  as  these  are  a
             primary consideration.


         15.      The second appellant was born on 19. May 2007 and is  aged
             9.  She has spent a little over seven years residing in the UK
             continuously.  She is well integrated into the  school  system
             and the records show that she has  made  very  good  progress.
             Her removal to  Nigeria  would  unquestionably  interrupt  her
             academic progress.  She would have to form  new  relationships
             in Nigeria, a country she has not known.  I accept that she is
             in a family unit in  the  United  Kingdom  that  includes  her
             mother and her mother's partner.  There is not a great deal of
             evidence on this point but I am prepared to  accept  that  she
             does have a relationship with  her  mother's  partner.   I  am
             satisfied therefore that the  best  interests  of  the  second
             appellant are for her to continue living  in  the  UK  without
             disruption  to  her  private  and   family   life   and   more
             importantly, to the bonds that she has formed at school and in
             her community.


         16.      I now turn to consider whether it would be  reasonable  to
             expect  the   appellant   to   leave   the   United   Kingdom,
             notwithstanding, that her interests are  best  served  by  her
             remaining in the UK in the present family unit.


         17.  I attach very significant weight to the fact that  this  is  a
             young child, who has spent more than seven years of his  [sic]
             formative life, since birth, in the United Kingdom.  He would,
             in the period he has been living here have put down roots  and
             developed social, cultural and educational links.  I therefore
             accept that it is likely to  be  highly  disruptive  if  their
             child is required to leave the UK.  It is always easier for  a
             very young child who has not begun school because the focus is
             on their families.  In the case of older children however  the
             disruption becomes more serious.  Hence there is a very strong
             expectation that the child's best interests will be to  remain
             in the UK with his parents as part of a family unit.


         18.      The evidence of the mother is that she does not  have  any
             close relatives in Nigeria to whom she could return.  Even  if
             that be so, I do not accept that the appellant's mother  would
             have any serious difficulties in re-establishing her  life  in
             Nigeria, and in Lagos, where she says  she  lived  before  she
             arrived in the UK.  She stated  that  her  mother  is  in  the
             United Kingdom and that they are  in  contact.   There  is  no
             evidence, however,  that  has  been  presented  to  prove  her
             mother's presence in the United Kingdom.  I further take  into
             account that the first appellant claimed that she  had  fallen
             out with the mother, because her mother has abandoned  her  at
             an early age.


         19.      The second appellant would not have any  serious  language
             difficulties because English  is  widely  spoken  in  Nigeria.
             There is no suggestion that the  educational  facilities  that
             she would have access to Nigeria would be of such an  inferior
             standard as to seriously threaten the  educational  future  of
             the second appellant.


         20.      I accept that the second appellant's  removal  would  mean
             the severance of the relationship she has developed  with  the
             appellant's partner, and more importantly, it would  mean  the
             severance of the relationships she has formed  at  school.   I
             accept that there would be a  measure  of  disruption  to  her
             education in that she would  have  to  adapt  to  an  entirely
             different school environment and cultural setting.


         21.      I do not accept the evidence of the first  appellant  that
             she  would  be  entirely  destitute  in  Nigeria.   The  first
             appellant has shown herself to  be  a  resourceful  person  by
             finding the means to travel to the UK, several years ago,  and
             to sustain herself in a new environment for a number of years.
              I do not accept that the appellants would be exposed to  such
             a degree of hardship, in Nigeria, as to threaten the very well
             being of the minor child.


         22.  There are important public policy considerations that  I  have
             to take into account in deciding whether it is  reasonable  to
             expect the minor child to leave the United Kingdom.  The first
             appellant  arrived  in  United   Kingdom,   it   would   seem,
             clandestinely.  She has remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
             breach of  the  immigration  rules  for  several  years.   Her
             conduct does seriously undermine the public  interest  in  the
             maintenance of effective immigration control.
         23.      These public interest considerations, though  relevant  to
             the question that this appeal poses, must be  weighed  against
             the best  interests  of  the  second  appellant.   This  is  a
             difficult case.  On the one hand,  the  second  appellant  has
             lived in the only country that she knows  for  the  last  nine
             years; her removal to Nigeria would cause a real disruption in
             her  life.   On  the   other   hand,   the   public   interest
             considerations in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
             control, and, indeed, in the economic well-being of the United
             Kingdom are equally compelling considerations.


         24.      The conclusion at which I arrive,  having  regard  to  the
             totality of the evidence is that it  would  be  reasonable  to
             expect the second appellant to leave the United Kingdom".


8.   There was an application for  permission  to  appeal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  refused  permission  but   the   application   was   renewed.
    Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the
    First-tier Judge had arguably failed  to  give  sufficient  reasons  to
    explain why he had concluded as he had done.

9.   The respondent filed a response on 30 May 2017 arguing that  the  judge
    had given sufficient reasons for finding  that  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect the second appellant to leave the UK and had cited  the  correct
    legal framework and  case  law.   Cogent  reasons  had  been  given  in
    paragraphs 16 to 24.  There was a response filed by the  solicitors  on
    22  June  2016  arguing  that  when  the  private,  family  and   other
    circumstances of the appellant's were  taken  cumulatively  they  would
    outweigh  any  legitimate  aim  sought   to   be   protected   in   the
    proportionality exercise.

10.  Mr Ariyo  submitted  that  it  had  been  acknowledged  that  the  best
    interests of the second appellant were to continue to live in  the  UK.
    The case law was clear and reference was made to paragraph  47  of  MA.
    The judge had only taken into account the first appellant's immigration
    history whereas in paragraph 47 it was made clear that that  could  not
    be considered.

11.  Furthermore in paragraph 15 the judge had erred  in  stating  that  the
    appellant's daughter had spent "a little over seven years  residing  in
    the UK continuously" when a span of two years could not be described as
    "a little  over  seven".   The  judge  had  referred  to  the  economic
    wellbeing of the United Kingdom when considering  the  public  interest
    considerations in paragraph 23 of his decision although he acknowledged
    that this particular complaint did not feature in the grounds.

12.  The mother's partner was an EU national  exercising  treaty  rights  in
    the UK.  It appeared that there had been  no  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant's partner at the First-tier hearing.

13.  The child was now over 10 and an application was pending for her to  be
    given UK citizenship.  This had been sent on 25 May  2017.   There  had
    not yet been a response.

14.  Mr Bramble said he had received a copy of the application  although  it
    had not yet been logged on the Home Office system.

15.  In relation to the arguments advanced he submitted there  had  been  no
    error of law.

16.  The hearing had taken place in August 2016  and  while  the  child  was
    over 7 it was quite clear  that  the  judge  had  taken  her  age  into
    account.   The  determination  had  been  satisfactorily  reasoned   as
    submitted in the Rule 24 response.

17.  The judge had correctly directed  himself  when  considering  the  best
    interests of the child.  Having found  that  her  interests  were  best
    served by remaining in the UK in paragraph 16 of the decision he turned
    to consider the issue of reasonableness.

18.  With reference to paragraph 46 of MA Mr Bramble helpfully  put  in  the
    guidance referred to by the Court of Appeal (para.11.2.4).   The  judge
    had correctly addressed himself to the appellant's case in the light of
    the guidance.  There was sufficient reasoning and the  complaints  were
    merely disagreement with the decision.  There was very little  evidence
    in relation to the position of the appellant's partner  and  there  did
    not appear to be a witness statement.

19.  There was in this case the issue of the appellant's partner  exercising
    treaty rights in the UK.  The daughter would not be leaving  with  both
    her parents.  She had never left the UK.  She had known  nowhere  else.
    Strong reasons were required as established in paragraph  11.2.4  if  a
    child had been in the UK for over seven years.

20.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

21.  The judge correctly addressed himself  on  the  legal  issues  and  had
    fully in mind  the  guidance  given  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan). In paragraph 45 of the decision the Court of Appeal made it
    clear that a court should have regard  to  the  public  interest  under
    Section  117B(6).   The  public  interest  considerations  apply   when
    assessing the reasonableness criteria in Section 117B(6).

22.   As  the  court  noted  even  when  applying  the  reasonableness  test
    advocated by the Secretary of State the fact that a child had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for seven years had to be given significant  weight.
    This is a factor highlighted by  the  judge  in  paragraph  17  of  his
    decision when he attached  "very  significant  weight"  to  the  second
    appellant's seven year residence in the United Kingdom.  It  is  to  be
    noted that paragraph 47 of the judgment in  MA  (Pakistan)  is  dealing
    with a narrow reasonableness test and in that context the court  stated
    that the conduct and immigration history of the parents  could  not  be
    taken into account.  The construction of the  reasonableness  test  the
    court adopted is made very clear in paragraph 87 of the judgment:

              "The appellants submit that the UT's consideration of  article
             8  contained  material  errors  of  law.   First,   the   UT's
             consideration of s. 117B(6) was unlawful. Once the  judge  was
             satisfied that the parents were not liable to deportation  and
             had a genuine  relationship  with  their  children,  the  only
             question was whether it would not be reasonable for the  child
             to leave the UK. The judge answered that question by  focusing
             on the conduct of  the  parents,  which  was  an  illegitimate
             approach. For reasons I have given above at some  length,  the
             judge was adopting the proper approach to  the  interpretation
             of the section when he  had  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the
             parents. If that is the right test then given  the  dishonesty
             of these appellants, the  decision  to  refuse  leave  to  the
             children was manifestly proportionate even though  it  was  in
             their best interests to remain in the  UK.  This  was  a  very
             careful  judgment  in  which   all   relevant   factors   were
             considered, and in my view the  judge  was  well  entitled  to
             strike the proportionality balance as he did."

23.  The judge took into  account  that  while  there  was  little  evidence
    before him  the  child's  removal  would  mean  the  severance  of  the
    relationship that she had developed with the  appellant's  partner  and
    the severance of relationships formed at school.  He had regard to  the
    disruption to her education and indeed all relevant circumstances.   He
    took into account that the first appellant was resourceful and that  on
    return the appellants would not be  exposed  to  hardship  such  as  to
    threaten the child's wellbeing.

24.  He had to weigh up the impact on the child and her best  interests  and
    the other matters referred  to  against  the  important  public  policy
    considerations bearing in mind the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
    MA.  He carried out his task conscientiously noting that the appeal was
    a difficult one.  As was said in paragraph 74 of MA  "It  may  be  that
    other judges  would  have  struck  the  balance  differently,  but  the
    question is whether this judge reached a conclusion which was not  open
    to him".  Just as in that case as the judge was required to have regard
    to the wider public interest in effective immigration control I do  not
    find that he materially erred in law.  I agree with the respondent that
    the grounds do no more  than  express  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    decision.  Although it was faintly argued at the hearing that the judge
    had misdirected himself in referring to economic wellbeing  of  the  UK
    the point did not feature in the grounds and I find no  material  error
    in law in what the judge stated. The judge had fully in mind the age of
    the child.

25.  The determination was not flawed by a  material  error  of  law  and  I
    direct that it shall stand.

     In relation to anonymity, as the decision involves a young child it  is
    appropriate to make an anonymity order in this case.







    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier judge made no fee award and I make none.






Signed                                  Date 5 July 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

