


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/01572/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 September 2017                       |On 12 October 2017               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        SHELLY-ANN PHELOMENA THOMPSON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Shafiullah, a Legal Representative from
Cleveland Law Ltd
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Although this case touches on the welfare of a child ("Z") I see  no
       basis for thinking, still less finding, that  there  is  a  risk  of
       publicity harming them and  I  do  not  make  an  order  restraining
       publication about this case.

    2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,
       hereinafter "the claimant" against the decision of the Secretary  of
       State refusing her leave to remain outside the Rules on human rights
       grounds.

    3. The claimant entered the United Kingdom in September 2009, lawfully,
       as a wife.  She left the United Kingdom for a short  period  between
       March and April 2010 and applied for permission  to  bring  her  son
       into the United Kingdom and she returned to the United Kingdom on 17
       June 2011 accompanied by her son who entered with permission.

    4. The appellant's permission to be in the United Kingdom and her son's
       permission to be in the United Kingdom expired on 18 November 2011.

    5. On 15 December 2012, that is  more  than  a  year  after  her  leave
       lapsed, she applied for leave to remain on "private and family life"
       grounds.   The  application  was  refused.   There  was  a   further
       application made in October 2014 which  was  also  refused.   On  13
       April 2015 she was  served  with  notification  of  a  liability  to
       removal and she served additional grounds under Section 120  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 arguing  that  she  was
       entitled to remain on human rights grounds. She particularly  relied
       on Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.   The
       application was refused on 20 May 2015 and it is the appeal  against
       that refusal that came before the First-tier Tribunal.

    6. The applicant's husband is a British citizen and  also  a  convicted
       criminal who has been sentenced to 76 months' imprisonment for drugs
       related offences.  I emphasise that this is not a deportation  case.
       As far as I am aware the claimant has no  criminal  convictions  and
       her husband is a British citizen.

    7. It is a feature of the case that although the claimant says that she
       maintained a relationship with her husband during his  incarceration
       she had only visited her husband in prison  on  one  occasion.   The
       claimant's husband had made a home visit once in August  2016.   Her
       child is not the natural child of her husband.   The  claimant  said
       that her child had some contact with his natural father but she  did
       not know his whereabouts.  At paragraph 45 the judge said:

  "Looking at the position today, the [claimant's] removal to Jamaica would
  not have a significant impact on the restricted family life she and Z are
  currently enjoying with Mr Martin.  They are not enjoying de facto family
  life  and  therefore  her  removal   would   not   change   the   current
  circumstances; there are no  reasons  why  telephone  contact  could  not
  continue to be maintained from Jamaica.  Although the [claimant]  is  not
  working at present and has no income, she still has family in Jamaica  to
  provide her with emotional support in the absence  of  her  husband.   In
  those circumstances, I am unable to find  as  at  today  that  there  are
  insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  outside  the  UK  in
  order to meet the exceptions of EX.1.(b)."

    8. The judge then went on to say the position would be  different  upon
       the  claimant's  husband  being  released  from  prison  which   was
       something she regarded as "imminent".  She did not  think  that  the
       claimant's husband could go  to  Jamaica.   There  was  no  evidence
       before her but she thought it:

  "highly unlikely that a British citizen with a criminal record for  drugs
  offences and having been sentenced to a lengthy term in prison  would  be
  permitted to enter Jamaica, whether as a visitor or to join his  Jamaican
  national spouse permanently."

    9. The judge found there would be insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
       life continuing outside the United Kingdom in those circumstances.

   10. She then considered the position outside the  Rules.   She  accepted
       that the claimant and her son had not deliberately overstayed.   The
       judge said:

  "The [claimant] should have realised, but did not,  that  she  needed  to
  apply for further leave both for herself and for Z, but I accept that her
  failure to apply was not deliberate and her intention was not  to  remain
  in the UK unlawfully."

   11. She found that on  this  alternative  basis  the  appeal  should  be
       allowed because of the impossibility of family  life  continuing  if
       she was in Jamaica.

   12.  The  judge  accepted  that  the  child  Z  did  not  have  a  close
       relationship with his natural father and that the claimant's husband
       was regarded as his "real father" in the sense that he was  the  man
       providing influence and support.  The judge was satisfied  that  Z's
       best interests lay in his remaining in the United Kingdom with  both
       parents.

   13. The decision to allow the appeal was challenged.

   14. Point seven of the Secretary of State's grounds is very critical  of
       the finding that the claimant did not  realise  that  her  visa  had
       expired.  I have reflected on this.  I too find it a very surprising
       decision.  However the judge had the advantage of listening  to  the
       evidence and however unlikely it might seem  it  is  not  impossible
       that a person did not appreciate that her  leave  had  lapsed.   The
       finding is not perverse and stands.

   15. The grounds also point out that the child  Z  has  had  very  little
       contact with his stepfather during his time in prison.  In effect he
       is in a single parent family.  These observations are correct but  I
       do not find them particularly helpful.  The judge clearly  took  the
       view that the claimant and her husband intend  to  reunite  and  the
       best interest is for the child to be with a  natural  mother  and  a
       committed stepfather.  There is  nothing  controversial  about  that
       finding.

   16. However the grounds identify two errors that cannot be answered.

   17. First, they point out that there is no evidence  before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal that the claimant's husband would be refused entry  to
       Jamaica.  Like the First-tier Tribunal Judge I would not be  in  the
       least bit surprised if he does in fact have difficulties but  it  is
       something that has to be proved and something that has to be  proved
       by the appellant.  I am aware that  there  are  occasions  when  the
       rules of evidence permit an assumption that the laws  of  a  foreign
       country are the same as the laws for the  United  Kingdom  but  that
       does not engage until it has been shown that  the  correct  position
       cannot be established.  I realise that the rules of evidence do  not
       apply in Tribunals but that does  not  obviate  the  need  to  prove
       matters that are capable of being proved. There is no need to  guess
       and this gap in the evidence could have been addressed,  ideally  by
       an opinion from someone learned in thein Jamaica. It may  well  have
       been a proposition which, supported  by  appropriate  evidence,  the
       Secretary of State could have been invited to admit.  The point  has
       just not been covered  and  the  judge  did  err  by  assuming  that
       something could have been proved but was not proved.

   18. The judge also  erred  in  finding  that  the  claimant's  husband's
       release was imminent and dealing with the case as  if  he  had  been
       released.  There was in fact only the sketchiest  of  evidence  that
       her husband's release was imminent.  It was an unsubstantiated claim
       made by the claimant for reasons that were not explained  well.   In
       any event the fact is the husband was in prison and  the  judge  was
       wrong to deal with the case as if he was at liberty.

   19. It follows  therefore  that  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  two
       irreparable errors in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  I  set
       it aside.  I must now decide how to proceed.  I see no  need  for  a
       further hearing.  The evidence relied on has been considered.

   20. It is perfectly clear to me that  the  claimant  and  her  son  have
       established significant  private  and  family  life  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  Setting aside a failure to secure leave they  appeared  to
       have lived respectably.  The claimant has worked and the  claimant's
       son has attended college.  There is some community  support  from  a
       friend showing that the claimant goes to church.

   21. All this is entirely sensible, credible evidence that  the  claimant
       and her son have established a "private  and  family  life"  in  the
       United Kingdom. However, these things developed at a time  when  she
       did not have permission to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  I  am
       required by statute to give them little weight.  It  is  also  clear
       that the claimant's son is not a "qualifying child" because  he  has
       not lived in the United Kingdom for long enough to gain that status.
       He was born in 2000 and has lived in the United Kingdom  since  June
       2011.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal had listed the neutral factors under Section
       117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   However
       once it is appreciated that the case cannot be decided on the  basis
       of what  might  happen  when  the  claimant's  husband  is  released
       whenever that might be, there is little in favour of  allowing  them
       to remain.  The fact that the claimant  did  not  realise  that  she
       needed further permission takes a little bit of the sting out of the
       need to show that people who defy immigration control do not  easily
       prosper but, as  the  First-tier  Judge  pointed  out,  it  was  the
       claimant's business to know when she needed further  leave  and  the
       only significance of this is that it makes  a  negative  point,  not
       quite as negative as it might otherwise be.  It is certainly  not  a
       reason to permit it to remain.  As far as the  claimant  herself  is
       concerned I see no basis whatsoever  on  which  her  appeal  can  be
       allowed responsibly.

   23.  Neither  do  I  find  the  situation  changed  materially  by   the
       considerations appropriate for her child.   No  particular  evidence
       was relied on about the disruptive effect that removal would have on
       him and as indicated above he has not lived in  the  United  Kingdom
       for long enough  to  attract  the  "seven  years'  protection.   His
       private life has been established while he has been  in  the  United
       Kingdom unlawfully and again it is not a weighty matter.

   24. The best solution is not possible here.  As far as the evidence goes
       the claimant's husband is not in position to re-establish a  nuclear
       family.  There are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  in  the  path  of
       establishing  themselves  in  Jamaica  and  immigration  control  is
       meaningless if it not enforced.

   25. None of this prevents the claimant and her son applying to return to
       the United Kingdom if and  when  the  claimant's  husband  is  in  a
       position to provide for  them  financially  and  once  his  personal
       circumstances are clear there may be merit in taking advice about  a
       further application even if he is not in work.

   26. However the evidence here supports only one conclusion and  that  is
       that the claim on human rights grounds should be dismissed.

Decision

I allow the  Secretary  of  State's  Appeal  and  I  substitute  a  decision
dismissing the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 12 October 2017               |
|Judge                                |                                     |

