
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01608/2015
                                                               IA/00985/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2016                   |On 2 November 2016                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                  A S & A O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves issues relating to the welfare of children. I find that it  is
appropriate to continue the order. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellants are granted anonymity. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their  family.  This  direction  applies  to  the  appellants  and  to   the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first and second appellants are husband and wife.  The  respondent
    made a deportation order under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007
    against the first appellant following his conviction for possession  of
    a passport with improper intention. The  appellant  was  stopped  while
    attempting to leave the UK with a passport that did not belong to  him.
    The respondent made associated decisions under section 3(5)(b)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 to deport  the  first  appellant's  wife  and  two
    children. The appellants appealed against the respondent's decision  to
    refuse  a  human  rights  claim  within  the  context  of   deportation
    proceedings.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Scott-Baker  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 01 December  2015.  The  appellants
    seek to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

       i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in  finding  that  the  appellant's
          son, who was in possession of a British passport at the  date  of
          the hearing, was not a British citizen.

      ii) The First-tier Tribunal made contradictory findings regarding the
          first appellant's knowledge of the fraud that led to  an  earlier
          revocation of Indefinite Leave  to  Remain,  which  rendered  her
          findings relating to Article 8 flawed.

Decision and reasons

3.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

4.    On behalf of the respondent, Ms Ahmad accepted that the judge did  not
    have jurisdiction to find that the appellant's son was  not  a  British
    citizen in circumstances where  he  was  in  possession  of  a  British
    passport at the date of the hearing although she  argued  that  it  was
    open to the judge to make findings calling into question whether he was
    entitled to a British passport. She submitted that the  error  was  not
    material but it is difficult to see how it could not have been material
    to a proper assessment of human rights issues when the  consequence  of
    holding a British passport  would  negate  the  respondent's  power  to
    deport the child. She was unable  to  tell  me  what  the  respondent's
    position had been before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.    At the date of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal further  evidence
    indicated that HM Passport Office revoked the child's British  passport
    on 08 January 2016. I have considered whether it would  be  appropriate
    for the Upper Tribunal to remake the  decision  based  on  the  current
    position,  whereby  the  child  no  longer  has  evidence  of   British
    citizenship, and it is therefore arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings of fact  could  still  stand.  However,  some  of  the
    appellant's  criticisms  regarding  apparently  contradictory  findings
    relating to the appellant's state of knowledge of the  ILR  fraud  have
    some force. At the very least it is somewhat unclear whether the  judge
    found that the appellant had knowledge of the fraud  or  not.  Although
    the issue is not likely to be determinative it  is  a  matter  that  is
    relevant to the weight to be given to public interest considerations. I
    am  also  told  that  there  have  been  further  developments  in  the
    appellants' factual circumstances. The  appellants  now  have  a  third
    child and want to raise compassionate circumstances surrounding one  of
    the other children. Bearing in mind the anxious scrutiny that  must  be
    given to human rights claims I am satisfied that it is  appropriate  to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

6.    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a
    point of law. The decision is set aside and remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing




Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
02 November 2016







