
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01320/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 13 September 2019                 |on 18 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               AKLAKUR RAHMAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors Ltd.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW HEARING AND REASONS

    1. On 21 June  2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Talbot  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal on human rights grounds. Permission to appeal  has
       been granted to the appellant.

Background

    2. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  21  December  1968,
       appealed on human rights  grounds  the  respondent's  decision  of  4
       January 2019 refusing an application dated 3 March 2018 for leave  to
       remain.
    3. There is also a previous determination of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Watson promulgated on 5 September 2016 which was  considered  by  the
       Judge on the Devaseelan principles.
    4. The Judge notes there  was  no  claim  in  relation  to  family  life
       pursuant to Appendix FM, the claim concerning  only  the  applicant's
       private life [18].
    5. The Judge finds no adequate reasons for departing from  the  findings
       of Judge Watson  subject  to  the  proviso  the  respondent  has  now
       accepted the appellant's continuous residence since July  2005  which
       the Judge finds does not amount  to  20  years  continuous  residence
       prior to the application; leading to it being concluded the appellant
       could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the
       Immigration Rules. [20].
    6. The Judge did not find very significant obstacles to the  appellant's
       integration into Bangladesh.
    7. In relation to article 8 outside the Rules the Judge writes at [23]:

           "23.   I accept that the Appellant  has  established  a  private
                life in the UK, having lived here  continuously  since  July
                2005. However, I take into account the provisions of Section
                117B the 2002 Act. I note that the Appellant does not appear
                to have acquired a knowledge of English to  any  extent  and
                that all of the Appellants residence  in  the  UK  has  been
                unlawful and therefore little weight is to  be  attached  to
                it. I accept that it may be challenging for the Appellant to
                re-establish his  life  in  Bangladesh  after  such  a  long
                absence but he has a native knowledge of  the  language  and
                culture and is likely to have family members there  who  may
                be able to offer  some  assistance.  He  has  also  acquired
                skills in the UK which may serve him on his return.  In  any
                event  on  the  evidence  currently  before  me,  I  am  not
                satisfied   that   there   are    sufficiently    compelling
                circumstances as to justify a grant  of  leave  outside  the
                ambit of the Immigration  Rules  or  that  the  Respondent's
                decision is not proportionate as against the public interest
                in the maintenance of effective immigration control."

    8. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the  Judge  erred
       in the treatment of the evidence of continuous residence as follows:

           "3.    The FTT erred in finding that:


                 a) Despite there being two earlier judgements,  the  SSHD's
                    subsequent acceptance that A was in the UK in  1999  and
                    2001 does not show continuous residence from those dates
                    to 2005 (when it was  accepted  he  was  resident  from)
                    [paragraph 19 of judgment]. A's  evidence  was  that  he
                    could not have left  the  UK  and  returned  after  1999
                    because he has no travel documents, nor money to do  so.
                    The evidence was detailed and consistent with  knowledge
                    of immigration control. It is not possible to leave  the
                    UK legally  without  a  travel  document,  nor  re-enter
                    without one. If A did not have one, then he  would  need
                    to pay money to get one, which he did not have.  The FTT
                    was obliged to provide cogent reasons for rejecting this
                    evidence.  It erred in  not doing so. Further,  the  FTT
                    dismisses A's witness statement, Mr Mohammed Choudhury's
                    evidence, because it was very brief and not supported by
                    supporting documentation [paragraph 19]. Evidence is not
                    required to be of a  certain  length  and  supported  by
                    documents. This evidence was not before previous  judges
                    and therefore the FTT  was  obliged  to  provide  cogent
                    reasons why, despite being  short  and  unsupported,  it
                    should not be accepted.


                 b) If the evidence of continuous  residence  from  December
                    1999   was   accepted,   A   would   satisfy   Paragraph
                    276ADE(1)(iii) (20 years  long  residence)  in  December
                    2019. This is a Rule which  recognises  that  continuous
                    unlawful presence in the UK  can  found  a  claim  under
                    Article 8 (private life) and that 20 years provides  the
                    proper balance.  Therefore, this length of  time  cannot
                    be given little weight under section 117B.  The decision
                    of the 4.1.19 may stop the clock, but it remains a  case
                    where a compelling factor may make A's claim exceptional
                    under  Article  8.  There  is  therefore  no  subsequent
                    consideration of the significant  delay  in  considering
                    A's claim in the balancing exercise as recorded in  para
                    2(d) above, where it is recognised that delay can  be  a
                    compelling factor (see EB (Kosovo) v SSHD). If the claim
                    had been considered properly, there is no reason why  it
                    could not be allowed on this basis.

    9. Permission to appeal was granted  by  another  judge  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal on the basis the grounds disclosed arguable errors of law.

Error of law

   10. Judge Watson in a decision promulgated on the  5  September  2016  at
       [36] found:

           "36.   I find that the appellant has not shown residence in  the
                UK prior to 2007. It follows that he is not shown  residence
                of 14 years under the Rules as at the date of application in
                2009, nor has he shown 20 years under the new Rules. I  have
                taken into account the letter referred  to  by  Judge  Munro
                regarding a 2006 NHS appointment, but as the  appellant  had
                denied having any medical treatment at the  2008  hearing  I
                find that it cannot show on the balance of probabilities any
                residence in 2006. The Judge found it unreliable along  with
                the other documents provided."

   11. At [19] of Judge Talbot's decision reference is  made  to  the  above
       finding and the fact Judge Watson found inconsistencies  in  relation
       to both the oral and documentary evidence before  him.  Judge  Talbot
       also notes  it  appears  that  before  more  than  one  Tribunal  the
       appellant sought to rely upon documents purportedly corroborating his
       presence in the United Kingdom and activities which  subsequent  oral
       evidence had shown to  be  unreliable.  This  creates  understandable
       suspicion or concern  in  the  decision-maker's  mind  regarding  the
       reliability of the evidence being relied upon in an appeal.
   12. The Judge noted the respondent accepted that the appellant  had  been
       in the UK in December 1999 and between June and  December  2001.  The
       appellant claimed in his oral evidence to have been in the  UK  since
       31 December 1991 [11]. 20 years from which will be met on 31 December
       2019.
   13. The Grounds repeat the assertion the Judge should have  accepted  the
       appellants claim to have lived in UK for the requisite 20-year period
       for the reason stated. This argument was advanced at the hearing  and
       considered and not found to be determinative by the Judge.
   14. The claim the appellant could not have left  the  UK  as  he  had  no
       travel documents nor money to secure the same was not established  by
       evidence. The appellant claimed to be working during the time he  has
       been in  the  UK  illegally  and  so  would  have  access  to  funds.
       Similarly, Judge Watson noted documents  relied  upon  in  the  claim
       before him to have  been  forged/fabricated.  The  assertion  in  the
       grounds that it is not possible to leave the  UK  legally  without  a
       travel document and or to re-enter without one, is correct  in  terms
       of  legal  entry  and  exit,  but  entry  by  illegal   migrants   is
       surprisingly common and on the whole does not involve legally  issued
       travel documents.
   15. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter  for  the  Judge.
       It has not been shown the weight  given  is  arguably  irrational  or
       unreasonable. The Judge noted  the  evidence  of  Mr  Choudhury  [19]
       having had the benefit of seeing  and  hearing  such  evidence  being
       given. The comment such evidence  was  brief  and  not  supported  by
       documentation is a factual assessment that has not been shown not  to
       be available to the Judge. The Judge did not consider the evidence to
       warrant the weight the appellant claims should have  been  attributed
       to it.
   16. Having assessed this and  the  other  available  evidence  the  Judge
       writes at [20]:

           "20.   After careful consideration of all  the  evidence  before
                me, I can see no adequate  reason  for  departing  from  the
                findings of Judge Watson subject to  the  proviso  that  the
                Respondent  has  now  accepted  the  Appellants   continuous
                residence since July 2005. This does not amount to 20  years
                continuous residence prior to his application and I conclude
                that the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph
                276ADE(1)(iii)."

   17. It has not been shown this is not a finding open to  the  Judge  when
       giving the  weight  the  Judge  considered  appropriate  in  all  the
       circumstances to the evidence.
   18. In relation to weight to be given to duration of residence  as  found
       by the Judge, everyone who, not being a UK citizen, is present in the
       UK and who has leave to reside here other than to do so  indefinitely
       has a precarious immigration  status  for  the  purposes  of  section
       117B(5). It is also  the  case  that  the  concept  of  a  precarious
       immigration  status  under  section  117B(5)  did  not  include   the
       situation of a person present in the UK unlawfully.   In  subsections
       (4) and (5) of section 117B Parliament has drawn a clear  distinction
       between  unlawful  presence  and  a  precarious  immigration  status.
       Section 117B (4) and (5) of 2002 Act state:

           '(4)   Little weight should be given to-


                (a)    a private life, or


                (b)    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


           that is established by a person at a time when the person is in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.


           (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
           established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration
           status is precarious.'

   19.  In  Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part   5A   -   compelling
       circumstances test) [2017]  UKUT  13  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
       Parliamentary intention underlying Part 5A of NIAA 2002  is  to  give
       proper effect to Article 8 ECHR. Thus a  private  life  developed  or
       established during periods of unlawful or precarious residence  might
       conceivably qualify to be accorded more than little weight and s 117B
       (4) and (5) are to be construed and applied accordingly.
   20. In Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803 it was held that Section  117A(2)(a),
       when  read  in  conjunction  with  section  117B(5),  indicated  that
       although courts should have regard to the consideration  that  little
       weight should be given to private life established  when  immigration
       status was precarious, it was possible to override such  guidance  in
       exceptional cases where the private life had a special and compelling
       character. Such an interpretation was necessary  to  prevent  section
       117B(5) from being applied incompatibly with Article 8. This part  of
       the Court of Appeal's decision was approved by the Supreme  Court  in
       Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58
   21. In Kaur (children's  best  interests  /  public  interest  interface)
       [2017] UKUT 14 (IAC)it was held that the "little  weight"  provisions
       in Part 5A  of  the  2002  Act  do  not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid
       measurement or concept; "little weight" involves  a  spectrum  which,
       within its self-contained boundaries, will result in the  measurement
       of the quantum of weight considered appropriate in the fact sensitive
       context of every case.
   22. In this appeal the Judge finds there is nothing  special  and/or  any
       compelling characteristics in the appellant's private life sufficient
       to warrant other than little weight being attached to it. No arguable
       legal error is made out in relation to this finding.
   23. The  Judge's  finding  that  there  are  no  sufficiently  compelling
       circumstances to warrant a grant of leave under the Immigration Rules
       or sufficient to override the  public  interest  in  the  appellant's
       removal from the United Kingdom has not been shown to  be  a  finding
       infected by arguable legal error. The Judge was  entitled  to  attach
       the weight given to the  evidence  and  to  approach  the  same  with
       caution especially in light of there being two occasions in which  it
       has been found that evidence relied upon  by  the  appellant  is  not
       reliable.

Decision

   24. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand

  Anonymity.


   25. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 13 September 2019
