
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/01123/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 19 October 2017                        |     On 08 November 2017          |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                            Mr james thomas goode
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Malone promulgated on  7  February  2017  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    refuse him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  to  refuse  his
    human rights claim.  The appellant's case  is  that  he  did  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM  and  Appendix  FM-SE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Further, he submits  that  he  ought  to  have  benefited  from
    paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules; or, in the alternative,  that
    his removal would be  contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 2. In this case I am satisfied from the witness statement from Mr  Richard
    Bartram, the solicitor who represented the appellant before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that Judge Malone had at the  hearing  indicated  orally
    that he was going to allow the appeal following  a  discussion  between
    the representatives of  the  Home  Office  and  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing.

 3. The  case  revolves  around  primarily  two  sets  of  documents.   The
    appellant says that he did submit sufficient bank  statements  to  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM-SE he does however accept that  he  did
    not supply a full set of payslips.  The Secretary  of  State  concluded
    that the bank statements did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM-
    SE in calculating  the  resources  available  as  the  bank  statements
    related to fixed term accounts.  The judge was satisfied and I consider
    this finding ought to be preserved that the funds were in  fact  freely
    available if the holder of the  account  was  prepared  to  forego  any
    interest and on that basis ought to have been taken into account in the
    calculation of resources available.  It was also accepted that  certain
    payslips out of a sequence have not been provided.

 4. I am satisfied that the judge erred in law for two reasons.  First,  in
    announcing at the hearing as a result of preliminary  discussions  that
    he would be allowing  the  appeal,  he  permitted  a  procedural  error
    whereby both parties were deprived from properly putting forward  their
    cases, specifically in the case of  the  applicant  preventing  a  full
    examination of all issues relating to Article 8.  In  the  alternative,
    the judge erred in that in producing a written decision he  had  failed
    properly to record the decision he had  in  fact  made  which  was  the
    appeal was to be allowed.   On  either  view  a  procedural  error  was
    committed and I am satisfied that in all the circumstances  given  that
    unfortunately a full consideration of all the Article  8  issues  would
    need to be conducted, that the matter must be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. As the finding that the bank statements recording funds held  in  fixed
    terms accounts ought to have  been  taken  into  account  in  assessing
    resources available under Appendix FM-SE and Appendix FM was a  correct
    decision, it will be for a fresh First-tier Tribunal  to  consider  the
    impact of that on  paragraph  245AA  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    difficulty is that given the current appeals regime it is not  possible
    properly to  address  the  simple  issue  of  whether  there  has  been
    compliance with the Immigration Rules or not it being apparent that  if
    as appears to be accepted  between  the  parties  the  only  thing  now
    missing are a number of payslips out of a sequence.

 6. This is precisely the kind of case that ought to have  been  considered
    under paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules.   Nonetheless  and  not
    without a considerable degree of reluctance I consider  that  the  only
    course of action that I can properly take is to remit the  decision  to
    the First-tier Tribunal with the  finding  as  to  financial  resources
    being preserved.  I would however hope that given  the  narrow  dispute
    which now exists between the parties that this matter could be resolved
    without the need for a further hearing.




SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision.
    The finding that the requirements of Appendix FM-SE were met in respect
    of the bank statements is preserved.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date:  6 November 2017

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul






