

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/01342/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 December 2019                      |On 20 December 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           MS CARMEN DASILVA BELL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms M Butler (instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a decision of Judge Carroll  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    promulgated on 9 August 2019 in which he allowed the appeal.

 2. For the sake of continuity and clarity I shall continue to refer to  Ms
    Bell as the appellant and to the Secretary of State as  the  respondent
    in this judgment.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 3. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted assert that the
    judge failed to adequately reason findings on material  matters/made  a
    material misdirection of law/irrational findings.  In  particular,  the
    grounds state that the judge found the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration  Rules  in  that  there  were  no  very
    significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  to  Jamaica.  He  found  the
    relationship between the appellant and her  daughter  went  beyond  the
    normal emotional ties between parents and adult siblings on  the  facts
    of the case and, following that finding  the  judge  concluded,  whilst
    accepting that little weight should be placed on private life  that  is
    established  when  a  person's  immigration  status  is  precarious  or
    unlawful,  that  the  facts  of   this   case   displayed   exceptional
    circumstances that gave rise to a disproportionate breach of article  8
    of the ECHR.

 4. The grounds note  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that  both  the
    appellant and her daughter were without credibility in numerous aspects
    of their evidence and that the Judge  appeared  to  reject  the  expert
    evidence that asserted a significant suicide risk. It is said that  the
    judge gave no indication of  acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  latest
    independent social worker's report that asserted a catastrophic  effect
    on the appellant's daughter  and  granddaughters  but  does  appear  to
    reject this when upholding the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aujla in 2015.

 5. It is submitted that the judge gave  no  clear  reasoning  why  he  had
    departed from the  decision  of  Judge  Aujla,  who  had  rejected  the
    Kugathas test and which Judge Carroll Tribunal helpfully set out in the
    decision. Judge Aujla had found that the sponsor, her daughter, and her
    children would be able to visit the appellant on her return to Jamaica.
    It is said to be unclear from the decision what  factors  had  altered,
    given the findings under the  Immigration  Rule,  to  reveal  emotional
    dependency beyond normal  emotional  ties  between  parents  and  adult
    children or what exceptional circumstances now revealed themselves post
    the 2015 decision.

 6. It is then said that, given the lack of adequate reasoning  as  to  why
    Judge Carroll felt able to depart from the 2015 decision, the  apparent
    rejection of the  expert  evidence  and  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the sponsor and appellant,  the  conclusion  that  this  appeal
    succeeds outside of the Rules under exceptionality are irrational.

Appeal Background and Claim

 7. The appellant in this case was born in November 1954 and is a  national
    of  Jamaica.  She  is  thus  now  aged  65  years.  She  had   applied,
    unsuccessfully, for leave to remain in the UK on human rights  grounds.
    The date of decision was 4 January 2019.

 8. The appellant had visited the UK 7 times  between  1991  and  2003.  In
    January 2003 she entered the UK, again with a visit visa,  valid  until
    June 2003.  On this occasion she remained without  leave.  She  applied
    for leave to remain outside  the  Rules  in  October  2008,  which  was
    refused, without a right of appeal, in September 2009.

 9. In December 2012 the appellant made a further application for leave  to
    remain, which was again refused, without a right of appeal, in December
    2013.

10. In March 2014 the  appellant  made  an  application  for  a  derivative
    residence card which was refused in April 2014. The appellant  appealed
    against that decision and it was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Aujla in October 2015. Permission to appeal that decision  was  refused
    and the appellant became appeal rights exhausted in November 2015.

11. In May 2017 the appellant made  a  further  application  for  leave  to
    remain, which gave rise to the decision currently under appeal.

12. In his judgment Judge Carroll set out the submissions made  in  support
    of the application, by the appellant's representative, at paragraph 7.

13. It was asserted that the appellant was an extremely vulnerable, elderly
    woman who had experienced a  history  of  traumatic  events,  including
    prolonged, extreme domestic violence throughout her life. It  was  said
    that she came from a very disadvantaged background in Jamaica; that she
    had left school at a very  young  age  to  work;  that  she  was  often
    destitute without a fixed abode having to prostitute  herself  to  find
    food and shelter.

14. It was said that she had three daughters from three  different  men  in
    Jamaica one born in 1972 one born in 1973 (J, the current sponsor)  and
    a third born in 1984.

15. The appellant has no contact with the eldest child and  does  not  know
    her whereabouts. The younger two are both in the UK and very  close  to
    her. The appellant has been living with her middle daughter, J and  her
    two daughters since 2003.

16. It is  then  said  that,  while  in  Jamaica,  the  appellant  suffered
    prolonged  and  severe  domestic  violence  and  abuse  from  different
    partners, including being burnt with hot water, being brutally  beaten,
    being pushed into glass doors, having  bricks  shoved  over  her  head,
    being kicked in her stomach and  that,  as  a  result  of  the  extreme
    violence she had inflicted upon her, she suffered three miscarriages at
    various points.

17. It is said that, because of the extreme violence and abuse that she was
    subjected to, the appellant was unable to raise her daughters. She  had
    married her last partner and moved in with him and his mother and for a
    short time her youngest daughter lived with them.  Because she was  ill
    treated by her husband  the  appellant  moved  out.  Her  husband  also
    sexually molested J on the only occasion she went to stay at their home
    briefly to escape her own father's violence.

18. As a result of the violence from her husband,  the  appellant  reported
    him to the police and left the house. She lived with her  mother-in-law
    and sold fruit on the street to survive. When her  mother-in-law  died,
    the appellant moved in with a female pastor and she took  her  youngest
    child, C, to stay with her. Then from  around  1991  a  friend  started
    inviting her to the UK and she travelled on several occasions to the UK
    between 1991 and 2003, always returning to Jamaica within the  currency
    of her visa.

19. During this time her youngest daughter, C, came to the UK as a  visitor
    and remained.

20. Around 1998 it was said that the appellant regained contact with J, who
    had moved to the UK as a teenager. J had suffered severe abuse from her
    own father in Jamaica and was forced to flee the house because  of  the
    violence.  She came to the UK with her stepmother  who  had  also  been
    abused by him.

21. The appellant and her daughter started to  rebuild  their  relationship
    and in 2001, when the appellant came to the UK, she saw J a  few  times
    and babysat for her  granddaughter,  born  in  May  1999.  They  became
    closer.

22. J was herself in an abusive relationship at the time.  In 2004 she gave
    birth to her second daughter. Although suffering domestic violence from
    her partner and wanting to leave, she did not as she felt she could not
    cope on her own without support and with two young children.

23. Because she did not want her  daughter  to  continue  suffering  in  an
    abusive relationship, the appellant came to the UK to help her get  out
    of the relationship and to help look after the children so that J could
    keep her job and study and improve her life.  It was  for  this  reason
    that she remained in the UK, having travelled here in January 2003. She
    has lived with daughter J and the two children since that time.  It  is
    said that she  took  an  active  part  in  the  children's  upbringing,
    providing care on a daily basis.

24. It is said that the children had psychological issues as  a  result  of
    their father's abusive behaviour towards  their  mother  and  had  been
    bullied at school. J herself had been deeply affected by the abuse both
    from her father, paternal aunt and  grandmother  and  by  the  domestic
    violence  from  her  former  partner  such  that   she   is   attending
    psychotherapeutic counselling.

25. Although referred for counselling, the appellant had never taken up any
    therapeutic treatment and was referred by her  representatives  to  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation where she attends twice-weekly sessions.

26. It was said that the  appellant  suffers  from  suicidal  thoughts  and
    moments of extreme depression and  anxiety.  Having  been  involved  in
    raising her grandchildren since 2003, she has developed a  strong  bond
    with them.

27. It is said that the appellant's mental health problems are worsened  by
    the instability of her legal status and if returned to  Jamaica,  where
    she has no ties, no accommodation, no family, no support network and no
    hope of receiving proper care for her diabetes, high blood pressure and
    psychological problems.

The Reasons for the Refusal

28. The judge then set out, in brief, the reasons for refusal, namely  that
    the appellant had lived in Jamaica until she was 48 years of age,  that
    no mental health  issues  had  been  raised  in  any  of  her  previous
    applications and that there were a number  of  inconsistencies  in  her
    evidence. The  Secretary  of  State  also  noted  that  the  medication
    prescribed for the appellant is available  in  Jamaica  where  she  can
    continue to receive financial support from friends and  family  in  the
    UK.

29. It is recorded that at the hearing the appellant and her witnesses were
    treated as vulnerable witnesses.

The Expert Evidence

30. The judge then set out the psychiatric evidence prepared  by  Professor
    Katona and contained in  the  appellant's  bundle.  In  his  report  he
    recorded that her  clinical  score  was  indicative  of  severe  mental
    distress and that she had moderate depressive  symptoms.  He  diagnosed
    PTSD, which in his opinion, was caused by repeated domestic abuse  that
    she had experienced over many  years  in  Jamaica,  together  with  her
    ongoing immigration uncertainty. He concluded  that  she  would  be  at
    significant risk of suicide in the UK if she lost  all  hope  of  being
    allowed to remain. That report was dated  April  2017.   There  was  an
    updated report by Professor Katona, also contained in  the  appellant's
    bundle. He concluded in that, that an enforced return to Jamaica  would
    be emotionally devastating and result in significant worsening  of  her
    already severe PTSD and  depressive  symptoms  and  the  frequency  and
    intensity of  her  associated  panic  attacks.  He  said  that  without
    support, in  the  context  of  worsening  PTSD,  depressive  and  panic
    symptoms, the appellant would be unable to work and support herself and
    unable to secure her basic needs such  as  food  or  accommodation.  He
    stated that homelessness and destitution  would  result  in  a  vicious
    cycle of mental deterioration. He  also  opined  that  the  appellant's
    suicide risk would be increased and was significant and that she  would
    be at high risk of suicide during the removal process and once back  in
    Jamaica.

31. The judge then referred to an independent social worker's report  dated
    March 2017 which opined that if the appellant were  to  be  removed  to
    Jamaica it would have a catastrophic effect on  the  relationship  with
    her daughter  J,  with  whom  she  had  built  a  loving  and  mutually
    supportive relationship. She  also  opined  that  the  removal  of  the
    appellant from the family would put the granddaughters at some risk  of
    impairment of their mental health and development  such  as  to  affect
    their education and future lives.

The 2015 Judgment of Judge Aujla

32. The judge then went on to set out the relevant findings of Judge  Aujla
    in his determination from 2015.

33.  The  paragraphs  recited  find  that  although  no  doubt  helping  in
    performing certain tasks in relation to the two children, the appellant
    was not their primary carer.  Their primary carer was their mother.

34. Judge Aujla rejected the assertion that the Secretary of State had  not
    complied with her duty under section  55  and  found  that  whilst  the
    appellant's granddaughters would miss their  grandmother  if  she  were
    removed, since she had lived with them  for  12  years,  her  departure
    would not in any event jeopardise their  welfare,  well-being  or  best
    interests. He noted that  the  option  of  visiting  the  appellant  in
    Jamaica with their mother was always open to  the  children  so  as  to
    maintain the bond between them.

35. With reference to article 8, Judge Aujla considered  the  matter  under
    Appendix  FM  and  found  that  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy   the
    requirements. She did not have an established family life in the United
    Kingdom either as a partner or as a parent and did not  qualify  as  an
    adult dependent relative  as  she  had  not  entered  the  UK  in  that
    capacity.

36. Judge Aujla did not consider there to be exceptional  circumstance  for
    article 8 to be considered outside the Immigration Rules. In any event,
    he found that even if he were to do that, he would find  that  she  did
    not have a non-emotional dependency on her sponsor and that any  family
    life she had was established while in the  UK  illegally  and  applying
    section 117B of the 2002 Act he found her removal to be proportionate.

37. Judge Aujla also considered the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE  and
    noted that she had not resided in the UK for 20 years and had spent the
    first 49 years of her life in Jamaica, where she was familiar with  the
    culture. He found there to be no evidence  to  demonstrate  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to her integration into Jamaica  on
    return.

Judge Carroll's Findings

38. Judge Carroll then went on to his assessment of the appellant's case as
    put before him.

39. The first thing he said was that there were significant aspects of  the
    evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  her   daughter   which   were
    characterised  by  evasiveness;  in  particular,  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's employment in the United Kingdom. She had said in her  oral
    evidence that she had worked for "cash in hand" but had  stopped  doing
    that a long time ago. The judge noted however, that according to the GP
    records in the appellant's bundle, she had been issued with a "not  fit
    for work" document  in  August  2018,  which  he  found  would  not  be
    necessary for cash in hand employment. He also noted the GP  notes,  in
    July 2015, recorded that she had a stress-related problem and that  she
    was a school cook. He also noted that the  appellant  was  recorded  as
    saying that she had been working for 12 years.

40. Judge Carroll then referred to  a  2012  Haringey  Mental  Health  Team
    report where the appellant is recorded as having left secondary  school
    at age 16 with a  certificate  in  cooking  and  having  furthered  her
    education in NVQ 2 in Customer Care and IG Health and Safety in the UK.
    That evidence, the judge noted, to  be  wholly  inconsistent  with  the
    Helen Bamber Report which claimed that the appellant  had  left  school
    without qualifications and had taken no exams.   It  also  contradicted
    the appellant's statement where she claimed to have often missed school
    and stayed at home and that she had not even managed to finish  primary
    school.

41. The judge then went  on  to  note  that  the  2015  application  for  a
    derivative residence card was based on  her  claimed  role  as  primary
    carer for her grandchildren.  Judge  Carroll  found,  in  view  of  the
    evidence that he had previously referred to, that given the appellant's
    long-term employment as a school cook she could not, even allowing  for
    school hours, have had available to her the amount of  time  needed  to
    care for her granddaughters to the extent  that  she  claimed  to  have
    done. He also noted that the evidence of her long-term  employment  had
    implications in the context of her credibility and in  the  context  of
    her claimed mental health difficulties. Her employment, he  found,  was
    evidence of fundamental importance as to her ability to function.

42. He noted that the appellant had been asked whether she had used a false
    identity to work and, while she had initially claimed not to understand
    the question, she then said she had worked in her own  name  but  later
    that she had worked in somebody else's name and that she did not have a
    national insurance number.

43. The judge then noted that the appellant's daughter's  evidence,  as  to
    what her mother had  be  doing  in  the  UK,  was  equally  lacking  in
    credibility. When she was asked how long her  mother  had  worked,  she
    said that it had not  been  for  long  and  then  that  she  could  not
    remember. She said that her  mother  had  worked  cash  in  hand  as  a
    cleaner. When she was asked whether she knew which  school  her  mother
    had worked in, she said she had not been really focusing  on  that  and
    she did not know. The judge noted that the appellant and  her  daughter
    claimed to be exceptionally close and  it  "beggars  belief"  that  her
    daughter would not know where her mother had been working for a  period
    of many years.

44. The judge then went on to refer to the letter of 7 June 2017  from  the
    Helen Bamber Foundation, contained in  the  appellant's  bundle,  which
    refers to the appellant having been offered 26 sessions  of  "narrative
    exposure therapy" but that she attended only 17  of  those.  The  judge
    found that to be a low attendance rate for a person  claiming  to  have
    significant mental health issues for which therapy  and  treatment  are
    required.

45. The judge then referred to Professor Katona's  more  recent  report  of
    July 2019, where he had recorded that the appellant had told  him  that
    in January 2019 she had felt like drowning herself and had  filled  the
    bath with cold water and got into it, intending to drown  herself,  but
    had then fallen asleep.  She had said that  one  of  her  grandchildren
    come into the bathroom and found her.  The  judge  found  that  it  was
    inherently implausible that the appellant would have fallen asleep in a
    bath of cold water on a January day and further,  that  a  letter  from
    Barnet, Enfield and Haringey Mental Health Trust  from  September  2016
    records the appellant giving a similar  account  of  such  an  incident
    having occurred in 2015 when it was her daughter  who  found  her.  The
    judge also noted that nowhere in the daughter's witness  statement  was
    any such incident mentioned.

46. The judge noted that  the  pattern  of  very  frequent  travel  by  the
    appellant between Jamaica and the UK  between  1991  in  2003  did  not
    suggest a traumatised individual who feared  return  to  her  place  of
    birth.

47. Notwithstanding those negative findings, the judge then went on to  say
    that he was nevertheless satisfied as to her account of how she had re-
    established a relationship with her daughter which had been severed  by
    her daughter's departure from Jamaica in 1990.

48. The judge was also satisfied that  the  two  had  established  a  close
    relationship by having lived together  in  the  UK  for  a  significant
    period. In relation to her grandchildren however the judge  noted  that
    the eldest was over 18 and away at university  and  the  younger  would
    shortly be 18. He did not doubt their affection for  their  grandmother
    but one of them was already living an independent adult life and  there
    was no evidence to show that the younger one would not shortly be doing
    the same. He found the evidence did not cause him to  depart  from  the
    findings made by Judge Aujla in 2015  that  the  appellant's  departure
    from the UK would not  jeopardise  the  welfare,  well-being  and  best
    interests of the grandchildren, who in any event  have  the  option  to
    visit her in Jamaica.

49. The judge then went on to say that it was the appellant's case that she
    no longer had any friends or family members in Jamaica.  He  then  said
    that it is apparent from  the  preceding  paragraph  that  he  was  not
    satisfied as the appellant's credibility on very significant aspects of
    her evidence. He  noted  that  she  failed  to  mention  anywhere,  the
    existence of a daughter  living  in  Canada  as  was  claimed  in  oral
    evidence. There was no explanation for the failure of the appellant  to
    mention the existence of that child and her failure to do so,  together
    with the inherent implausibility of there being not a single family  or
    social connection in Jamaica led him to doubt the  credibility  of  her
    evidence in that context. He said that he  did  not  underestimate  the
    difficulties she would face on relocating to Jamaica  but,  as  he  had
    noted above, she had travelled frequently to that country between  1991
    and 2003.  She lived in Jamaica for 48 years and he found the  evidence
    fell short of demonstrating there would be very  significant  obstacles
    to her integration if required to leave the UK.

50. The judge therefore concluded that the appellant did  not  satisfy  the
    provisions of paragraph 276 ADE.

51. The judge then went on to note the appellant's poor immigration history
    but also noted that she had re-established  an  important  relationship
    with her daughter and that they had provided  each  other  with  great,
    mutual, emotional support made necessary,  in  part,  by  J's  problems
    caused by an abusive relationship. He accepted that having been in  the
    UK since 2003, all of the appellant's meaningful connections  were  now
    in the UK, primarily with her daughter, but also with friends  and  the
    church. He expressed himself  satisfied  that  the  facts  demonstrated
    elements of emotional dependency between her  and  her  daughter  which
    went beyond the normal emotional ties that exist between a  parent  and
    adult child.

52. Following from that the judge found the appellant to enjoy  family  and
    private life in the UK sufficient to engage  article  8  and  that  the
    decision to  remove  her  would  interfere  with  both.  He  found  the
    interference to be accordance with the law and then went on to consider
    whether the interference was necessary and proportionate.

53. The judge then reminded himself of the requirement to take into account
    section 117B of the 2002 Act which provides that little  weight  should
    be given to a private life established by a person at a time when their
    immigration status is precarious or unlawful, as the appellant has been
    since her arrival in 2003. He then went on  to  say  that  it  is  well
    established that, in the case of non-settled migrants, it  is  only  in
    exceptional circumstances that the decision to remove would  give  rise
    to a breach of article 8. In the light of all the evidence to which  he
    had referred above, he expressed  himself  satisfied  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances and found  that  the  decision  under  appeal
    gives rise to a disproportionate breach of article 8.

My Findings

54. I have no hesitation in finding that the judge's reasoning for allowing
    the appeal outside the Immigration Rules, under article 8 of the  ECHR,
    given his previous numerous negative findings are inadequate, bordering
    on the irrational. It is  well-established  that  where  the  appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of either paragraph 276 ADE or Appendix FM
    there must be compelling reasons to consider the matter under article 8
    outside the Rules and certainly to allow them  for  that  reason.   The
    Judge simply  gave  no  adequate  reason  as  to  what  the  compelling
    circumstances in this case were.  All of his  findings  were  that  the
    appellant's position was not as claimed  by  her  but  then  found  her
    removal disproportionate.

55. I therefore indicated that for those reasons I was going to  set  aside
    the decision to allow the appeal under article 8 outside the Rules  but
    I was not going to  set  aside  any  of  the  judges  previous  adverse
    findings in  relation  to  which  there  had  been  no  challenge.  The
    appellant had not filed a rule 24  response  and  those  findings  were
    fully reasoned and based on the evidence.

56. I indicated that I would redecide the appeal on  submissions,  all  the
    evidence having previously been  given,  and  the  matter  fell  to  be
    decided on the narrow issue of whether the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    under article 8 outside the Rules. I allowed Ms Butler time to  prepare
    her submissions and the hearing was resumed later in the day.

57. In her submissions Ms Butler relied on the very close relationship  the
    judge had found between the appellant and her daughter and that she had
    lived  for  a  very  significant  period  with  her  daughter  and  her
    granddaughters, albeit one grandchild had left home and the  other  was
    soon  going  to.  She  relied  upon  the  judge's  finding   that   the
    relationship was important  and  that  they  provided  great  emotional
    support to each other and  the  fact  that  the  judge  had  found  all
    meaningful connections were now  in  the  UK  with  her  daughter,  her
    friends and the church.

58. She then submitted that the judge had  not  rejected  the  evidence  of
    either Professor Katona or the independent social worker  and  that  it
    was clear that the appellant's mental state indicated a very real  risk
    of suicide. She argued that her mental stability, and her physical  and
    moral integrity could not be preserved if she returned to Jamaica.  She
    argued that the psychiatric evidence, the lack of  meaningful  ties  to
    Jamaica, the age of the appellant, that she  had  been  the  victim  of
    extreme protracted domestic violence taken together with the  objective
    evidence regarding the situation  for  women  in  Jamaica  amounted  to
    compelling circumstances to justify allowing the appeal.

59. On the Secretary of State's behalf Mr  Avery  relied  on  the  original
    decision and argued that it was clear from the content of the  judgment
    that Judge Carroll had rejected  the  medical  evidence.   The  various
    observations made by the  judge  undermined  the  conclusions  in  that
    medical evidence; in particular his findings that there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to integration. That was  the  basis  upon  which
    article 8 should be considered. Whilst there is family life between the
    appellant and her daughter, the fact remains that the appellant  has  a
    very poor immigration history and taken in the round with  the  adverse
    findings, there was nothing exceptional about this case to override the
    public interest in of immigration control.

60. I find that the judge did reject the medical evidence as to the gravity
    of the  appellant's  mental  state.  It  is  clear  from  his  numerous
    findings, that I have set out above, that the appellant's situation was
    by no means as dire as suggested. She had undertaken only part  of  the
    therapies offered, the evidence of suicide  attempts  was  inconsistent
    and unreliable, and all  significantly  undermined  by  her  employment
    history.

61. The appellant and her daughter's evidence in itself lacked  credibility
    and consistency and, was contradictory. It smacked of exaggerating  the
    situation and the appellant's circumstances in an attempt  for  her  to
    remain in the UK.

62. The simple fact that there is family life between the appellant and her
    adult daughter in the UK and that she has formed ties here in the years
    she has been here are all matters provided for within Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276 ADE. There are no  circumstances  not  covered  by  those
    provisions and no  compelling  circumstances  beyond  those  previously
    considered and rejected,  which  would  warrant  allowing  this  appeal
    outside the Rules.

63. I find the public interest in the maintenance of immigration control is
    not outweighed by any of the factors in this  case  and  therefore  the
    appeal must be dismissed.

64. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State is  allowed.
    In  redeciding the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    decision, that appeal is dismissed.

    No application was made for anonymity and I can see no reason  to  make
    an anonymity direction in this case.


Signed [pic]                            Date 16 December 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed [pic]                            Date 16 December 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
