
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01442/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 November 2016                        | On 17 November 2016           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           sajmina daudbhai patel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Appeared on own behalf.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity we will refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


    Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 10 November 1984  and  she
    is now 32 years old.

3.   The appellant  entered  the  UK  with  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Migrant on 23 July 2011, with entry clearance valid until  30
    March 2013.  On 29 March 2013 she applied for leave  to  remain,  which
    was granted on 22 May 2013, again as a student.  Leave was valid  until
    9 April 2016.  On 19 December 2015 she applied for leave to remain as a
    spouse of a British citizen, Mr Huzaifa Patel.

4.   The application was refused on a number of grounds by  the  respondent.



5.   The appellant appealed in terms of Section 82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   The First-tier  Tribunal  held  the  decision  of  the  respondent  not
    lawful.

7.   The respondent sought  to  appeal  the  above  decision  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and was granted permission to appeal on 30 August 2016.

Submissions

8.   The respondent did not challenge any of the findings  of  fact  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

9.   The challenge to the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    this: the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  in  that  it  had  failed
    accurately to identify the nature of the decision under appeal  (saying
    that the appeal was against  the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner, rather than against the refusal of a human rights claim),  and
    failed to identify and consider the only ground of appeal open  to  the
    appellant, namely that the decision was unlawful under Section 6 of the
    Human Rights Act 1998.  The First-tier Tribunal had made  no  reference
    to Section 6 and had not analysed whether  the  decision  breached  the
    appellant's human rights.

10.  Given the way that argument developed before us we did not  require  to
    call upon the appellant to reply.

Discussion

11.  We are satisfied that having regard to the whole terms  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination (which was determined on the papers) that
    it failed to identify the nature  of  the  decision  under  appeal  and
    failed to identify and consider the only ground of appeal open  to  the
    appellant, which was in terms of Section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  This is because the  appellant's  application  was  made  on  19
    December 2015, after section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014  came  into
    force. We accept without difficulty that this is an error of law.

12.  Having indicated to the parties that we considered that  there  was  an
    error of law we raised with them the issue of the materiality  of  that
    error of law.

13.  The bench  put  to  Ms  Ahmed  that  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    considered the matter as it should have done it would have required  to
    have asked itself the well-known questions set out by Lord  Bingham  in
    Razgar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] 2AC 368.  Ms
    Ahmed accepted that this was a correct analysis.

14.  Accordingly the first question  which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would
    have been required to ask itself would have been this: was there family
    life?  Ms Ahmed accepted that there was family life.

15.  Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal  would  have  been  required  to  ask
    itself this:  would the proposed removal be an  interference  with  the
    appellant's right to respect for her family life?  Once more  Ms  Ahmed
    accepted that the answer to that would have been yes.

16.  Thirdly, the next question would have been this:   if  so,  would  such
    interference have consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage
    the operation of Article 8?  Once more Ms Ahmed agreed  the  answer  to
    that question would have been yes.

17.  The fourth question would have been this: if so, is  such  interference
    in accordance with the law?   Ms  Ahmed  accepted  this  was  the  next
    question which the First-tier Tribunal would have been required to  ask
    itself.

18.  In that Ms Ahmed accepted that the foregoing was  the  proper  analysis
    as to how the First-tier Tribunal should have approached  its  task  we
    are satisfied that there was no material error of law.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal asked itself the question: was  the  interference  lawful  and
    held that the decision of the respondent was not lawful.  The  findings
    of fact made with respect to that question, the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    approach to that question and its decision in answer to  that  question
    were not challenged in the grounds of appeal.  That being the case  the
    First-tier Tribunal had in fact asked itself the correct question  even
    though it had not identified the nature of the decision  under  appeal,
    had made no reference to the Human Rights Act 1998 and to the  question
    of the appellant's human rights.

19.  In the above circumstances we then  asked  Ms  Ahmed  to  identify  any
    material error of law and she was unable to  do  so.   We  are  equally
    unable to identify any material error of law.

Decision

20.  There being no material error of law we refuse the appeal.

21.  We make no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
