
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01053/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st November 2018                         |On 9th November 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A A]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, who appeals with  the  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  S  J  Clarke,
    promulgated on 22 March 2018, in which she allowed the appeal of Mr [A]
    against a decision of the Secretary of State, dated 28  December  2016,
    refusing him leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds.  It  is  more
    convenient to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. From now on I shall refer to Mr [A] as  "the  appellant"  and
    the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

 2. The appellant is a failed asylum seeker  from  Eritrea  (disputed)  who
    first entered the UK in November 2007, aged 16. He is  now  27.  On  15
    August 2016 he made a human rights claim, seeking further discretionary
    leave, on the basis he was still the partner  of  Ms  [CS],  a  British
    citizen, and they had a child together, [D], born in 2016. However, his
    application was refused on 28 December 2016. The respondent decided the
    appellant no longer enjoyed family life because his  relationship  with
    [CS] had ended and he no longer had contact  with  [D],  who  had  been
    adopted. The appellant met the suitability requirements  of  the  rules
    but did not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1) of the rules. He was  26  years
    of age and had resided in the UK for nine years. It  was  not  accepted
    there would be very significant obstacles to his reintegration  in  the
    country to which he  would  have  to  go.  There  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave outside the rules.

 3. The appellant lodged a notice of appeal and the grounds simply asserted
    that removing him would breach articles 2, 3 and 8 of the Human  Rights
    Convention.

 4. At the hearing the appellant gave evidence but Ms [S] did  not  attend.
    The respondent relied on a report by a consultant clinical and forensic
    psychologist that Ms [S] was not interested in long-term  relationships
    and her report made no mention of the appellant. The judge nevertheless
    accepted the appellant's oral evidence that he and Ms [S]  had  resumed
    living together. She found this was consistent with the statement  made
    by Ms [S]. The judge accepted this was  an  enduring  relationship  and
    that they lived together on and off. The judge concluded that, although
    the  rules  were   not   met,   removing   the   appellant   would   be
    disproportionate.

 5. The grounds seeking permission to appeal  argued  the  judge's  finding
    that the appellant enjoyed family life  was  not  adequately  reasoned.
    There was no independent evidence confirming the relationship  and  the
    judge's  decision  that  there  was  a  subsisting   relationship   was
    irrational.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal on the  basis  the
    grounds were essentially disagreement with the  judge's  decision.  The
    renewed grounds argued the only reason  given  by  the  judge  for  her
    finding was that the evidence of the appellant was consistent  with  Ms
    [S]'s statement. This was insufficient. The finding that the  appellant
    had moved back into Ms [S]'s home in early  2016  was  contradicted  by
    evidence from the landlord.  In  granting  permission,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Freeman said,

         "The evidence of the appellant's partner was a crucial part of  his
         case: although the judge made it clear that she took  into  account
         the fact that she had not heard from her  in  person,  arrangements
         could easily have been made for the partner to give her evidence in
         a suitable way for a vulnerable witness, if she was one."

 7. The appellant's representatives have lodged a rule 24 response opposing
    the appeal and arguing the judge was entitled to conclude as she did.

 8. I heard oral submissions from the  representatives  concerning  whether
    the judge made a material error of law such that her decision should be
    set aside.

 9. Mr  Melvin  said  the  judge  had  not  taken  proper  account  of  the
    psychologist's report, albeit it was two years' old,  which  stated  Ms
    [S] was not interested in having a relationship. He  pointed  out  that
    there was no evidence from Ms [S]'s sister or her mother to support the
    claimed relationship.  In  short,  there  was  a  lack  of  independent
    evidence to corroborate the claim. He relied on  TK  (Burundi)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40 in which Thomas LJ said as follows,

         "16. Where evidence to support an account given by a  party  is  or
         should readily be available,  a  Judge  is,  in  my  view,  plainly
         entitled to take into account the failure to provide that  evidence
         and any explanations for that failure. This  may  be  a  factor  of
         considerable weight in relation  to  credibility  where  there  are
         doubts about the credibility  of  a  party  for  other  reasons.  I
         accept, as did the Judge, that  Miss  Mutoni,  his  first  partner,
         might well have been reluctant to help, but there was  no  evidence
         that any attempt had been made to seek her  help  in  circumstances
         where her  failure  to  help  would  result  in  serious  financial
         disadvantage to the support to her child, and no evidence as to the
         payments alleged to have been made. Nor in my view can  Immigration
         Judge Scobie in any way be criticised  for  his  rejection  of  the
         appellant's account of why he had  not  sought  evidence  from  his
         current partner, Miss Ndagire. In my view the approach of the Judge
         on the evidence before him was an approach he was entitled to  take
         in assessing the appellant's credibility; there  was  no  error  of
         law. On that evidence, he was entitled to reach the view  that  the
         family life was not as strong as the appellant claimed or in  other
         words not strong at all. He was therefore entitled to come  to  the
         conclusion he demonstrably arrived at with  great  care,  that  the
         balance under Article 8 came down in favour of the appellant  being
         returned to Burundi . In my judgment, there was no error of law and
         this ground of appeal fails."

10.  Mr  Melvin  argued  that  it  was  an  obvious  step  to  obtain  such
    corroboration in this case and the judge should have drawn  an  adverse
    inference from its absence.

11. Mr Miah argued, in effect, that it was open to the judge to  reach  the
    conclusion which she  reached  on  the  evidence  before  her  and  the
    respondent's arguments were simple disagreement with the decision.

12. Having considered the matter carefully and having had the assistance of
    the thoughtful submissions of both representatives,  I  concluded  that
    the judge's assessment contains no material error of  law.  Whilst  the
    decision might be described as a generous one, it cannot be  said  that
    the decision is erroneous on any of the bases put forward.

13. The judge clearly had in her contemplation the issues which might  have
    caused another judge to come to the opposite conclusion.  For  example,
    she noted the psychologist's report made no mention  of  the  appellant
    and that it records Ms [S]  was  uninterested  in  having  a  long-term
    relationship. However, there was no dispute about  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was the father of [D] and the judge viewed the report,  which
    was two years' old, in  that  context.  She  was  plainly  entitled  to
    conclude that the relationship was up and  down.  She  noted  Ms  [S]'s
    explanation in her witness statement that she may have said that [to Dr
    Morgan] but that she now relied on the appellant and continued to do so
    every day.

14. The judge accepted the explanation for the lack of documentary evidence
    showing that the appellant lived with Ms [S] which  was  that,  as  the
    appellant is working, an arrangement  hereby  they  lived  together  as
    partners  would  have  drastic  implications  for  Ms   [S]'s   benefit
    entitlement. She did not condone  the  arrangement  but  found  it  was
    plausible.

15. As for Ms [S]'s decision not to attend  to  give  evidence,  the  judge
    accepted what she said in her statement about her experiences of family
    proceedings  concerning  [D].  The  judge  recognised  this  meant  the
    respondent's representative had no opportunity  to  cross-examine  her.
    She explained why she nonetheless preferred the appellant's account and
    Ms [S]'s statement. She noted the evidence that, if the  appellant  had
    been seeking a relationship for the purpose of remaining in the UK,  it
    would have been a lot easier for him to find another partner. She found
    this had the ring of truth. The judge was not, in those  circumstances,
    bound to consider how Ms [S]'s evidence might otherwise be facilitated.



16. Turning to Mr Melvin's point about the well-known case of TK (Burundi),
    I note that it concerned the opposite situation in which the  challenge
    made was to a judge drawing an adverse inference from  the  absence  of
    supporting evidence which it was reasonable to expect to see.  In  this
    case, the argument seems to be that the  judge  should  have  drawn  an
    adverse inference from the absence of corroboration. However, it was  a
    matter for the judge to give such weight as she saw fit to the evidence
    and it is not at all clear that she was asked to  infer  anything  from
    the absence of supporting evidence from Ms [S]'s  family  members.  Her
    overall conclusion was that the couple lived together on  and  off  but
    this was nonetheless an enduring relationship so as to  engage  article
    8.

17. It has not been shown the judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  relevant
    evidence.

18. To the extent the respondent's challenge is that the  judge  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for her conclusions and findings, I  have  had
    regard to the well-known decision in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan
    [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), which sets out the applicable principles. More
    recently, in MD  (Turkey)  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1958,  Singh  LJ
    considered the extent of the duty to give reasons and,  in  particular,
    the question of adequacy. He said as follows,

         "26. ... It is  important  to  appreciate  that  adequacy  in  this
         context is precisely that, no more and no less. It is not a counsel
         of perfection. Still less  should  it  provide  an  opportunity  to
         undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to  see  if  they
         are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits. The  purpose
         of the duty to give reasons is, in part, to enable the losing party
         to know why she has lost. It is also to enable an  appellate  court
         or tribunal to see what the reasons for the decision  are  so  that
         they can be examined in  case  some  error  of  approach  has  been
         committed."

19. Treacy and Longmore LJJ agreed with Singh LJ.

20. I have concluded in the  light  of  this  binding  authority  that  the
    reasons given by the judge in this case are adequate.  I  consider  she
    has shown that she considered the evidential issues  which  might  have
    gone against the appellant but that she gave sound reasons for  finding
    that the relationship was genuine and subsisting.

21. To the extent the grounds rely on  a  perversity  challenge,  I  remind
    myself that in R (Iran and Others v SSHD) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 Brooke LJ
    set out the test for perversity as follows:

         "11. ... It is well known that "perversity" represents a very  high
         hurdle. In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  481,  the  whole  court
         agreed that the word  meant  what  it  said:  it  was  a  demanding
         concept. The majority of the court (Keene and Maurice Kay LJJ) said
         that it embraced decisions that were irrational or unreasonable  in
         the Wednesbury sense (even if there was  no  willful  or  conscious
         departure from the rational), but it also  included  a  finding  of
         fact that was wholly unsupported by the evidence,  provided  always
         that this was a finding as to a material matter."

22. There is no basis for arguing the judge was not entitled to  reach  the
    conclusion she reached on the evidence before her. She chose to believe
    the appellant and this was not a  situation  in  which  she  could  not
    rationally do so. Mr Melvin held back from suggesting it was.

23. I therefore dismiss the respondent's appeal. The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and her decision allowing the appeal shall stand.

The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is continued.


Signed                                  Date 1 November 2018

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
