
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/01552/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of       |             Decision & Reasons         |
|Justice                            |Promulgated                             |
|On 5 June 2017                     |             On 6 June 2017             |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                         EMMANUEL OGUNLEYE OGUNRINDE
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Mathias Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Widdup (FtJ), promulgated on 04 October  2016,  dismissing
        the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 22 June
        2015 refusing his human rights claim.


   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of the USA, date of birth  28  February
        1955, although he was  born  in  Nigeria.  He  entered  the  United
        Kingdom  as  a  visitor  in  October  2005   but   overstayed.   An
        unsuccessful application for leave to remain as a dependent  spouse
        was made in 2008. On 5 May 2015 he applied for leave to  remain  as
        the parent of his 3 daughters all  of  whom  are  resident  in  the
        United Kingdom and living with their mother. It was unclear to  the
        respondent whether the appellant was still in a  relationship  with
        the mother of his daughters and she proceeded, in  the  absence  of
        any evidence of a relationship, to consider the  application  based
        on the parent route under Appendix FM.


     3. The respondent concluded that the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
        requirements of R-LTRP.1.1(d)(ii), with reference to E-LTRP.2.2-2.4
        and E-LTRP.3.1, and that he failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of
        paragraph 276ADE.


     4. The appellant submitted a valid application to appeal this decision
        to the First-tier Tribunal. He requested an oral hearing  and  paid
        the appropriate fee. On 22 March 2016 he was issued with  a  Notice
        of Hearing  indicating  that  his  appeal  would  be  heard  on  16
        September 2016 at Hatton Cross. In anticipation of this hearing the
        appellant, who was not legally  represented,  filed,  on  19  April
        2016, a bundle  of  documents  including  a  skeleton  argument,  a
        witness statement from himself, copies of his children's  passports
        and residence cards, and letters in support of his application from
        his partner (as described in her statement, although  she  and  the
        appellant did not live together due to  "circumstances  beyond  our
        control") and his 3 daughters.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. It appears from the determination, and  was  not  disputed  by  the
        respondent, that the appellant's appeal was listed on a float list.
        This means that his case was not assigned to a particular judge and
        would be heard as and when  a  court  became  available.  When  the
        appeal came to be heard the respondent was  not  represented  by  a
        presenting officer. The FtJ satisfied himself  that  the  appellant
        was made aware  of  the  listing  because  his  (former)  partner's
        witness statement referred to the hearing date. At paragraph 9  the
        FtJ stated that the appellant did not attend the hearing centre and
        that no explanation was provided for his absence. Pursuant to  rule
        28 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  &
        Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 the FtJ satisfied himself that it was in
        the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing  even  in  the
        appellant's absence.


     6. The FtJ proceeded to  consider  the  limited  documentary  evidence
        provided by the appellant. He noted (for example, at paragraphs 15,
        16, 24 & 29) that, had the  appellant  attended  the  hearing,  his
        evidence could have been tested and more  weight  could  have  been
        attached to the statements provided, and that the  FtJ  would  have
        had an opportunity to learn more about  the  families'  immigration
        history, the appellant's relationships with his family, and further
        details of the  nature  of  his  private  life.  The  FtJ  was  not
        satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the   requirements   of   the
        immigration rules relating to his relationship  with  his  children
        and his private life relationships. Nor was  the  judge  satisfied,
        taking into account  the  public  interest  factors  identified  in
        section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
        that his removal would constitute a disproportionate impact on  his
        relationship with his children. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal

     7. In his grounds the appellant maintains that he was in fact  present
        at the First-tier Tribunal on 16 September 2016. He had  booked  in
        at reception, was informed that his case was on the float list, and
        that he remained at the court until 3:50 p.m. when the court  clerk
        informed that all floaters were going to be listed on  a  different
        day. The essence of the grounds, which appear to have been  drafted
        by the appellant himself, was  that  he  was  deprived  of  a  fair
        hearing through  the  absence  of  any  opportunity  to  give  oral
        evidence.


     8. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal  Frankish  who  stated  that,  if  the   appellant   could
        demonstrate that he was treated as absent when he was  present,  it
        was arguable that a procedural error amounting to an error  of  law
        occurred.

Submissions at the error of law hearing


     9. At the outset of the hearing the appellant's  legal  representative
        produced a letter from Tariq Tarapdar, Court Clerks Manager at  IAC
        Hatton Cross, signed by him and a Mitie Security Officer at  Hatton
        Cross, and dated 1 June 2017. This letter read as follows:


          Mr Ogunrinde came to  Hatton  Cross  31/05/17  and  spoke  to  me
          directly. He informed me that he had a hearing  at  Hatton  Cross
          16/09/16 and was on float list. He also explained that  the  case
          was heard in absence and he was under  the  impression  that  the
          case was to be adjourned.
          Mr Ogunrinde has asked me to help and  to  provide  any  possible
          evidence that he attended Hatton Cross on 16/09/17  [this  should
          read '16/09/16']. Unfortunately I could not find any evidence and
          according to our records the case was marked as "no-show".
          However after speaking to  a  member  of  a  security  team  [the
          security officer's name and ID provided] he clearly remembered Mr
          Ogunrinde being  on  site  and  also  remembers  speaking  to  Mr
          Ogunrinde's children.

    10. Having considered this letter, and having regard  to  the  emphasis
        placed by the FtJ on his inability to further explore or  test  the
        appellant's evidence, Mr Melvin accepted that he was in a difficult
        position and made no further submissions. I indicated  that  I  did
        not need to hear from the appellant's representative. I gave  brief
        oral reasons for allowing the appeal and indicated that the  matter
        would be remitted to the first-tier Tribunal for  a  full  de  novo
        hearing.


      Discussion

    11. I am satisfied that the appellant was present at Hatton Cross on 16
        September 2016 and that, through an administrative  error,  he  was
        marked as being absent. The letter from the Courts  Clerk  Manager,
        signed by the Security Officer, which  was  not  challenged  by  Mr
        Melvin, strongly indicates that the appellant was  on  site  on  16
        September 2016. Furthermore, the  appellant's  description  in  his
        grounds of appeal of the procedure governing float cases at  Hatton
        Cross is consistent with my own experience, having  sat  at  Hatton
        Cross for several years. I am satisfied, through a  combination  of
        the HM Courts & Tribunals Service letter  and  the  description  of
        floats given by the appellant in his grounds, that he  was  wrongly
        marked as a "no-show".


    12. The FtJ heard the appeal in the appellant's  absence.  This  is  no
        criticism of the judge. He acted entirely appropriately in  relying
        on information given to him  by  his  court  clerk  and  proceeded,
        giving valid reasons, to determine the appeal.  However,  the  fact
        remains that the appellant was deprived of an opportunity of giving
        oral evidence in his appeal. As the FtJ properly pointed out, there
        was no opportunity for him to explore the appellant's  relationship
        with his children, his relationship with his (former) partner,  and
        the private life relationships established by him. Through no fault
        of the FtJ the appellant has not had a fair opportunity to  present
        his case and this renders the First-tier Tribunal decision  unsafe.
        In these circumstances it is appropriate to remit the  matter  back
        to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh assessment  of  his  appeal,
        before a judge other than Judge Widdup.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is vitiated by a material error of law

The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Widdup

I make no anonymity direction.

[pic]                               05 June 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

