
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01298/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2019                 |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL KEBEDE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                               MS RUIRONG REN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before us for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge  Fowell  who  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal   against   the
    respondent's refusal of her application for further leave to remain  in
    the UK.  Judge Fowell's decision was promulgated on 25 June 2019.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and none  is
    required now.



Background

 3. The appellant is a Chinese citizen born on 1 October 1962. She  arrived
    in the UK on a visit visa  in  2004  and  remained  in  the  UK  as  an
    overstayer.

 4. The appellant entered the UK using her own name and date of  birth  (as
    in this appeal).  She claimed asylum in 2004 using  a  false  name  and
    date of birth: Xue Li, born 1 October 1972.

 5. In 2009 the appellant attended the respondent's office  in  Croydon  to
    apply for an application residence card ("ARC") in the name of Xue  Li.
    She says that, as her fingers were damaged, she was unable to give  her
    fingerprints.  An ARC was subsequently issued to the appellant  by  the
    respondent in the name of Li Xue Li, rather than Xue Li.  Her  date  of
    birth on the card was also different: 21 February 1960.

 6. The appellant noticed these  errors  when  she  left  the  respondent's
    building with the card. She says she felt scared  and  vulnerable;  she
    felt unable to identify the errors to the respondent.  She used the ARC
    to obtain a national insurance number in the name of Li Xue Li and  was
    employed in that name.

 7. The appellant was subsequently granted discretionary  leave  to  remain
    ("DL"), in the name of Li Xue Li, from 9 September 2011 to 8  September
    2014. She was granted further leave in that name from 4 March 2015 to 3
    March 2018.

 8. In the meantime, by way of her solicitors' letter of 29 November  2017,
    the appellant applied to the respondent for "a new biometric  residence
    permit card as her details on her current card  are  incorrect".    She
    submitted a  transfer  of  conditions  application  with  that  letter,
    seeking to change her name and date of birth to her  genuine  name  and
    date of birth. That application was refused on 15  January  2018.   The
    appellant then submitted on 14 February  2018,  in  her  own  name,  an
    application for further leave to remain.  The respondent  refused  that
    application.  It  was  considered  the  appellant  did  not  meet   the
    suitability criteria in the Immigration Rules,  specifically  S-LTR.4.2
    and S-LTR.4.3, the appellant having made  false  representations  in  a
    previous application. The respondent also concluded that there were not
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration on return  to
    China  (paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi))  insofar  as  her  private  life  was
    concerned. The respondent also relied, on similar grounds, on paragraph
    353.

 9. It is that refusal decision which was  the  subject  of  appeal  before
    Judge Fowell.

10. Judge Fowell  found  that,  although  it  had  been  dishonest  of  the
    appellant to give a false name (Xue Li) and not to  have  corrected  it
    when she had realised she had been issued papers in the name of Li  Xue
    Li, her benefit from the deception had been "unplanned" and that it was
    not a "suitability issue".  Judge Fowell concluded at [28] that neither
    the "initial or evidential burden of proving dishonesty [had been] made
    out".  Judge Fowell  concluded  however  that  the  appellant  had  not
    demonstrated there were very significant obstacles to  her  integration
    on return to China.  The judge also found the appeal could not  succeed
    pursuant to the Article 8 jurisprudence outside the Rules, there  being
    no disproportionate interference with the appellant's protected rights.

11. Permission to appeal was granted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    following terms:

         "... in the light more especially of judicial  findings  concerning
         the respondent's failure to substantiate the initial burden on them
         to  show  deception  (28)  and  positive  findings  concerning  the
         appellant vis a vis the suitability grounds and/or her  bona  fides
         generally (29), there was arguable [sic] that the Judge misdirected
         themselves on the  law  giving  rise  to  material  error  (9),  in
         confining  consideration  of  the  state's  requirements   to   the
         Immigration Rules, and failing to weigh the respondent's  guidance,
         specifically (HO API 'Discretionary Leave' (V.7.0 18/08/2015)  S.10
         Transitional Arrangements) in the  Art  8  closing  proportionality
         assessment and therein the requisite balancing exercise  concerning
         the competing private interests of the individual appellant and the
         public interest represented by the respondent, contrary to  SF  and
         others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC)."

12. Hence the matter came before us.

Submissions

13. Mr Kannangara, for the appellant, adopted the grounds  of  appeal.  The
    nub  of  his  oral  submissions  is  that  Judge  Fowell  should   have
    considered,  in  the  Article   8   proportionality   assessment,   the
    respondent's policy, Asylum Policy  Instruction,  Discretionary  leave,
    version 7.0, published on 18 August 2015, as in the appellant's bundle.
     No blame attached to the appellant who had contacted the  Home  Office
    in 2009 and been issued an ARC in  the  name  of  another  person.  The
    appellant had not  contributed  to  that  mistake;  she  had  noted  it
    immediately but had been too scared to inform the Home  Office  of  it;
    "her mind was not right".  He submitted it was relevant that  the  name
    allocated to the appellant on the ARC was similar to that used  by  the
    appellant when she had claimed asylum.  It was argued that there was no
    significant change in the appellant's circumstances; she was asking for
    settlement on the same basis as it had been granted in  2011.  In  that
    year she had assumed that her asylum claim had been  refused  and  that
    she had been granted discretionary leave. It was accepted there was  no
    evidence it had actually been refused.

14. For the respondent, Ms Isherwood submitted that the appeal was being re-
    argued by the appellant. The respondent had not challenged the findings
    of Judge Fowell on the alleged deception but,  nonetheless,  the  Judge
    had found the appellant had used  a  false  name  and  had  obtained  a
    national  insurance  number  in  that  false  name.   The   appellant's
    immigration history was relevant  to  the  proportionality  assessment,
    including her use of a different name and date of birth.  Section  10.1
    of the discretionary leave guidance was applicable to the appellant who
    had previously been granted discretionary leave  on  a  false  premise.
    The application which had given rise to the refusal  under  appeal  had
    been made in the appellant's own name. Thus the  circumstances  of  the
    grant of  discretionary  leave  were  significantly  different  to  the
    appellant's circumstances at the date of application.  In summary,  the
    findings were open to Judge Fowell. Furthermore, she submitted, it  was
    not correct  to  state  that  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  remained
    outstanding.

Discussion

15. It is not in dispute between the parties  that  the  appellant  used  a
    false name to claim asylum in about 2004.   The parties also agree that
    the appellant has used three names: her own name to enter the UK  on  a
    visit visa in 2004; a false name and date of birth to pursue an  asylum
    claim; and the identity of another person in  whose  name  an  ARC  was
    issued by the respondent in 2009.

16. Ms Isherwood does not challenge the assertion that Judge Fowell  should
    have  considered  the  respondent's  guidance  in  his  assessment   of
    proportionality  pursuant  to  the  Article  8  analysis  outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  We have had  regard  to  that  guidance:  the  Home
    Office Asylum Policy Instruction,  Discretionary  leave,  version  7.0,
    published on 18  August  2015.   Section  10  deals  with  transitional
    arrangements in place  following  the  significant  amendments  to  the
    Immigration  Rules  in  July  2012.   It  sets  out  the  guidance  for
    "applicants granted DL before 9 July 2012"  as  is  the  case  for  the
    appellant who was first granted DL in 2011. It provides as follows:

         "Those granted leave under the DL policy in  force  before  9  July
         2012 will normally continue to be  dealt  with  under  that  policy
         through to settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave
         on the same basis as their original DL was granted  (normally  they
         will be eligible to apply for settlement after  accruing  6  years'
         continuous DL (or where appropriate a combination of DL  and  LOTR,
         see section 8 above)), unless at the date  of  decision  they  fall
         within the restricted leave policy.

         Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances  prevailing  at
         the time of the original grant of leave continue at the date of the
         decision. If the circumstances remain the same, the individual does
         not fall within the restricted leave  policy  and  the  criminality
         thresholds do not apply, a further period of  3  years'  DL  should
         normally be granted. Caseworkers must consider  whether  there  are
         any circumstances that may  warrant  departure  from  the  standard
         period of leave. See section 5.4.

         If there have been significant changes that mean the  applicant  no
         longer qualifies for leave under the DL  policy  or  the  applicant
         falls for refusal on the basis of criminality (see criminality  and
         exclusion section above), the further leave application  should  be
         refused. ..."

17. We agree that Judge Fowell should have taken this policy  into  account
    in  his  assessment  of  proportionality.  The  existence  of  relevant
    guidance is indicative of the weight to be given to the maintenance  of
    effective immigration control, a public  interest  factor  pursuant  to
    s117b(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
    Act").  His failure to take that policy into account  is  an  error  of
    law.

18. As regards the remaining grounds of appeal  to  this  tribunal  we  are
    unable to find that they demonstrate errors of law  for  the  following
    reasons.

19. There is some confusion regarding the  suggestion  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to this tribunal that the appellant had been granted five years'
    leave "under the legacy scheme".  It is submitted  she  had  "completed
    five years at the time of grant of  discretionary  leave  (2004-2009)".
    However, we also note from her solicitors' letter of 15  February  2018
    that  "her  asylum  application   was   refused".    Furthermore,   the
    appellant's solicitors also refer, in correspondence to the respondent,
    to the appellant's "discretionary leave [being] granted mainly based on
    her residence in the UK".  We give little  weight  to  this  submission
    therefore. In any event, it is something of a side issue.

20. It is also submitted in the grounds that the appellant's "asylum  claim
    is still outstanding and that amounts to breach of her rights under the
    Refugee Convention".  The appellant's own  evidence  does  not  support
    this assertion. In any event, it was  not  open  to  the  appellant  to
    pursue this claim in the First-tier Tribunal without the consent of the
    respondent (section 85(5) of the 2002 Act).  This is not  a  ground  of
    appeal which Mr Kannangara raised in his oral submissions and we  infer
    that he accepts it is unsustainable on the evidence before  the  First-
    tier tribunal.

21. For the avoidance of doubt we make the point that the decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse to transfer the  appellant's  conditions  was  not
    before Judge Fowell.  We do not accept there is a material misdirection
    in the Judge's decision as regards the application of the  respondent's
    transfer of conditions policy.   The grounds refer to the  findings  at
    [29] of the decision where Judge Fowell found that the benefit  to  the
    appellant of using the  false  name  was  "unplanned".   While  another
    conclusion could have been reached on the evidence, it  was  one  which
    was open to the Judge to make on the evidence.  In any event,  for  the
    reasons set out below, the  issue  of  whether  or  not  the  appellant
    received a benefit from her use of the false name attributed to her  by
    the respondent is immaterial.

22. We turn to the issue of materiality and bear in mind  the  guidance  of
    this tribunal in IA  (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 323; [2007] Imm AR 685, at [15], where Keene
    LJ said:

         "... in public law cases, an error  of  law  will  be  regarded  as
         material unless the  decision-maker  must  have  reached  the  same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is  material  if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "

23. We also bear in mind the decision of this tribunal in  ML  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 844, at [14]-
    [17] (Moses LJ) and [20] (Sir Stanley  Burnton).  The  test  which  was
    established in that case was that the outcome must be  "inevitable"  if
    an error of law is to be regarded as being immaterial.

24. The appellant was initially granted DL in 2011 in the false name  which
    was attributed to her by the respondent in 2009 when an ARC was  issued
    to  her  in  that  name.  The  appellant  therefore   perpetuated   the
    respondent's error by applying for leave in that name. She then applied
    for further leave in that false name three years later.  While we  have
    regard to the findings of Judge Fowell on the issue of dishonesty  (and
    these are not challenged before us) the  appellant  misrepresented  her
    identity in those two applications. Leave was granted on the basis of a
    misrepresentation.  Judge Fowell acknowledged as much at [29].

25. Thus even if Judge Fowell had taken  into  account  the  terms  of  the
    respondent's discretionary leave policy, he would have found  that  the
    "circumstances prevailing at the time of the original grant  of  leave"
    had significantly changed. At the date of decision, the respondent  was
    aware that the grants of discretionary leave in 2011 and 2014 had  been
    to a person using a false name.  The appellant's case is that  she  did
    so without blame but she misrepresented her identity by using  a  false
    name, albeit attributed to her by the respondent in error, when  making
    two applications for DL.   We do not accept that "mere adoption of  the
    name given by the respondent" (as asserted in the grounds of appeal  to
    this tribunal) absolves the appellant. In any  event,  irrespective  of
    the issue of blame, this is a significant change of circumstances.  The
    policy does not require that the circumstances relate to the  applicant
    personally or that the applicant is somehow blameworthy. It  is  worded
    in such  a  way  as  to  include  circumstances,  as  here,  where  the
    respondent had issued the initial and subsequent grants of  DL  on  the
    basis of error combined with the appellant's misrepresentation  of  her
    identity.  By the date of decision this had become apparent. We are  in
    no doubt there was a significant change  in  circumstances  as  between
    2011 (and 2014) and 2018.

26. We find therefore that even if Judge Fowell had taken into account  the
    respondent's policy, the outcome of this  appeal  would  have  been  no
    different.

Decision

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law and the decision is preserved.

28. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed      A M Black  Date 13 September 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
