
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/01346/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th June 2017                      |       On 20th June 2017              |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   ms m b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Pinder of Counsel, Active Immigration LTD
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation  to  a  judgment  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Buckwell
    promulgated on 11th April 2017 following a hearing at Taylor House.

 2. The Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal,  Ms  M  B,  was  born  in
    November 1983 and is a citizen of Mongolia.  She originally entered the
    UK as a Tier 1 dependant in October 2011 and she had  leave  thereafter
    until it finally expired on 10th October 2016.  She was  at  all  times
    lawfully in the UK and she made an application to remain.   This  is  a
    very unusual case in that the Appellant and her husband  are  a  couple
    with significant means.  He had a well paid position  with  a  bank  in
    London and they acquired a valuable home  in  London.   However,  their
    marriage  proved  to  be  short-lived  and   notwithstanding   Wardship
    proceedings in the UK and supposedly the  surrender  of  the  husband's
    passport, he nevertheless abducted their, at the time 20 month old son,
    and took him to his home country, Singapore.   Since  that  time  there
    have been extensive proceedings both in Singapore and  in  the  UK  and
    there have been two judgments from the High Court  in  the  UK.  It  is
    pertinent to mention at this stage that in the Wardship proceedings the
    child's interests were separately represented by a Guardian ad Litem.

 3. There have been two lengthy judgments, one in March  2014  and  one  in
    November 2016.  Those judgments come down firmly  in  mother's  favour,
    ordering the return of the  child  to  the  UK  and  indeed  concurrent
    proceedings in Singapore have made similar orders.   All  those  orders
    have been frustrated by the refusal of the husband to  comply  and  the
    most recent order of the High Court in this country was of Mrs  Justice
    Roberts on 16th November 2016.

 4. In, what is a lengthy judgment  running  to  some  109  paragraphs  Mrs
    Justice Roberts made a final order in relation to  the  child  and  his
    best interests and she says at paragraph 108 of that judgment:

         "In the final analysis, the Guardian did not  find  this  to  be  a
         finely balanced case and neither do I.  I am wholly persuaded  that
         it is overwhelmingly in M's best interests to be  returned  to  the
         full-time care of his mother in this jurisdiction at  the  earliest
         opportunity."

    She goes on at paragraph 109 to say:

         "There will be orders (i) prohibiting the father  or  anyone  else
         from removing M  from  her  care  (that's  the  mother);  and  (ii)
         prohibiting the mother from removing M from this jurisdiction."

    It can be seen from that that the High Court  in  this  country,  after
    very careful consideration, has determined the child should be  in  the
    UK, cannot be removed from the UK and should be  in  the  care  of  his
    mother.

 5. In allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds Judge Buckwell clearly  had
    all of that in mind.  It was an unusual case because  it  did  not  fit
    into the Immigration Rules and indeed the child, having been  abducted,
    is currently not in the UK.  However,  dismissing  this  lady's  appeal
    would prevent her from carrying out what the High  Court  had  ordered,
    namely bringing the child back to the  UK.   I  have  no  intention  of
    taking any action which would frustrate the very clear order and wishes
    of the High Court and for that reason find that Judge Buckwell did  not
    make a material error of law in his determination of  this  appeal  and
    therefore the appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of State is
    dismissed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date 19th June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

