
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01373/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3rd January 2019                      |On 04th February 2019              |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Okail [S]
                        (no ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Dingley (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dhanji, promulgated on 7th September 2018, following a hearing at
    Hatton Cross on 1st August  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Syria,  and  was  born  on  21st
    September 1993.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, dated 4th January 2017,  refusing  his  application
    for further leave to remain on the basis of his  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant had originally arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  9th
    February 2012 as a student, and his leave  was  valid  until  13th  May
    2014.  He was granted further extensions of  stay  until  30th  January
    2016, and thereafter he made further applications  again  on  27th  May
    2016, which was refused on 4th January  2017.   The  Appellant  claimed
    never to have worked.  He had ambitions to study.   He  had  undertaken
    HND  course  in  business  law  and  then  had  enrolled  at  Greenwich
    University for a BA in business management,  but  he  was  experiencing
    emotional difficulties, and  was  diagnosed  with  moderate  to  severe
    clinical depression, he managed to complete his BA and then decided  to
    undertake an MBA.  As a result of  his  depression  he  was  unable  to
    complete this.  He now wished to re-enrol and maintained  that  he  had
    been accepted for a September 2018 start date to finish  his  MBA.   He
    had returned to Syria some  three  or  four  times.   The  position  of
    universities in Syria was dire although they still manage  to  function
    in some respect with the ongoing violence and instability around  them.
    He did not consider the option of pursuing his studies in Syria to be a
    viable one in the circumstances.

The Judge's Findings

 4. At the hearing before Judge Dhanji,  consideration  was  given  to  the
    Respondent Home Secretary's  position  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under the  private  life  route,  because  he  could  not  meet
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) in that it was not accepted that there would be
    very significant obstacles to his integration back into Syria.  He  had
    been granted leave to remain as a student and this was not a  route  to
    settlement.  The Appellant also did not meet the  requirements  of  the
    "Syrian Concession" (paragraph 5.1).  There were  also  no  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances to his claim.  His  family  were  still  in
    Syria and he had spent  most  of  his  life  there,  and  he  had  been
    returning there.

 5. The judge also had regard to the submissions made  by  the  Appellant's
    representative, who appeared as her Counsel, who had  relied  upon  her
    skeleton argument, and who had maintained that "the whole point of  the
    Syrian Concession was to  make  the  Rules  more  flexible  for  Syrian
    nationals and discretion should have been exercised in the  Appellant's
    favour" (paragraph 5.2).  The Appellant's case was not  that  he  could
    not go back to live in Syria, as he had not made an asylum claim,  what
    he was saying was that he could not go back there and continue with his
    studies because universities there are not functioning (paragraph 5.2).





The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge concluded that the Appellant's family were  still  in  Syria.
    He had family support there.  He  had  returned  to  Syria  during  the
    course of his studies.  There was no evidence to suggest that he  could
    not reintegrate successfully into Syrian life  upon  return  (paragraph
    6.8).  As far as the Appellant's  studies  were  concerned,  the  judge
    observed that:

         "I have great sympathy for  the  view  expressed  in  some  of  the
         material the Appellant has submitted that it is important that  the
         education of a generation of young Syrians is not put  in  jeopardy
         because  educated  individuals  will  be  needed  to  rebuild   the
         country", (paragraph 6.6)

    but the judge was not persuaded that the  Appellant  could  succeed  on
    this basis.

 7. First, Article 8 did not include the right to study  or  work  in  this
    country (paragraph 6.7).  Second, the Appellant's private life arose in
    the context of limited leave to remain which permitted  no  expectation
    of a further grant of leave to stay here (paragraph 6.7).   Third,  the
    reference to the "Syrian  Concession"  was  of  no  assistance  to  the
    Appellant, because the purpose was not to enable a person  to  succeed,
    where that person would not otherwise be able to meet the  requirements
    of the Rules (paragraph 6.9).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  misinterpreted  and
    misapplied the significance of the Home Office "Syrian  Concession"  in
    the context of Article 8, in that she failed to take proper account  of
    this concession in the proportionality exercise, given the civil war in
    Syria.   Second,  that  the  judge  had  conducted  the  hearing  in  a
    procedurally unfair manner because she failed to take  account  of  the
    Appellant's   documents   and   failed   to   allow   the   Appellant's
    representative to complete her final submissions.

10. Given the allegation that the judge had acted in a procedurally  unfair
    manner, by preventing the Appellant's representative,  from  completing
    her submissions, the Tribunal Judge, Judge Dhanji, was asked to provide
    a  response  to  the  allegations,  which  she  did   in   a   detailed
    "Memorandum".

11. In consequence, on 22nd November 2018, the Upper Tribunal  listed  this
    matter for an appeal hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me, the Appellant was represented by  Mr  Dingley
    of Counsel.  He, very properly at the outset, submitted that there  was
    nothing in the question of the "Syrian  Concession"  because  that  was
    intended to apply only on a points-based system appeal, and  would  not
    have assisted the Appellant in this case.  The more important question,
    was a short point, but nevertheless, a good point, he submitted.   This
    was the fact that the judge's failure to allow  the  representative  to
    continue  with  her  submissions,  would  have  been  viewed  as  being
    tantamount to the lack of a fair hearing, by  an  objective  bystander,
    which in this case would have included the Appellant himself,  who  had
    attended  this  hearing   for   the   first   time   with   his   legal
    representatives.

13. Second, although in her Memorandum, the judge makes it  clear  that  "I
    remember the case well because I have not before had  to  consider  the
    Syrian Concession" (paragraph 1), and although she states that she does
    not recall  having  interrupted  the  submissions  of  the  Appellant's
    representative and brought them to an  abrupt  ending,  she  does  also
    state that in the past she has acted in a way as to  bring  submissions
    to a  close  (see  her  penultimate  paragraph).   That,  submitted  Mr
    Dingley, was enough to show that there was an error of law.  Mr Dingley
    drew my attention to his well-compiled  skeleton  argument,  which  has
    been of great assistance to this Tribunal,  as  well  as  the  attached
    cases on procedural unfairness, which he put before this Tribunal.

14. For his part, Mr Lindsay submitted that there  was  no  error  of  law.
    First, Judge Dhanji expressly states that she has recollection of  this
    case and that she did not cut the  Appellant  short.   The  Appellant's
    Counsel, had provided a skeleton argument, and the judge refers to this
    in her determination.  Moreover,  the  representative  herself  in  her
    "Statement of Truth" before this Tribunal, makes it clear that she  had
    addressed Judge Dhanji's Tribunal for a good eight to  ten  minutes  in
    her  submissions.   It  also  ought  not  to  be  forgotten  that   the
    representative was a competent and experienced Counsel of  some  twelve
    years' standing, and that if she felt she had been curtailed in  making
    her submissions, it  would  have  been  open  to  her  to  have  stated
    precisely that before the judge, but she did not do so.   Finally,  and
    in any event, there is  no  material  error  of  law,  because  on  the
    materials before this Tribunal, it is  not  possible  to  say  how  the
    Appellant could have succeeded in an Article 8 appeal in this regard.

15. In reply, Mr Dingley submitted  that  the  short  point  was  that  the
    representative was not allowed to finish her submissions in relation to
    paragraph 276ADE.  He himself could not say exactly what  it  was  that
    she planned to submit  before  the  judge  by  way  of  persuading  the
    Tribunal that this appeal stood to be allowed.  That was  neither  here
    nor there.  What was important was the fundamental  right  of  a  legal
    representative, to  be  allowed  to  make  their  submissions,  without
    feeling that they are under pressure to stop, and without  actually  in
    point of fact, being stopped by the judge.  This was the position here.
     He drew my attention to the important cases that  he  relied  upon  in
    this regard.  These were the cases of Alubankudi [2015] UKUT 00542  and
    Elayi [2016] UKUT 00508.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  I come to this conclusion notwithstanding Mr Dingley's valid
    and commendable efforts to persuade me otherwise.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

17. First, this is a case where the Appellant's representative on the  day,
    an experienced Counsel in this jurisdiction,  with  her  own  practice,
    herself states (paragraph 10) of her statement of truth, that  she  was
    continuing  "with  respect  to  the  Syrian   Concession"   when   "the
    Immigration Judge spoke to the Appellant and stated that that  was  the
    end of the appeal and she would make her decision in due course".   Her
    representative states only that, "I was taken aback by  the  fact  that
    she had done that whilst I was still making submissions and I  did  not
    attempt to stop or argue with her ..." (paragraph 10).  Given  that  it
    has now been conceded by Mr Dingley, that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    question  of  the  "Syrian  Concession"  of  any  importance   to   the
    Appellant's appeal, it is understandable for the judge to have  decided
    that she had heard enough on this issue.   But  more  importantly,  her
    representative does not say that she objected to the termination of the
    proceedings.  She did not alert the judge to  the  fact  that  she  was
    still wishing to make further  representations.   This  indeed  is  the
    judge's own recollection of the matter as  well  because  Judge  Dhanji
    makes it clear in her memorandum (paragraph 1(iv))  that  "nothing  was
    said or done by [the representative] at the hearing  to  indicate  that
    she had not finished, no such issue arose".

18. Second, it does appear to be the  case  here  that  the  representative
    decided to raise this as a ground of appeal only after  she  had  found
    that the appeal had not been allowed, because she makes it clear  that,
    "I was of the opinion that  she  [the  judge]  therefore  accepted  the
    submissions with respect to the concession and did not wish to hear  me
    further" (paragraph 10).  Indeed, the representative  goes  on  to  say
    that, "I honestly thought I was stopped as she  was  agreeing  with  my
    submission and therefore there was no need for me  to  continue,  as  I
    have experienced with previous judges" (paragraph 15).

19. Third, the representative on the day in question was able in any  event
    to make oral submissions for eight to ten minutes (paragraph 12 of  the
    statement of truth).

20. Fourth, the judge had the skeleton argument of  the  representative  in
    question (paragraph 13).

21. Finally, it is difficult to see how the Appellant was prejudiced in any
    way  by  what  transpired  at  the  hearing.   Indeed,  even   if   the
    representative on the day is correct in  relating  the  events  in  the
    manner that she does, the objective bystander would not have  left  the
    court hearing under the impression that he or she had failed to  secure
    a fair hearing, because the representative herself states that,

         "Immediately after the appeal, the Appellant asked  me  why  I  was
         stopped and I reassured him that my skeleton  argument  was  before
         her.  This was again discussed with the Appellant when this  appeal
         was refused and I had advised him that I would rely on  this  issue
         when drafting the grounds for permission." (Paragraph 14)

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st January 2019








