
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/01679/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st October 2019                  |On 9th October 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                FARRAKH ABBAS
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday, of Counsel, instructed by Elaahi & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in June 1988. He  arrived
       in the UK in April 2011 as  a  Tier  4  student  migrant  with  entry
       clearance. He had leave to  remain  in  that  capacity  but  when  he
       applied to extend that leave he was refused with a right  of  appeal.
       That appeal was dismissed on 3rd July 2015 by Judge of the First-tier
       Tribunal C Burns, and the appellant became appeal rights exhausted in
       November 2015. In July 2015 the appellant applied for leave to remain
       outside of the Immigration Rules but this was voided due to his being
       within the appeal process. In February  2016  he  again  applied  for
       leave outside of the Rules but this  application  was  refused  as  a
       fresh human rights claim  under  paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration
       Rules.    On 27th March 2017  the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
       remain based on his private and family life ties  with  the  UK,  and
       that application was refused in the decision of  11th  January  2019.
       His appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge J Lebasci in a determination promulgated on the 13th June 2019.



    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Owens on the
       1st July 2019 on the  basis that it was arguable that the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law in giving inadequate reasons for rejecting the
       appellant's oral testimony that he took his  TOEIC  test  himself  to
       obtain his ETS English qualification and  for  concluding  that  this
       evidence did not amount to  an  innocent  explanation.  It  was  thus
       arguable that the decision that his Article 8 ECHR  appeal  based  on
       his family life relationship  with  a  British  citizen  fell  to  be
       dismissed erred in law.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In oral submissions by Mr Shilliday and in the grounds of  appeal  it
       is contended, in short summary, that there was a failure to  consider
       the account that the appellant gave of the test he  took  at  Burnley
       Training College on 16th  January  2013  as  there  are  no  findings
       regarding this evidence  and  whether  it  properly  amounted  to  an
       innocent explanation. It appeared that the First-tier Tribunal  might
       have thought that the evidence did not need to be considered  without
       corroborative evidence, see paragraph 33.1.  The  appellant  was  not
       represented and had not understood he could try to obtain  the  voice
       recording from ETS and mistakenly believed  that  a  previous  judge,
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Burns, had cleared him of deception.
       There was no strong evidence that  Burnley  Training  College  was  a
       "fraud factory": as only 22% of tests were said by ETS to be invalid,
       with 78% being simply questionable on the day the appellant took  his
       test.

    5. Mr Avery submitted, in summary, that it was clear from  paragraph  30
       that the appellant's oral  evidence  was  viewed  as  important,  and
       further it is set out at paragraph 31 of the decision. It was open to
       the First-tier Tribunal to find that the appellant had only submitted
       generic evidence and overall from paragraph 33.1 of the  decision  it
       is clear that the First-tier Tribunal looked at all of  the  evidence
       and was not impressed by the appellant's explanation, and so properly
       found he had used deception.

    6. I told the parties that I found that there had been an error  of  law
       by the First-tier Tribunal, as I found that  there  was  an  innocent
       explanation which satisfied a minimum level of plausibility raised by
       the appellant in response to the evidential burden evidence from  ETS
       put forward by the respondent. The reasoning at paragraph 33.1 of the
       decision that this was not a qualifying explanation was not lawful as
       it implied that corroborative evidence was needed or that  it  needed
       to be one which was one which reached further than a minimum level of
       plausibility.  The First-tier Tribunal had therefore failed  to  move
       to the third stage of consideration and consider whether overall  the
       evidence of the respondent meant  that  this  explanation  should  be
       rejected.  It  was  therefore  necessary  to  remake  the  appeal  to
       determine whether on the balance of probabilities the respondent  had
       satisfied the burden on him to show deception by the  appellant.  The
       remaking would also require  submissions  on  whether  any  different
       outcome for the appeal  should  be  reached  if  it  was  found  that
       deception by the appellant had not been proved by the respondent.

Submissions- Remaking

    7. Mr Avery submitted that the ETS investigation had been  shown  to  be
       robust and it was very unlikely that it would have  been  shown  that
       the appellant had cheated through those processes if  this  were  not
       the case,  false  positives  were  less  than  2%  according  to  the
       respondent's expert analysis of those processes. The evidence of  the
       appellant was not persuasive as it was  just  a  generic  account  of
       taking an English test, so when balancing against the evidence of the
       respondent the respondent should be found to have shown cheating  and
       deception on the balance of probabilities. Mr Avery argued that  even
       if the  appellant  was  found  not  to  have  cheated  in  his  TOEIC
       examinations this could not mean  that  he  succeeded  in  his  human
       rights appeal. He had not met the points-based Immigration Rules  for
       students in his appeal before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Burns
       as he had no English language certificate. There  was  no  meaningful
       challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on human  rights
       grounds dismissing the appeal and so this should be upheld.

    8. Mr Shilliday submitted that the ETS evidence had been found  only  to
       reach the evidential burden and not satisfy the legal burden in SM  &
       Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT  00229  when  an
       innocent explanation was raised. The respondent's  evidence  had  not
       moved on significantly since  that  time.  The  appellant  had  given
       proper answers about his test-taking and there was no reason to doubt
       his account. Mr  Shilliday  submitted  that  if  it  were  found  the
       appellant had not used deception then this should  materially  affect
       the outcome of his human rights appeal as he should  be  put  in  the
       position that he would have been if this decision had not been  made,
       as if all of this had not happened he would have been able to succeed
       in his student appeal before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Burns.  He
       accepted that the appellant's life had moved  on,  and  that  he  now
       wishes to remain in the UK on the basis of his relationship with  his
       wife, but this should not be held against him. He had remained in the
       UK pursuing a just cause of clearing his name of deception, his human
       rights claim has deepened as a result and his appeal should therefore
       be allowed on human rights grounds.

    9. At the end of the submissions I reserved my decision.

Conclusions -Remaking

   10. I start my consideration from the point where it is accepted that the
       ETS evidence satisfies the evidential burden on the  respondent,  and
       the description of taking the test plus a contention of doubt in  the
       conclusive  nature  of  the  ETS  evidence  given  by  the  appellant
       satisfies the requirement to  put  forward  an  innocent  explanation
       which satisfies a minimum level of plausibility.

   11. I do not agree with Mr Shilliday's submission that the state  of  the
       respondent's evidence remains at the level that it was at when  SM  &
       Qadir was  decided  as  since  that  time  further  expert  evidence,
       including that of Professor French, has been obtained to support  the
       contention that the ETS procedures were sufficiently robust  to  mean
       that they are very unlikely to find that a person  had  cheated  when
       they had not done so. Further the ETS data for this appellant is that
       his scores were invalid which means that they concluded that  he  had
       cheated rather than it was not possible to tell if he had due to  the
       general unreliability of the college, although this  existed  too  as
       none of the test results from the college being found to be  able  to
       be preserved. However, I find that there must be consideration of the
       difficulty for the respondent that whatever exacting  procedures  ETS
       operated to detect fraud the material that they had to rely upon  was
       supplied by  the  colleges,  and  the  quality  of  that  input  data
       therefore relied upon was supplied  by  very  questionable  colleges.
       Burnley college was one where the procedures were  deemed  such  that
       nearly two thirds of the tests, 64% of all  ETS  tests  taken  there,
       were deemed unreliable due to  the  general  unreliability  of  those
       running the college and its procedures without any specific  evidence
       of fraud in those cases.   I also accept that even though, as set out
       below, I find that this appellant did not need to  cheat  as  he  had
       sufficiently good English this does not mean that he did not do so as
       there are other explanations as to why a person  might  cheat  beyond
       inability to speak English.

   12. On the other hand, in the appellant's favour, is  the  following:  he
       has no history of abusing immigration control  in  any  way  and  was
       believed in his other evidence about his marriage  by  Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Burns at the hearing in June 2015 ( who found  he
       did not need to make a finding with respect  to  deception);  I  find
       that he had sufficient English not to have  needed  to  cheat  as  he
       would have had to show an English  test  certificate  to  obtain  his
       original student leave to  enter  in  2011,  he  was  able  to  speak
       sufficient English at the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  in
       June 2015 to give evidence without an interpreter and he was  married
       his UK born wife in 2012 who also gave evidence in English before the
       First-tier Tribunal in 2015;  his is adamant he took the test himself
       and was able to give a detailed description of how he took  the  test
       which has not been shown to be at variance with the actual  situation
       at Burnley College and did not demonstrate  internal  inconsistencies
       when subject to cross-examination before the First-tier Tribunal;  he
       gave a good reason for using Burnley College which was  that  it  was
       opposite the place where he was studying which in turn  was  near  to
       his  sister's  residential  address;  and  the  respondent  does  not
       apparently contend  that  Burnley  College  was  a  "fraud  factory",
       perhaps as there were relatively low numbers of  persons  taking  the
       ETS tests at that college.

   13. This is a very finely balanced decision, but  bearing  in  mind  that
       strong evidence is required by the respondent to show on the  balance
       of probabilities that the appellant  used  deception,  and  thus  his
       innocent explanation should be rejected, due to the  consequences  of
       such a decision I find that when all of the above is considered  that
       this has not been shown given the many  factors  in  the  appellant's
       favour and the possibility of the evidence against  him  having  been
       contaminated or muddled at source by Burnley College.

   14. However, I do not find that this changes the outcome of  this  appeal
       for the following reasons. I do not accept that this is  a  situation
       where there is a "historic injustice"  committed  by  the  respondent
       which should lead the  appellant  to  succeed  in  his  human  rights
       appeal. The appellant did not lose his student  appeal  before  Judge
       Burns in 2015 because he was wrongly found to have used deception. He
       lost that appeal because his English language  certificate  had  been
       cancelled by ETS, which clearly was a  decision  which  was  properly
       open to them given the fact they  had  discovered  mass  cheating  in
       their examinations. It  was  also  clearly  not  a  decision  by  the
       respondent at all so it cannot be argued  that  there  was  injustice
       committed by the respondent which led to the appellant not having  an
       English certificate.  The appellant had  not  taken  another  English
       test and supplied an alternative certificate so  he  could  meet  the
       Immigration Rules when his appeal was heard by Judge Burns, and there
       is no evidence I was referred to that he has done so since that  time
       either. Further, when it came to the human  rights  appeals,  firstly
       before Judge Burns and now before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  J
       Lebasci and myself, he did not argue that he wished to  remain  as  a
       student at all: the factual matrix had,  as  Mr  Shilliday  accepted,
       moved on and he wished and wishes simply to remain as a spouse.

   15. This appeal has therefore enabled him to  "clear  his  name"  in  the
       sense I found that the respondent had not satisfied me on the balance
       of probabilities that he cheated in his TOEIC examinations, but I  do
       not find that this is a factor to which I  should  give  weight  when
       determining whether his removal is  a  disproportionate  interference
       with his family life in the UK. He is now to be seen neutrally  as  a
       man whose character does not have this blemish.

   16. I find that the appellant is genuinely married to his British citizen
       wife, Ms [LS], who has lived in the UK all of her life and  works  in
       this country, and that the couple have  cohabited  as  man  and  wife
       since their marriage in 2012.  However, he is not able  to  meet  the
       requirements of the 5 year route under Appendix FM  because  he  does
       not have leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.  He  also  cannot  meet  the
       requirements of the ten year route under EX1 of Appendix  FM  to  the
       Immigration  Rules  because  he  has  not  shown   there   would   be
       insurmountable obstacles to family life with his wife taking place in
       Pakistan as he has not put forward evidence that  this  would  entail
       very serious hardship as issues such as  his  wife  having  to  leave
       family, change work and adapt to life in a  different  country  where
       she does not wish to live do not suffice to meet this exacting  test,
       particularly as she speaks some Urdu, has  visited  Pakistan  in  the
       past, and both the appellant and his wife have  qualifications  which
       would assist with obtaining work and establishing  themselves.  There
       is further absolutely no evidence that the appellant could  meet  the
       private life Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  as  he
       cannot show he would have very significant obstacles  to  integration
       if he returned to Pakistan which is his country of nationality, where
       he has lived for most of his life and has the necessary language  and
       cultural connections, and where he has friends and family.

   17. If the appeal is looked at outside of the Immigration Rules on  wider
       Article 8 ECHR grounds  only  little  weight  can  be  given  to  the
       appellant's private life ties with the UK as these have  been  formed
       whilst he has been  precariously  and  unlawfully  present,  applying
       s.117B(4) and (5) of Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.
       Some weight can be given to  his  relationship  with  his  qualifying
       partner, as the  relationship  was  formed  when  the  appellant  was
       lawfully present with leave as a student, but I find  that  there  is
       nothing further that can be balanced against the  significant  weight
       that must be given to the  public  interest  in  removing  those  who
       cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  thus  in
       maintaining immigration control. The fact that the  appellant  speaks
       English and is financially independent due to  his  wife's  work  are
       neutral matters.

   18. I conclude in light of all of the evidence that the  removal  of  the
       appellant is not disproportionate, although of course this  does  not
       mean that he might not be entitled to return to  the  UK  with  entry
       clearance as a spouse in accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules  at
       Appendix FM, but this will be a matter for him to consider  with  his
       legal representatives.

Decision:

    1. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
       making of an error on a point of law.

    2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on human rights
       grounds.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   2nd October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
