
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01646/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2019                          | On 05 March 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 HP (India)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals on procedural fairness grounds from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Farrelly sitting at Taylor House on 5
    September 2018) dismissing her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the Department") to refuse
    to grant her indefinite leave to remain on the  grounds  of  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an
    anonymity direction, but as the appellant's state of health at the time
    of the hearing is a central issue in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
    I consider that an anonymity direction is warranted.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of India, whose date of  birth  is  24  May
    1985.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 22 April  2009  with  valid
    entry clearance as a student.  She was granted limited leave to  remain
    as a student, and in due course was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1
    (Post-study work) migrant.  On  8  August  2013  she  made  an  in-time
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur, and  she  was
    granted leave to remain in this capacity until 19 May 2017.

 3. On 14 May 2017 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain  on
    the basis of 10 years' lawful  residence,  although  she  had  not  yet
    reached the 10-year watershed. The background  to  this  was  that  her
    business had foundered due to the exit of her business partner, and the
    appellant was unable to meet the requirements of the  Rules  to  extend
    her leave to remain in the capacity of  a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur.   Her
    legal representatives, Westbrook Law, said in their covering letter  of
    12 May 2017: "her business partner made a rough exit from the business,
    where [HP] was put in limbo."  On that basis, Westbrook Law invited the
    respondent to grant her indefinite leave to remain on the grounds  that
    there were truly exceptional circumstances in her case.

 4. On 14 December 2014 the Department gave their reasons for refusing  the
    application.   She  had  not  accrued  10  years'   continuous   lawful
    residence, and so she did not qualify for indefinite leave  to  remain.
    She did not qualify in the alternative for leave to remain  under  Rule
    276ADE(1)(iv).  Her parents continued to reside in India, and  she  had
    visited India in 2012.  She could  utilise  the  skills  that  she  had
    acquired in the UK to assist her in securing employment or establishing
    a business in her home country in order to support  herself.   She  had
    been educated to a high level in the UK, having obtained a  Masters  in
    Business Administration from Liverpool John Moores University.

 5. In the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the case that  was
    advanced was that the decision of the Department was unreasonable.

 6. By a notice dated 29 January 2018, the appellant and Westbrook Law were
    notified that the appeal would be heard on 29  August  2018  at  Taylor
    House.  On 21 August 2018 Westbrook Law sent a letter to  the  Tribunal
    requesting an adjournment on the ground  that  the  appellant  suffered
    from depression and had mental health issues.  In support of this, they
    submitted a sick note from her GP  who  said  that  she  had  seen  the
    appellant on 13 August 2018 for abdominal pain, and that the  appellant
    was awaiting  gynaecological  investigations.   A  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge considered the adjournment application, and  refused  it  on  the
    basis that the GP note made no reference to any  mental  health  issues
    and did not say that the appellant would be unfit to attend.  A  notice
    of decision was sent by letter dated 24 August 2018.

 7. It is not disputed that Westbrook Law and the appellant  received  this
    notice in advance of the hearing scheduled for 29 August 2018.  The way
    it is put  in  the  application  for  permission  is  that,  after  the
    adjournment request was refused, the appellant "failed to instruct" her
    legal representatives to attend the hearing on 29 August 2018.



The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The hearing did not in the event go ahead on that  day.   Instead,  the
    appeal hearing was re-listed for 5 September 2018.  In  his  subsequent
    decision, Judge Farrelly observed that there was no note on the file as
    to why it did not  proceed  on  29  August  2018,  or  if  any  further
    notification was sent.  But there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant or her representative attended on 29 August 2018 or made  any
    further enquiries as to the outcome of  the  listed  hearing.   On  the
    basis that the appellant had been advised of the hearing and had failed
    without good reason to attend, he had decided  to  proceed.  The  Judge
    went on to assess the appeal on the merits, and found that the decision
    of the Department was reasonable and proportionate.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. The application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    settled by the appellant's legal representatives.   They  pleaded  that
    the  decision  had  been  taken  deceitful  without   considering   the
    appellant's medical condition and without  having  any  regard  to  her
    medical notes "as she was not mentally prepared to stand in a court  to
    provide  any  pieces  of  evidence  if  needed."   She  was  undergoing
    persistent gynaecological issues due to which she had  been  undergoing
    stress and depression.  When she had requested a sick note from her GP,
    she was only given one based on the main issues -  namely  her  stomach
    pain - but it failed to  mention  her  depression.  A  request  for  an
    adjournment was sent similarly on 5 September 2018.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission

10. On 21 November 2018 Designated Judge Woodcraft  refused  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "The grounds of onward appeal argue that due to her ill health  the
         appellant was unable to instruct a  representative  to  attend  the
         hearing on [29] August 2018.  The appellant  was  given  7  months'
         notice of that hearing, and sufficient time to instruct someone  to
         represent her whatever her medical condition.  That appeal date was
         in turn adjourned giving the appellant some  extra  time.   On  the
         basis of the appellant having been  advised  of  the  new  date,  5
         September 2018, but  had  failed  to  attend  without  giving  good
         reason, the Judge decided to proceed as was open to him.  Even  now
         the medical certificate produced by the appellant merely shows that
         she was not fit to work, which is not the same as saying  that  she
         was unfit to attend court.

         The remainder of the grounds repeat the  appellant's  arguments  in
         relation to her private life, but as the Judge pointed out at [12],
         the appellant's  status  is  precarious  and  little  weight  could
         therefore be given to it in  the  balancing  exercise  outside  the
         Rules.  The grounds amount to no more than a disagreement with  the
         result [and] they do not demonstrate any arguable error of  law  on
         the Judge's part."

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant for Permission

11. Following a renewed application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, (also settled by the appellant's legal representatives) Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission to  appeal  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "An  arguable  procedural  error  has  occurred.   The  appeal  was
         initially listed for hearing on 29 August 2018.  Her application to
         adjourn that hearing was refused.  However,  the  hearing  did  not
         proceed on that date but was, instead, listed before Judge Farrelly
         on 5 September 2018.  He proceeded to hear the appeal with  neither
         party in attendance but no notice of a re-listed hearing appears to
         have been sent.  The Judge noted that he could see no  such  notice
         at [6].  If the appeal was to be listed on a different date from 29
         August 2018, in the absence of a further  notice  of  hearing,  the
         appellant was denied an opportunity to attend  on  that  new  date.
         That is arguably a procedural error amounting to unfairness."

Discussion

12. The first question which arises is whether the true factual  matrix  is
    that apprehended by Judge Grubb or that apprehended by Judge Woodcraft.
     While it appears that no  formal  notice  of  hearing  was  issued  in
    respect of the hearing on 5 September 2018, it is likely that Westbrook
    Law were notified of the re-listed  hearing  on  5  September  2018  in
    advance of it taking place.  My reasoning on this  issue  is  two-fold.
    Firstly, if they had not been notified of the re-listing of the hearing
    on 5 September 2018, I would have expected the absence of notice to  be
    a ground of appeal in the permission application settled  by  Westbrook
    Law.  But I cannot find a complaint about non-notification of  the  new
    hearing date in either the permission  application  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or in the renewed application  for  permission  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Secondly, and in any event, they pleaded that a request  for
    an adjournment was "sent similarly on 5  September  2018".   The  plain
    implication of this is that they were aware of the  hearing  being  re-
    listed on that date, and in response they renewed the  request  for  an
    adjournment which they had  made  in  respect  of  the  earlier  listed
    hearing on 29 August 2018.

13. I accept that there is no specific evidence of  this,  beyond  what  is
    stated in the permission application. But the fact  remains  that,  not
    only are the appellant's former representatives not complaining  of  an
    absence of notice of the hearing on 5 September 2018, but the case they
    are advancing by way of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is that they  were
    aware of the hearing on 5 September 2018 before it took  place.   Their
    complaint, on behalf of their client, is not the absence of  notice  of
    the hearing being re-listed on 5 September 2018, but the fact  that  it
    went ahead despite the appellant's medical condition.

14. But even if I am wrong about the absence of notice for the hearing on 5
    September 2018, I do not consider on the particular facts of this  case
    that the appellant has been the  victim  of  procedural  unfairness  or
    irregularity.

15. Firstly, she has not made out a case on the medical  evidence  provided
    by way of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that she was unfit to attend the
    hearing on either 29 August or 5  September  as  a  witness  or  as  an
    observer - she was not a litigant in person. Secondly, it is clear that
    neither she nor her representatives would have attended on 5  September
    2018 in any  circumstances.  As  of  5  September  2018  the  appellant
    continued to consider that she was too unwell to attend a hearing,  and
    she continued to be unwilling to instruct Westbrook Law to present  her
    case in her absence.

16. Thirdly, by her earlier conduct I consider that the  appellant  can  be
    said to have waived her right to an oral hearing, and to have consented
    to her appeal being disposed of in her absence. Both the appellant  and
    her legal representatives were aware in advance of the  hearing  listed
    for 29 August that the adjournment request on medical grounds had  been
    refused. In the circumstances, the appellant ought to have attended  on
    29 August 2018 and ought to  have  instructed  her  representatives  to
    attend with her to present her case. But she chose  neither  to  attend
    herself nor to instruct Westbrook Law to attend for  the  oral  hearing
    which was scheduled to take place. Accordingly, she was  constructively
    content for the hearing to proceed in her absence and in the absence of
    her legal representatives. In the circumstances, she was  not  remotely
    disadvantaged by the fact that the hearing in her  absence  took  place
    some days later instead.

17. The  position  might  be  different  if  the  appellant  had  recovered
    sufficiently such that she felt she could have attended the hearing  on
    5 September 2018 if she had known about it.  But that is not her  case.
    Her case is that the hearing should not have gone ahead  on  either  29
    August 2018 or 5 September 2018 because of her continuing ill health.

18. However, as noted by Judge  Woodcraft,  the  sick  note  issued  on  30
    October 2018 does not confirm that the appellant was  unfit  to  attend
    the hearing of her appeal in August or September 2018.  Also,  it  does
    not confirm that the appellant was suffering from depression and stress
    at the end of August or the beginning of September 2018, as opposed  to
    suffering from depression and stress on the date of  assessment,  which
    was on 30 October 2018.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 18 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
