
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
hu/01477/2015

                                                 hu/01478/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th July 2017                         |On 2nd August 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                          Bamidele Olalekan Shoebi
                           Fadeke Victoria Shoebi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. These are the appellants' appeals against the decision of Judge  Oliver
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 19th October 2016.

Background

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  The first appellant arrived in
    the UK on 8th September 2006 with leave to remain as  a  student  which
    was extended twice, his leave expiring on 31st May  2011.   The  second
    appellant joined him as his dependant on 14th January 2010.  Since 31st
    May 2011 they have both overstayed.

 3. Whilst in the UK they have had three children, a son aged 5, a daughter
    aged 3 and another daughter born on 4th January  2015.   Following  the
    birth of their third child they were granted  leave  to  remain  for  a
    short period, to 13th April 2015 because of the postnatal interests  of
    mother and child.

 4. The appellants' case is based upon the risk of FGM in Nigeria to  their
    two daughters.  The judge noted that they had been specifically advised
    to make an application for asylum or breach of  Article  3  obligations
    but had not done so.  He said that no claim had been made for the  good
    reason that internal relocation was generally  a  viable  option.   The
    second witness was asked why the family could not move to  an  area  of
    Nigeria away from the family where FGM was not practised and  she  said
    that it would not be easy as they had not been in Nigeria  for  a  long
    time and did not have anyone left there.

 5. The judge concluded as follows:

         "The appellants' family life does not  qualify  under  Appendix  FM
         under either the partner or parent route.  In respect of the former
         there will not be very significant obstacles to their return and it
         would not be unreasonable for the children, by returning, to remain
         with their parents.  None of the children have resided  in  the  UK
         for seven years.  To the private lives of  the  appellants  I  give
         little weight.

         I find that there are no exceptional  circumstances  which  warrant
         consideration outside the Rules.  If I am wrong as to this  I  find
         that there will be no interference with their family life since the
         family unit will not be broken.  In any event this is a case  where
         the public interest  in  immigration  control  makes  their  return
         proportionate."

The Grounds of Application

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred  in  his  consideration  by  failing  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the children at any stage which was particularly troubling
    as there was potential for the female children to  be  exposed  to  the
    risk of FGM at the hands of their extended family members in the  event
    that their parents elected to return to either  of  their  home  areas.
    The judge was wrong to concentrate on the  failure  of  the  family  to
    claim asylum, failing to appreciate that the family were bound to raise
    concerns about FGM in their human rights appeal under  Section  120  of
    the 2002 Act.  His determination was cursory and flawed because he  had
    failed to apply the undue  harsh/reasonable  criteria  as  set  out  in
    Januzi [2006] UKHL 5.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Andrew for the reasons stated
    in the grounds on 8th June 2017.

 8. Prior  to  the  hearing  I  received  a  letter  from  the  appellants'
    representatives stating that they would not be attending on his behalf,
    although they continued to  act  and  they  were  instructed  that  the
    appellant would be representing himself in person.

 9. There was no appearance by the appellant.

10.  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  there  was  no  error  of  law   in   this
    determination.  The entire case was based on the risk of FGM which  had
    been dealt with at length by the Immigration Judge.  The children  were
    extremely young and it was inconceivable  that  the  judge  would  have
    found that their best interests lay in remaining in the  UK  when  they
    clearly should be with their parents.

Findings and Conclusions

11. It is  correct  to  say  that  there  is  no  interest  of  a  specific
    consideration of the children's best interests in  this  determination,
    which is regrettable.  However in these particular  circumstances,  the
    error is not material.

12. It is quite clear from the witness statements that the appellants' case
    was based upon the risk of FGM to the two daughters.

13. In his statement the first appellant explained why he had lost track of
    time prior to the expiry of his visa and, as a result  of  his  ongoing
    health problems, he was unable to secure employment  with  the  British
    Army as he had hoped.  He then stated that he and his wife belong to  a
    very traditional tribe which  strongly  believes  that  FGM  should  be
    carried out on daughters, and although they as parents strongly  oppose
    FGM they would be forced  to  undergo  the  procedure.  There  is  also
    reference to the fact that his eldest son is now at school and  he  has
    never been to  Nigeria.   His  second  child  is  also  at  school  and
    progressing well.  They enjoy private life in the UK.

14. The second appellant reiterated the claim that they  sought  protection
    from the state for their daughters and that the  eldest  children  have
    adjusted to school life in the UK.

15. The judge properly concentrated his attention on the main issue in  the
    appeal which was the fear of FGM on the two daughters.  He was  correct
    to state  that  whilst  he  accepted  that  the  second  appellant  had
    undergone FGM, the practice on the  daughters  could  be  prevented  by
    their returning to one of the large areas in Nigeria where it  was  not
    widely practised.

16. He  recorded  the  evidence  in  relation  to  relocation.   The  first
    appellant said that they could not go and  live  in  a  different  area
    because they had not been anywhere else before and his wife  said  that
    it would not be easy because they had not been in Nigeria  for  a  long
    while and they did not have anyone left there.  That is a long way from
    establishing that it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  family  to
    relocate.

17. The children are not qualifying children.  They are Nigerian  nationals
    and have lived in the UK for less  than  seven  years.   They  are  all
    extremely young, only one of  school  age,   and  their  lives  revolve
    around the family. Had the judge specifically turned his  mind  to  the
    issue of best interests of the children there is  only  one  conclusion
    that he could properly have come to. Their best interests  clearly  lie
    in staying with their parents and returning with them to their  country
    of nationality.

18. There is no material error of law in this decision which shall stand.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




[pic]
Signed                              Date 2 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor





