
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01612/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 14th June 2021              |On the 29th June 2021              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                               SHAZEDUR RASHID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Saini, Counsel instructed by Brit Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by Microsoft Teams
      (V). A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing. I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party expressed any
      concern, with the process.




Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  15  December  1978,
      who entered the UK in October 2010 as a Tier 4 student.

   3. On 19 February 2016 an application by the appellant for further leave
      was refused under paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration  Rules  on  the
      basis that he had fraudulently obtained a TOEIC certificate from  ETS
      on 23 May 2012.

   4. The appellant appealed against that  decision  and  his  appeal  came
      before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid. The decision of  Judge
      Majid was set aside by the Upper Tribunal with no  findings  of  fact
      preserved and the appeal was remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
      be considered afresh. The appeal then came before Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Cassel. In a decision promulgated on 19 February  2019,
      Judge  Cassel  dismissed  the  appeal,  finding  that  the  appellant
      fraudulently obtained the test result in 2012 by use of a proxy.  The
      appellant became appeal rights exhausted, in respect of the  decision
      by Judge Cassel, on 18 July 2019.

   5. On 30 July 2019 the appellant submitted an application for indefinite
      leave to remain on the basis of his private life. In this application
      he submitted, inter alia, that he had lived in the UK for nine years,
      was of good character, and that he wished to work and  take  part  in
      charitable work. It  was  not  argued  in  his  application  that  he
      satisfied the conditions of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

   6. The application was refused by the respondent  9  January  2020.  The
      refusal decision made no reference to the ETS/fraud issue and it  was
      stated that the application did not fall for refusal  on  grounds  of
      suitability in  section  S  -  LTR  of  Appendix  FM.  There  was  no
      consideration in the decision of paragraph 276B.

   7. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision. On 18  June
      2020 a case management hearing was held by telephone by Judge of  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  O'Keefe.  The  decision,  following  the   case
      management hearing, states, inter alia, that

           "A previous appeal by the appellant was refused  by  the  First-
           tier Tribunal on 19 February 2019; the Tribunal found  that  the
           appellant had used deception to obtain a TOEIC certificate.  The
           principles of Devaseelan therefore apply to those findings."

   8. The appeal then came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Karbani
      ("the judge"). In a decision promulgated  on  15  December  2020  the
      judge dismissed the appeal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   9. In paragraph 10 of the decision, the judge noted that  the  appellant
      submitted amended grounds arguing that, at the date of  the  hearing,
      he satisfied the conditions of  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
      Rules (continuous  lawful  residence).  The  judge  stated  that  the
      respondent considered this to be a new matter and that she  consented
      to it being considered.

  10. The focus of the decision was paragraph 276B.  The  judge  considered
      each of the five subsections  of  paragraph  276B  that  need  to  be
      satisfied, as follows:

        a. Subsection (i) requires that the appellant has accrued 10  years
           of continuous lawful residence in the UK. The judge  found  that
           this was satisfied.


        b. Subsection (ii) requires that it would not be undesirable for  a
           person to be given indefinite leave to remain. The  judge  found
           that this was not satisfied because the appellant had been found
           by Judge Cassel to have engaged in deception and  there  was  no
           basis to depart from the finding of Judge Cassel.

        c. Subsection (iii) requires that an appellant does  not  fall  for
           refusal under the general grounds for refusal. The  judge  found
           that this subsection was satisfied as  the  respondent  did  not
           submit any grounds for general refusal.

        d. Subsection (iv)  requires  an  appellant  to  have  demonstrated
           sufficient knowledge of the English language and life in the UK.
           The  judge  found  that  this  was  not  satisfied  because  the
           appellant had not taken the life in the UK test.

        e. Subsection (v) requires that the appellant must not be in breach
           of immigration laws unless  paragraph  39E  applies.  The  judge
           found that paragraph 39E applied and that this was satisfied.

  11. Having found that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  conditions  of
      paragraph  276B  because  subparagraphs  (ii)  and  (iv)   were   not
      satisfied, the judge proceeded to  consider  paragraph  276  ADE  and
      article 8 ECHR outside the Rules. The judge found  that  there  would
      not be very significant obstacles to the appellant  integrating  into
      life in Bangladesh and that his removal to Bangladesh  would  not  be
      disproportionate under article 8 ECHR.

The grounds of appeal

  12. There are 7 grounds of appeal. They argue as follows:

        a. Ground 1. The judge followed the decision of  Judge  Cassel  but
           not Judge Majid.


        b. Ground 2. The decision of the respondent  did  not  mention  the
           ETS/TOEIC issue and therefore it was not  at  issue  before  the
           judge.

        c. Ground 3. The judge could  have  made  an  "unless  order"  with
           respect to the appellant's life in the UK  test,  which  he  was
           booked to take; and the judge should have taken into account the
           effect of covid 19 on the appellant's ability to take  the  test
           earlier.

        d. Grounds 4-7. These grounds, in summary, submit  that  the  judge
           failed to properly consider evidence (or  the  absence  thereof)
           relating to the question of whether  the  appellant  engaged  in
           fraud in respect of the TOEIC test.

Submissions

  13. Mr Saini's submissions focused  entirely  on  the  second  ground  of
      appeal.  He  argued  that  the  respondent  could  not  rely   on   a
      conduct/suitability argument as a reason  to  oppose  an  appellant's
      appeal when that conduct/suitability argument had not been raised  by
      the  respondent  in  her  refusal   letter   (or   in   an   addendum
      letter/decision). In  the  absence  of  a  written  decision  raising
      suitability, Mr Saini maintained that it was not a "live"  issue  for
      the judge to determine.

  14. He relied on paragraph 79 of Mahmood (paras. S-LTR.1.6. & S-LTR.4.2.;
      Scope) [2020] UKUT 00376 to support this argument, where it states.

           The two separate basis upon which the  respondent  may  exercise
           discretion to refuse an application for leave to remain  can  be
           summarised as i) the use of false representations or  a  failure
           to disclose any material fact in a previous application and  ii)
           the use of false representations in order to obtain  a  document
           required to support such an  application.  Consequent  to  their
           independent nature, the Tribunal is satisfied that reliance upon
           one or both of the elements must  be  specifically  pleaded  and
           reasoned by the respondent in her decision letter,  or  if  upon
           becoming aware of further information the  respondent  seeks  to
           exercise her discretion during  the  course  of  the  subsequent
           appeal process it should be by means  of  an  addendum  decision
           providing reasons with an appellant being given sufficient  time
           to counter the serious nature of the underlying allegation as to
           conduct.

  15. Mr Saini acknowledged that the appellant had  raised  paragraph  276B
      for the first time shortly before the hearing and therefore there was
      no reason for the respondent to have  addressed  it  in  the  refusal
      letter. But he argued that the respondent should not  have  consented
      to the Tribunal considering the new matter  without  first  making  a
      written addendum decision. He argued that this position is  supported
      by the respondent's guidance on rights of appeal (version  10,  dated
      18 December 2020).

  16. Ms Everett expressed sympathy for the  appellant's  position  because
      suitability/conduct was not raised in the refusal  letter  but  noted
      that it was the appellant who had raised the new matter which brought
      conduct/suitability into play. She also referred to paragraph  21  of
      the decision which makes clear that suitability was addressed  during
      submissions.

Analysis

   1. Shortly before the hearing the appellant raised a new matter: that he
      was entitled to ILR on the basis of long  residence  under  paragraph
      276B of the Immigration Rules. Paragraph 276B contains five  distinct
      subsections, all of which must be satisfied. Two of  the  subsections
      (subsections (ii) and (iii)) involve suitability/conduct issues.






   2. Requesting that the Tribunal consider paragraph 276B at the  hearing,
      even though the respondent had not had sufficient time to consider it
      prior to the hearing, was course of  action  that  was  open  to  the
      appellant. See OA and Others (human rights;  'new  matter';  s.120  :
      Nigeria) [2019] UKUT 65 (IAC). Sections 85(4)-(6) of the  Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") permit  a  judge  to
      accede to such a request if the respondent consents.  In  this  case,
      the respondent consented and therefore the  judge  had  jurisdiction,
      and was entitled, to hear the new matter.






   3. There is no requirement under the 2002 Act (or in other  legislation)
      on a judge to refuse to hear a new matter if the respondent  has  not
      made a written decision in respect of it prior to the hearing. Nor is
      there a requirement on the respondent to refuse to consent to  a  new
      matter being considered if she does not have time to issue a  written
      decision before the hearing.  Mr  Saini  relied  on  the  appellant's
      guidance dated 18 December 2020 on "rights of  appeal"  but  no  such
      obligation on the respondent is stated in (or can be  inferred  from)
      this guidance which in fact says (on page 29) that consent should  be
      given unless it would prejudice the respondent.



   4. That said, where the respondent refuses to grant leave on  the  basis
      that a person has engaged in deception, the fraud allegation needs to
      be put to the appellant in sufficient  detail,  and  with  sufficient
      specificity, for the appellant to understand what he has been accused
      of so that he can seek to counter it. Ordinarily, this will involve a
      written decision (or addendum decision if the issue has come to light
      after the initial decision). This point was made in paragraph  79  of
      Mahmood and  is  consistent  with  numerous  authorities  considering
      procedural  fairness  including,  for  example,  Pathan,  R  (on  the
      application of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]
      UKSC 41.






   5.  However,  this  is  not  a  case  where  the  appellant   faced   an
      unparticularised or unanticipated allegation of deception  that  took
      him by surprise at the hearing, and in respect of which  he  has  not
      had an opportunity to prepare  a  response.  On  the  contrary,  even
      though the fraud issue was not raised in the respondent's decision of
      9 January 2020, it could not have been more clear  to  the  appellant
      that, at the hearing, his alleged fraud would be at issue. Nor  could
      the appellant have been  in  any  doubt  as  to  the  nature  of  the
      allegation. This is because:



        a. Judge O'Keefe, at the case management review hearing on 18  June
           2020, stated in clear terms that the  principles  of  Devaseelan
           would apply to Judge Cassel's findings on the use  of  deception
           to obtain a TOEIC certificate;






        b. it was an inevitable consequence of expanding the scope  of  the
           appeal to encompass consideration of paragraph 276B  (which  was
           done at the appellant's request) that the Tribunal would need to
           consider the fraud allegation (as  all  five  sub-paragraphs  of
           276B must be met and it would not be  possible  to  decide  sub-
           paragraphs (ii) and (iii) without considering the fraud  issue);
           and



        c. the appellant knew in  detail  the  nature  and  extent  of  the
           allegations against him, as well as the gaps/shortcomings in his
           evidence  to  refute  the  allegations,   because   these   were
           considered in detail by Judge Cassel in the decision promulgated
           on 19 February 2019.






   6. For these reasons, the appellant cannot succeed on ground 2.






   7. The other grounds, which were not pursued at the hearing, are lacking
      in merit. I will address them briefly:



        a. The judge could not have relied on the findings of  Judge  Majid
           because his decision was set aside; and the judge,  pursuant  to
           Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR  -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)
           Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702, was required to have regard to -
           and treat as a starting point - the decision  of  Judge  Cassel.
           Therefore ground 1 has no merit.






        b. Ground 3 is misconceived because an  appeal  cannot  be  allowed
           conditionally. See HH ('conditional' appeal decisions : Somalia)
           [2017] UKUT 490 (IAC).



        c. The appellant cannot succeed under grounds 4 - 7 because in  the
           absence of any new evidence or submissions that had not  already
           been considered by Judge Cassel  there  was  no  basis  for  the
           judge, who was bound to  follow  the  principles  enunciated  in
           Devaseelan,  to depart from Judge Cassel's conclusion  that  the
           appellant had engaged in fraud.



   8. The appeal is therefore dismissed.


Notice of decision


   9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
      an error of law and stands. The appeal is dismissed.

|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |                                  |
|Dated: 16 June 2021               |                                  |





















