
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/01002/2019 (V)
                                                           HU/01004/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 June 2021                    |On 29 June 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                              MD HABIBUR RAHMAN
                                 MITA BEGUM
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr Karim, Counsel instructed by Liberty Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1.  This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  to  which  both   parties   have
     consented. The form of remote hearing was video by  Microsoft  Teams
     (V). A face  to  face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
     practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.  I
     did not experience any difficulties, and neither party  expressed  any
     concern, with the process.

  2. The appellants  are  a  married  couple  from  Bangladesh.  The  first
     appellant came to the UK in 2009 as a student. The  second  appellant,
     his wife, joined him as a dependent in September 2016. They  have  two
     children born in the UK (in 2017 and 2020).

  3. The appellants claim that (a) they are entitled to indefinite leave to
     remain in the UK under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules on  the
     basis that the first appellant has resided in the UK lawfully for over
     10 years; (b) removal of the second appellant would violate article  3
     ECHR because of her mental health condition; and (c)  removal  of  the
     appellants and their children would breach article 8 ECHR.

  4. Following the refusal their human rights claims on 2 January 2019, the
     appellants appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Their  appeal  was
     allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Oliver.  However,  his
     decision was set aside and remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
     appeal then came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Aldridge
     ("the judge"). In a decision promulgated on 3 February 2021, the judge
     dismissed the appeal. The appellants are now  appealing  against  this
     decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

Paragraph 276B

  5. It was common ground that  the  first  appellant  had  leave  from  13
     October 2009 until 24 January 2018, when an  application  made  on  28
     January 2017 (varied on 29 June 2017) was  refused  and  certified  as
     clearly unfounded under section 94(1) of the  Nationality  Immigration
     and Asylum Act 2002.

  6. The first appellant advanced two arguments as to why,  notwithstanding
     that his leave ended on 24 January 2018, he had accrued  10  years  of
     continuous lawful leave. His first argument is that he made a  further
     application on 28 February 2018 (14 days after the refusal decision on
     24 January 2018) and therefore he benefited from the 14 day  exception
     under paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules. The judge rejected  this
     argument because, as the appellant was not granted leave following the
     application on 28 February 2018, he was an "open ended",  rather  than
     "book-ended", overstayer, and therefore, in accordance  with  Hoque  &
     Ors v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020]  EWCA  Civ
     1357, he did not meet the conditions of paragraph 276B(i).

  7. The first appellant's second argument was  that  the  decision  of  24
     January 2018 was unlawful and therefore his application of 28  January
     2017 (varied on 29 June 2017) remained (and remains) outstanding,  and
     therefore by operation of  section  3  Immigration  Act  1971  he  has
     accrued 10 years of leave. The reason the  appellant  maintained  that
     the respondent's decision on 24 January 2018 was unlawful was that  it
     determined his application made on 28 January  2017  rather  than  the
     variation of 29 June 2017. The appellant advanced this argument in the
     First-tier Tribunal even though it was rejected in an application  for
     permission  to  judicially  review  the  respondent's  decision.   The
     decision to refuse permission (in the judicial review application) was
     made by Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson on 7 September 2018. Judge  Hanson
     found that although the  respondent's  decision  of  24  January  2018
     referred  to  the  appellant's  original,  rather  than  the   varied,
     application, in substance the varied application was considered  fully
     by the respondent and the appellant's case was not arguably made  out.
     The appellant did not renew the application. The judge  rejected  this
     argument on the basis that it  was  not  for  him  to  go  behind  the
     decision of Judge Hanson. At paragraph 34 the judge stated:

           "I further reject the argument that the tribunal can, in effect,
           look behind the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  when  leave  to
           appeal the refusal of the respondent was rejected  and,  in  any
           event, the appellant was at liberty to appeal that  decision  of
           the Upper Tribunal and did not do so."

Article 3

  8. It was argued before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  because  of  her
     mental health problems removal of the second appellant  to  Bangladesh
     would violate article 3 ECHR. Reliance was placed on  several  reports
     as well as objective evidence about circumstances faced by people with
     mental health conditions in Bangladesh. The evidence  included,  inter
     alia:

        a. A report by a psychologist, Ms Costa, dated 17  September  2019,
           who described the second  appellant  as  being  very  upset  and
           worried about the threat of being returned  to  Bangladesh.  She
           stated that the second appellant suffered from depression,  poor
           memory, difficulties with concentration and headaches. She noted
           that the appellant was taking antidepressant medication and  has
           received counselling.


        b. A letter from a  doctor  in  Bangladesh  (Dr  Mohammed  Hunayun)
           stating that there is very limited provision in  Bangladesh  for
           mental  health  inpatients  and  that   private   treatment   in
           Bangladesh "is very much cash".

        c. A report from an expert on Bangladesh, Prof Aguilar,  describing
           a shortage, and  inadequacy,  of  mental  health  facilities  in
           Bangladesh. The report contrasts private sector  to  the  public
           sector  medical  treatment  in  Bangladesh  and  concludes  that
           because the second appellant would  be  reliant  on  the  latter
           there would not be necessary treatment  available  to  her.  The
           report states that the second  appellant's  mental  health  will
           deteriorate such that she will suffer a significant reduction in
           life expectancy.

        d. A report from a social worker, Mr Chester, who stated that  both
           appellants suffer from depression,  which  they  associate  with
           their uncertain future, and strong desire to avoid returning  to
           Bangladesh. Mr Chester does not appear, from the description  of
           his qualifications, to  have  any  expertise  about  Bangladesh.
           Nonetheless,  he  described  the  education  available  to   the
           appellants' child in Bangladesh, based on  what  the  appellants
           had told him, as worrying, and stated that based on what he  had
           "gleaned" the  family  will  lack  access  to  adequate  health,
           housing and employment.

        e. Various reports describing problems with the  health  system  in
           Bangladesh including  in  particular  the  provision  of  mental
           health services.

  9. The judge found the report of Ms Costa to  be  reliable  and  accepted
     that the second appellant suffers from a depressive illness  and  that
     she has been prescribed medication.

 10. The judge stated that he had reservations about  the  report  of  Prof
     Aguilar  because,  inter  alia,  it  was  not  within  Prof  Aguilar's
     expertise to express a view on the appellant's life expectancy.

 11. With respect to the social worker report, the  judge  stated  that  he
     treated  the  conclusions  with  caution  as  they  were  based  on  a
     presumption that the family will be destitute and the first  appellant
     will be unable to find employment.

 12. The judge  concluded  in  paragraph  42  that  the  evidence  did  not
     establish that the second appellant would face a significant reduction
     in her life expectancy were she returned to Bangladesh. The judge also
     found that because the first appellant is highly qualified  and  would
     be able to find employment, the second  appellant  would  be  able  to
     access (private) medical assistance and  medication.  The  judge  also
     found she would have the support of her family in Bangladesh.

Article 8

 13. The judge found that there would not be very significant obstacles  to
     either the first or second appellant integrating in Bangladesh.


 14. The judge then assessed the proportionality of the appellants removal.
     On the public interest side of the scales, the judge  found  that  the
     appellants speak English and are financially independent and therefore
     these "public interests" do not weigh against  them.  The  judge  gave
     significant weight, however, to the public interest in the maintenance
     of effective immigration controls.

 15. On the appellants' side of the scales the judge attached  only  little
     weight to their private life in the UK as this  was  established  when
     their immigration status was precarious. The judge gave weight to  the
     second appellant's health but did so in the context  of  finding  that
     she would be  able  to  obtain  support,  including  from  family,  in
     Bangladesh. The judge concluded that "the considerable public interest
     in maintaining effective immigration control" outweighed  the  private
     and family life established by the appellants in the UK.


Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 16. Mr Karim, on behalf of the appellant, has advanced  seven  grounds  of
     appeal.


 17. Ground 1. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge applied the
     wrong burden of proof in respect of both article 3 and article  8.  In
     respect of article 8, it is submitted that the judge erred by  stating
     (in paragraph 18) that the burden  was  on  the  appellants  when  the
     correct legal position is that once the appellants have shown  article
     8 is engaged the burden lies with the respondent to show that  removal
     is lawful and proportionate. With respect to article 3, it  is  argued
     that the judge erred by failing to  recognise  that  it  was  for  the
     respondent to show that  treatment  and  medication  is  available  in
     Bangladesh in accordance with the procedural requirements required  in
     Article 3 cases as set out in  AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State  for
     the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17.

 18. Ground 2. The second ground argues that the judge, when assessing  the
     appellant's argument that he satisfied  the  conditions  of  paragraph
     276B, failed to engage with the argument that  the  first  appellant's
     application of 28 January 2017 (varied on 29 June 2017) remained  (and
     remains)  outstanding,  and  therefore  by  operation  of  section   3
     Immigration Act 1971 he has accrued 10 years  of  leave.  It  is  also
     argued that the judge erred by treating  Judge  Hanson's  decision  as
     binding.

 19. Ground 3. The third ground of appeal argues that the judge (a)  failed
     to take Ms Costa's opinion into consideration when  assessing  Article
     8; (b) did not give adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  Prof  Aguilar's
     report; and (c)  did not adequately  explain  why  the  social  worker
     report was not accepted.

 20. Ground 4. The fourth ground of appeal argues that the judge  erred  in
     respect of article  3  by  speculating  about  the  first  appellant's
     ability to obtain work,  not  considering  the  Covid  situation,  not
     addressing the lack of childcare and not considering the inadequacy of
     medical treatment.

 21. Ground 5. The fifth ground  argues  that  the  judge,  when  assessing
     paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi),  failed  to  properly  consider  whether  the
     appellants would be able to integrate. It is argued that the judge did
     not consider the stigmatisation of mental health and  Covid  situation
     in Bangladesh.

 22. Ground 6. The sixth ground submits that the judge erred because  there
     were no clear credibility findings.

 23. Ground 7.  The  seventh  ground  submits  that  the  judge  failed  to
     adequately explain why he found it to be in the best interests of  the
     children to relocate to Bangladesh when  this  was  inconsistent  with
     Prof Aguilar and "purely speculative".

Analysis

 24. At the hearing, I heard submissions from Mr Karim, on  behalf  of  the
     appellant, and Ms Everett, on behalf of the respondent. I reserved  my
     decision.


 25. Having carefully considered the arguments made before me, as  well  as
     the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, I  am  satisfied
     that the judge did not materially err and therefore  the  decision  of
     the First-tier Tribunal should stand. Rather than address  Mr  Karim's
     arguments sequentially, I have structured  my  analysis  in  the  same
     order as the judge: by  looking  first  at  paragraph  276B,  then  at
     Article 3, and then at Article 8.

Paragraph 276B

 26. The first appellant's leave to remain in the UK ended  on  24  January
     2018. By that date, he had not been lawfully resident in the UK for 10
     years.


 27. In the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant sought to overcome  this  by
     advancing two arguments. The first  argument  was  that,  because  the
     first appellant made a further application on  28  February  2018  (14
     days after the refusal decision on 24 January 2018), he benefited from
     the 14 day exception under paragraph 39E  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
     Applying Hoque, the judge found that this argument could  not  succeed
     because the appellant was not granted leave following the  application
     on 28 February 2018 and therefore he was an "open ended", rather  than
     "book-ended", overstayer. Mr Karim has not challenge this finding.


 28. The second argument (which was  pursued before me by Mr Karim) is that
     the decision of  24  January  2018  was  unlawful  and  therefore  the
     appellant's application of 28 January 2017 (varied on  29  June  2017)
     remained (and remains) outstanding,  and  therefore  by  operation  of
     section 3 Immigration Act 1971 he  has  accrued  10  years  of  leave.
     Relying on Patel  (historic  injustice;  NIAA  Part  5A)  [2020]  UKUT
     00351(IAC),  Mr  Karim  also  argued  that  the  unlawfulness  of  the
     respondent's decision of 24 January 2018 was a "historical injustice",
     which should have been taken  into  consideration  in  the  article  8
     assessment.

 29. The difficulty with Mr Karim's argument is that,  for  the  clear  and
     cogent reasons given by Judge Hanson, the respondent's decision of  24
     January 2018 was not unlawful. Although the respondent's decision  did
     not refer to the variation on 29 June 2017, it is plain, as  explained
     by Judge Hanson, that the decision of 24  January  2018  addressed  in
     substance the varied application. There was nothing before  the  judge
     (just as there is nothing before me) to warrant a different conclusion
     to that reached by Judge  Hanson.  The  judge  was  therefore  clearly
     entitled to find that the appellant's leave ended on 24  January  2018
     (the decision on that date being lawful); and, therefore, that he  did
     not satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B(i).

 30. For these reasons, the appellant cannot succeed on the basis of ground
     2.

Article 3

 31. In order to resist removal  under  article  3,  the  second  appellant
     needed to provide medical evidence capable of  demonstrating  (ie  she
     had to raise a prima facie case) that there were  substantial  grounds
     for  believing  she  would  be  exposed  to  a  serious,   rapid   and
     irreversible decline in her health in Bangladesh resulting in  intense
     suffering or a significant reduction in life expectancy as a result of
     the absence of appropriate medical treatment.  As  is  made  clear  in
     paragraph 32 of AM, the prima facie case made by the appellant must be
     such that if not  challenged  or  countered  it  would  establish  the
     infringement of article 3. As explained in paragraph 33 of AM,  it  is
     only where an appellant presents evidence to  this  standard  that  it
     falls to the respondent to challenge or counter  it  by,  inter  alia,
     providing  evidence  about  the  availability  of  treatment  in   the
     receiving state.

 32. The medical evidence submitted in respect of the second appellant does
     not, on any legitimate view, come even close to establishing  a  prima
     facie case that removal would violate artic   e 3. At its highest,  it
     shows that she suffers from depression for  which  she  is  prescribed
     antidepressants and counselling. It is fanciful to  suggest  that  the
     evidence that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  capable  of
     meeting the high article 3 threshold. As a prima facie  case  had  not
     been made, it was not necessary for the respondent to adduce  evidence
     to counter it. The grounds  of  appeal  that  seek  to  challenge  the
     decision in respect of article 3 therefore have no merit.

Article 8

 33. Mr Karim argues that the judge erred  in  respect  of  the  burden  of
     proof. I disagree. Although the self-direction in paragraph 18  refers
     only to a burden on the appellant,  it  is  plain,  when  reading  the
     decision as a whole, that the judge approached article 8 correctly.

 34. The first task for the judge was  to  assess  whether  the  appellants
     would face very significant obstacles integrating in  Bangladesh  (the
     test in paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi)), the burden being on the  appellants
     to establish this. The judge gave a range of reasons  why  they  would
     not face significant obstacles. These were (a)  they  would  have  the
     emotional support of the second appellant's  family,  (b)  the  second
     appellant, once in Bangladesh, would no longer  face  the  stress  and
     uncertainty of her current situation, (c)  the  appellants  both  have
     meaningful ties to Bangladesh and speak  the  language,  and  (e)  the
     first appellant is highly educated and  would  be  in  a  position  to
     obtain employment. These are sustainable findings that  were  open  to
     the judge, which justify the conclusion reached - that  the  threshold
     of "very significant obstacles" was not met.


 35. The judge also, in my view, plainly approached article 8 "outside  the
     Rules" correctly. He took into consideration  the  factors  listed  in
     section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  the
     best interests of children, the second appellant's mental health,  and
     the availability of family support. Having identified the relevant and
     material considerations, the judge balanced them and  found  that  the
     public interest in the maintenance of  effective  immigration  control
     outweighed the private and family life of the appellants in the UK.

 36. The specific challenges in the grounds to the article 8 assessment are
     not sustainable because the judge was entitled to find that:

        a. a person with the first appellant's  education,  background  and
           experience would be able to find work in Bangladesh;


        b. the (relatively modest) medical needs of  the  second  appellant
           (antidepressants and therapy) could be paid for privately by the
           first appellant;

        c. the report of Prof Aguilar was  not  of  significant  assistance
           because he mistakenly  assumed  that  the  appellants  would  be
           destitute and unable to access private medical care;

        d. the report of Mr Chester added little of value to the assessment
           given he lacked expertise on the situation in Bangladesh;

        e. it is in the interests of very young  children  to  remain  with
           their parents in the country of  their  nationality  where  they
           have the benefit of extended family; and

        f. objective evidence about stigmatisation of mental health and the
           mistreatment of the severely mentally ill in Bangladesh did  not
           materially support the second appellant's case as she would have
           the support of her husband and extended family in Bangladesh and
           did not have a mental illness of the type and severity that  the
           objective evidence indicates might lead to mis-treatment.

 37. The grounds raise numerous challenges but, ultimately, cannot  succeed
     because the judge applied the correct legal  framework  to  evaluating
     article 8, engaged with the material evidence,  and  made  sustainable
     findings supported by adequate reasons. The grounds  do  not  identify
     any material errors.

Notice of decision

 38. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
     not involve the making of a material error of law and stands.

|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 23 June 2021                |








