
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01066/2020 (v)
     HU/01910/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at a remote hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 16th June 2021                |On the 29th June 2021                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                              MR GURDIAL SINGH
                           MRS JAGDEEP KAUR DUYEA
                        (no Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Holmes, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellants, who are citizens of India, appeal  with  permission
         against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Mack)
         (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") who dismissed  their  human
         rights appeals in a decision promulgated on the 22 December 2020.

      2. No anonymity direction was made by the FtTJ and there has  been  no
         application for such an order made before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. Permission to appeal was issued and on 24 February 2021  permission
         was granted by FtTJ Haria.

      4. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Judge
         Pitt) issued directions on 9 March 2021 inter alia, indicating that
         it was provisionally of the view that the error of law issue  could
         be determined without a face-to-face hearing and that this could be
         by way of a paper hearing. Both parties have  indicated  that  they
         considered that an oral hearing by way of a remote  hearing  should
         take place. On the  29  April  2021  UTJ  Allen  issued  directions
         listing the appeal  as  a  remote  hearing  in  the  light  of  the
         submissions made by both parties. Therefore,  the  Tribunal  listed
         the hearing to enable oral submissions to be given by each  of  the
         parties.

      5. The hearing took place on 16 June 2021, by means of Microsoft teams
         which has been consented to and not objected to by the  parties.  A
         face-to-face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable,
         and both parties agreed that all issues could be  determined  in  a
         remote hearing.  The advocates attended remotely via  video.  There
         were no  issues  regarding  sound,  and  no  substantial  technical
         problems were encountered during the hearing  and  I  am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means. I confirmed with Mr Holmes that a bundle of documents
         had been sent to the Tribunal by email. It  consisted  of  material
         which had not been before the FtT and Mr Holmes confirmed  that  it
         was not relied upon for this hearing.  Mr  Diwnycz  also  confirmed
         that there was a short Rule 24 response prepared by  his  colleague
         and provided a copy to the Tribunal and Mr Holmes.

      6. I am grateful to Mr Holmes and  Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  and
         helpful oral submissions.

Background:

      7. The history of the appellants is set out in  the  decision  letters
         and the decision of the FtTJ.  The appellants are citizens of India
         and are husband and wife. They have 2 children, A born  in  January
         2018 and H born in February 2019.

      8. The 2nd appellant  entered  the  UK  on  26  May  2009  with  entry
         clearance valid until 30 November 2010. Her leave was extended as a
         Tier 1 migrant until 17  December  2012  and  on  15  December  she
         applied for leave to remain as a student. This was refused in March
         2013 with a right of appeal. She was appeal rights exhausted on  27
         March 2013. In April 2013 she made an application which was out  of
         time but within 28 days of her being appeal  rights  exhausted  for
         leave to remain as a student which was granted from  December  2013
         until 26 September 2016.

      9. A further application was made in time as a Tier  1  migrant  which
         was granted on 19 September 2014 until 19 October 2017.

     10. However on 3 October 2016 the respondent curtailed her leave  as  a
         result of her educational sponsors licence being revoked. The leave
         was curtailed to expire on 27 January 2017.

     11. On 26 January 2017,  the  day  before  her  curtailed  leave  would
         expire, she applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the
         rules on compassionate grounds. The application was  refused  on  a
         decision dated 30 June 2017 on the basis that she did not meet  the
         requirements under the rules and  that  there  were  no  compelling
         reasons or exceptional circumstances to  justify  leave  to  remain
         outside of the rules. She lodged an  appeal,  and  the  appeal  was
         dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pickup) in  a  decision
         promulgated on 25 October 2017.

     12. First-tier Judge Pickup set out his conclusions as follows:

          1) "The appellant cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM, as
             conceded by Mr Caswell. She does not  assert  that  she  meets
             276ADE in relation to private life, but in any event, she  has
             not demonstrated that there are very significant obstacles  to
             her integration, or that of her husband, in India.

          2) I am not satisfied that either the appellant  or  her  husband
             have been disowned by their  own  family  or  that  they  face
             hostility from either side of the family  (at  [34]).  I  also
             find the husband's continuing contact with his family, regular
             telephone calls, inconsistent with  the  claim  to  have  been
             disowned by them (at [38]).

          3) I also note that the appellant and her husband have been  able
             to return to India  without  difficulty  from  the  family.  I
             reject the claim that this was because they did so in  secret.
             The appellant spent 3 weeks  in  India  at  the  time  of  her
             marriage before returning to the UK and he has said he spent 4
             weeks in India in 2015 on vacation without any difficulty from
             his family. She has also said she returned  every  year  after
             marriage to visit him in India. That they were able to do this
             undermines the claim that they would not be able to return  to
             India without being at risk from their respective  families  (
             at 39]).It also undermines  the  claim  that  they  could  not
             relocate elsewhere in India. On the evidence, I do not  accept
             that they are at any risk on return, and thus there is no need
             to relocate (at [40]). I am in fact satisfied that  it  is  an
             entirely contrived claim (at [41]).

          4) Neither the appellant nor her husband has any  settled  status
             in the UK. They are both from India, which is where they  have
             spent the vast majority of their life and the country of their
             religious, ethnic,  and  family  background.  They  both  have
             family in India, and I have rejected the claim to be estranged
             from either parental family. They thus  have  social,  family,
             and cultural ties to India.

          5)  The  husband  has  qualifications   and   professional   work
             experience in India.  Similarly,  the  appellant  was  in  the
             nursing  profession   and   has   obtained   further   nursing
             qualifications in the UK.  Together  with  her  experience  in
             working here, she will be in a good position to seek  work  in
             India, once her child has been weaned.

          6) The relationship between the appellant and her husband as  far
             as family life in the UK is concerned was precarious from  the
             outset,  so  that  there  is  no  legitimate  entitlement   or
             expectation to be able to continue family life in the  UK.  As
             they both have  no  status  they  can  both  return  to  India
             together and continue family life there without interference.

          7) In considering the  public  interest,  I  have  to  take  into
             account section 117B of the 2002 Act, as amended, that  it  is
             in the public  interest.  The  statute  provides  that  little
             weight should be given to  a  private  life  developed  whilst
             immigration status is precarious, as it was in this  case.  It
             is also clear that whether or not covered by s117B, the family
             life as related to life in the UK was also always in  a  sense
             precarious, so that they  had  no  legitimate  expectation  of
             being able to continue that family life in the UK.

          8) Having taken account of the whole facts and  circumstances  of
             the appellant and her husband, giving careful consideration in
             the round to all of the evidence, documentary  and  oral,  and
             the submissions made, I find  that  there  are  no  compelling
             reasons to justify granting leave to remain outside the Rules,
             or that would suggest  that  removal  would  be  unjustifiably
             harsh. In fact, there is nothing compelling at all about  this
             case."

     13. Permission to appeal by the First tier and the Upper  Tribunal  was
         refused. The 2nd appellant became appeal  rights  exhausted  on  17
         September 2018 and thus a continuous period of leave  ended  on  17
         September 2018.

     14. On 26 September 2018 she made a further out of time application for
         leave to remain outside of the rules which is refused on 8 February
         2019.

     15. Further application was made on  22  February  2019  for  leave  to
         remain outside of the rules and the application  was  later  varied
         but was voided on 18 June 2019.

     16. On 12 June 2019 she applied out of time  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain under the rules relating to long residence and on article  8
         grounds.

     17. The respondent made a decision on 21 January 2022 refused leave  to
         remain in the UK. It was this decision that formed the basis of the
         appeal before Judge Mack.

     18. In relation to the  1st  appellant,  who  is  the  2nd  appellant's
         spouse, he entered the United Kingdom on  5  May  2011  with  entry
         clearance as the partner of the  2nd  appellant  with  leave  valid
         until 17 December  2012.  The  stated  history  was  that  the  2nd
         appellant proposed the 1st appellant  prior  to  her  entering  the
         United Kingdom and that she had returned to India to marry  him  in
         2009.

     19. All further applications that were made  in  relation  to  the  1st
         appellant were on the basis that he was a dependent of his wife. On
         appeal before Judge Pickup,  he  was  a  dependent  on  his  wife's
         application made on 26 January 2017.

     20. The 1st appellant's appeal rights were deemed exhausted with effect
         from 3 July 2018.

     21. On 11 July 2018 the 1st appellant made an application for leave  to
         remain in the UK outside of  the  rules  on  compassionate  grounds
         which was refused on the 8th  of  February  2019  with  an  out  of
         country right of appeal.

     22. On 22nd February 2019 the appellant was included as a dependent  of
         his wife and an application for leave to remain in the UK which was
         voided as inappropriate on 18 June 2019.

     23. On 17 June 2019 the appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to
         remain in the UK under family/private life tenure  route.  This  is
         refused on 27 September 2019 with no right of appeal.

     24. On 10 October 2019 the appellant made an application for  leave  to
         remain in the UK outside of the rules on compassionate  grounds  on
         the basis of private life in the UK. This resulted in a decision of
         the respondent dated 6 January 2020 and formed  the  basis  of  the
         appeal before Judge Mack.

    The decision of the FtTJ:

     25. The appellants each appealed the decisions made by  the  respondent
         on 6  January  2020  (1st  appellant)  and  21  January  2020  (2nd
         appellant)., and the  appeals  came  before  the  FtTJ  on  the  16
         December 2020.

     26. In a decision promulgated on 22 December 2020  their  appeals  were
         dismissed. The FtTJ heard evidence from both of the appellants  and
         considered documentary evidence,  including  the  medical  evidence
         that had been advanced on  the  appellants'  behalf.  It  had  been
         conceded on behalf of the appellants that they could not  meet  the
         Immigration Rules (either under  Appendix  FM  or  under  paragraph
         276ADE, and in the case of the 2nd appellant  could  not  meet  the
         long residence requirements and also that the 2  children  born  in
         2018 and 2019 were not "qualifying children" under Appendix  FM  or
         S117B (6) ( see [57]). It was confirmed that the only issue  before
         the tribunal was the application  of  article  8  "outside  of  the
         rules".

     27. The FtTJ undertook an analysis of the evidence advanced  on  behalf
         of the appellants, taking into account their claim that they had no
         family they were in contact with in India, they had built a private
         and family life in the UK and would be unable to leave the  country
         and would be severely disadvantaged if they returned to  India  (at
         [35))  and  that  in  relation  to  their   children,   both   born
         prematurely, H had medical  conditions  which  made  him  unfit  to
         travel and would require medical treatment in the UK.

     28. The judge took as his starting point, the previous factual findings
         made by FtTJ Pickup at [76] -[80] and  upon  the  claim  maintained
         that both appellants had no contact with their families  in  India,
         the judge rejected that claim as "unlikely and  not  credible"  for
         the reasons set out at [80] and thus concluded that both appellants
         had family in India with whom they were in contact with (at  [80]).
         The judge went on to find that the appellant had  family  in  India
         who would be able to provide them with support on  return  who  had
         also provided substantial financial support whilst they been in the
         UK and that they had "close ties with their relatives" and they had
         visited family in India on a number of occasions. The  judge  found
         that those relatives "will not immediately withdraw  their  support
         when the appellant return to India" (at [90]).

     29. In relation to the medical evidence, the judge summarised  this  at
         [68 - 75]. The judge rejected the claim made that H's life would be
         at risk if he travelled out of the UK  and  found  that  there  was
         medication  suitable  for  both  children  which  could  easily  be
         obtained. The judge did not find that H's medical condition was  at
         such a level that is life would be in danger if unable  to  receive
         treatment in the UK and that the evidence did not  support  that  H
         would be unable to receive effective treatment in India (at  [71]).
         The judge considered the evidence given by the 2nd  appellant  that
         he was awaiting "life changing surgery" but gave  reasons  at  [74]
         that that was a deliberate and over exaggeration as to his  medical
         issues and at [75] consider the issue of cost of treatment.

     30. At [81] the FtTJ summarised the  relevant  immigration  history  of
         each of the appellant's, the length of residence and the  basis  of
         that residence. He concluded that when the 2nd  appellant  came  to
         United Kingdom as a student and on a temporary  basis  she  had  no
         legitimate expectation of being able to remain beyond her  studies.
         The marriage was entered into in India during her student leave  in
         the UK and whilst he had joined in 2011 it was as a  dependent  and
         with the expectation that both would return on  conclusion  of  her
         studies. At [ 91] the judge took into account that they  had  leave
         to enter and remain on the 2nd appellant's status as a student  and
         that was not a "route to settlement" and they were aware that  when
         they developed any private life or ties they had "no expectation of
         remaining in this country".

     31.  The  FtTJ  concluded  at  [92]  that  the  appellants   had   over
         significantly exaggerated the medical  conditions  of  H  and  that
         there was no evidence that would indicate H  needed  life  changing
         surgery or that travel would be life-threatening or that  he  could
         not receive treatment in India. The judge found also at  [92]  that
         both appellants had employment prospects upon return in India.

     32. The judge considered the best interests of the children involved at
         paragraphs [94 - 96] as a primary consideration and considered this
         in the context of the circumstances of H and the  medical  evidence
         previously summarised. The FtTJ rejected the suggestion that if  he
         travelled his life would in danger  or  would  be  in  jeopardy  as
         neither remotely reasonable and was not evidenced. The  FtTJ  found
         that the appellant had over exaggerated his medical  condition  and
         had not provided evidence that H could  not  receive  treatment  in
         India.

     33. As to the issue of proportionality, taking into account all of  the
         factors outlined in the earlier assessment, and taking into account
         the public interest considerations under section 117B, and  in  the
         light of H's needs and circumstances, the judge concluded that  the
         decisions  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  leave  to  remain   was
         proportionate.

     34. The judge therefore dismissed their appeals.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     35. Mr Holmes, Counsel on behalf of the appellant, who did  not  appear
         before the FtTJ but had drafted  the  grounds,  relied  upon  those
         written  grounds  of  appeal.  There  were   no   further   written
         submissions. There  was  a  Rule  24  response  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent dated 23 March 2021.

     36. I also heard oral submissions from Mr  Holmes  and  Mr  Diwnycz.  I
         confirm that I have  taken  them  into  account  when  reaching  my
         decision. I intend to consider those  submissions  when  addressing
         the grounds of challenge.

    Ground 2:

     37. Mr Holmes began his submissions with Ground 2.  Mr Holmes submitted
         that  the  FtTJ's  consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
         appellant's children is  deficient  and  that  the  judge  had  not
         reached any conclusions as to what their  best  interests  were  or
         whether it was in the children's best interests for their treatment
         in the UK to end.

     38. In his oral submissions, he referred to the decision  at  paragraph
         [95] and that whilst there was some discussion  as  to  their  best
         interests  there,  the  reader  would  not  be  clear  as  to  what
         conclusion the judge had reached. Thus  he  submitted  this  was  a
         material omission and thus a material error of law.

     39. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule  24  response.  On  behalf  of  the
         respondent  it  is  submitted  that  the  best  interests  of   the
         appellants children would be to remain with them  in  their  family
         unit given there is no intention  of  splitting  them  up.  It  was
         argued that this was  not  in  dispute  between  the  parties,  but
         rather, the issue was, taking into account the  importance  of  the
         children remaining in a family unit; whether this should be in  the
         UK or in their home country.  The  judge  took  this  into  account
         alongside the medical issues that were relevant to the appeal.  The
         judge records  the  relevant  evidence  and  the  submissions  made
         (decision of FtTJ at paragraphs 64, 66) which form the basis of the
         considerations that were undertaken by the judge (see paragraphs 67
         - 75, 92 - 95). There is nothing in  the  evidence  or  grounds  of
         appeal to demonstrate why the appellants' children could not travel
         and live in India, beyond a preference to remain in the  UK  or  to
         show why their parents would not be able to continue to meet  their
         best interests and that the family would  be  able  to  obtain  any
         necessary treatment for the child on return.

     40. I have given careful consideration to the grounds of challenge  and
         have done so in the light of the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  and  the
         evidence before the FtTJ. Having done so I am  not  satisfied  that
         there is any error in the assessment made.  Whilst  Mr  Holmes  has
         directed  the  tribunal's  attention  to  paragraph  [95],  in   my
         judgement it is necessary to consider the decision as a  whole  and
         the basis upon which the appellant's claim was advanced.

     41. The FtTJ  set out at paragraph [35] the basis of the claim made  on
         behalf of the appellants and at  [57]  it  was  conceded  that  the
         family could not meet the Immigration Rules as there were  no  very
         significant obstacles to the family's reintegration  to  India  and
         the children were not "qualifying children"  for  the  purposes  of
         Appendix FM ( at [85]).

     42. In this context, and in the light of the analysis of  the  evidence
         concerning the circumstances in India upon the family's return, the
         FtTJ reached the following factual findings:

          1) both appellants have family members in India whom they are  in
             contact with (at [80]).

          2) The appellants had returned to India on a number of  occasions
             including lengthy  holidays  without  adverse  incident.  This
             demonstrates  continuing  ties  to  their  home  country   (at
             [80(iii]).

          3) The appellants have family  in  India  who  will  be  able  to
             provide them with support on their return and  that  while  in
             the UK the family have been found to have received substantial
             financial support from family members and they have been found
             to have close ties with their relatives.  The  relatives  will
             not immediately withdraw their  support  when  the  appellants
             return to India (at [90]).

          4) Both appellants would be able to find  employment.  The  judge
             rejected the 2nd appellants claim that there was no  provision
             in India for work in the care sector and found  that  she  had
             achieved educational and professional certificates  whilst  in
             the UK. In relation to the 1st appellant the judge found  that
             he had  worked  as  a  computer  operator  in  India  and  had
             undertaken care work in the UK; he had skills  that  he  could
             use to provide for the family in India (at[92]).

          5) The 1st appellant had lived in India until he was 28 years  of
             age and the 2nd appellant until she was 23 years of  age  both
             having lived there for their childhoods and  formative  years;
             they had continuing cultural  language  and  social  links  to
             India and there were no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
             integration (at [103]).

          6) The 2nd appellant had been  in  the  UK  since  2009  and  her
             husband since 2011 as her dependent. The 1st appellant came as
             a student and had no legitimate expectation of began to remain
             beyond studies in the UK; it was not clear  when  her  studies
             concluded but leave was curtailed when her  sponsor's  licence
             was revoked. She did not apply to remain further as a student.

          7) The marriage was  entered  into  during  the  2nd  appellant's
             student leave in the UK and her husband joined in  the  UK  in
             2011 as a dependent  with  the  expectation  that  both  would
             return to India on conclusion of her studies.

          8) The 2nd appellant is no longer a student  with  no  legitimate
             basis to remain in the UK and that  the  appellants  only  had
             leave to  enter  and  remain  in  the  UK  based  on  the  1st
             appellant's status as a  student  which  is  not  a  route  to
             settlement and they were aware when they developed any private
             life or ties that they had no expectation of remaining in  the
             United Kingdom ( at[80], [91], [100]).

          9)  Neither   appellant   had   any   criminal   convictions   or
             circumstances such as deception or dishonesty (at [98]).

         10) In reality refusal of leave would not prevent either appellant
             from continuing family life together or with the children  (at
             [99]).

     43. The FtTJ summarised the medical evidence at [69]-[75]. There is  no
         suggestion in the grounds, or the oral submissions  made  that  the
         analysis of the medical evidence was incorrect or that he failed to
         properly have regard to the medical evidence that was presented  to
         him.

     44. Whilst the grounds referred to both children, in fact  the  medical
         evidence relied upon related to the  circumstances  of  H  born  in
         2019. The reference to A who was  also  born  prematurely  in  2018
         referred to his "skin issues" but there was  no  reference  to  any
         further medical problems as a result of his birth or otherwise  (at
         [69]).

     45. In relation to H,  he  was  born  at  31  weeks  and  has  a  small
         ventricular  septal  defect  in  his  heart  which  is  under   the
         cardiologist. He had been  referred  to  physiotherapy  as  he  was
         having problems grasping and holding things and it  was  stated  he
         would need a follow-up for 2 years from a neurological  aspect.  It
         was also noted that he had recently suffered reflux. In addition, H
         had a diagnosis of mild hearing loss likely due to middle ear fluid
         (at [71] and [72]).

     46. The FtTJ concluded  that  there  had  been  no  evidence  from  any
         specialists but from the GP practice and  that  whilst  the  letter
         from the appellant solicitors referred to H suffering  from  reflux
         and that the "child's life was in jeopardy" (recorded at [69]), the
         judge considered at [71] that reflux would  not  mean  that  during
         travel the condition would risk the child's life and that  if  that
         had been the case there would have been medical evidence in support
         of such a  contention.  The  judge  concluded  that  reflux  was  a
         "reasonably common condition which  would  not  make  travel  life-
         threatening" and there was no  evidence  to  demonstrate  that.  In
         respect of the medication that H was taking (cream and Gaviscon  at
         [73]), the FtTJ concluded that the medication suitable for children
         could easily be obtained.  As  to  the  reference  in  the  medical
         evidence to a neurological follow-up the judge  found  that  rather
         than  regular  appointments  this  indicated   that   H's   medical
         conditions were "not at a pitch that his life would be in danger if
         he were unable to receive treatment in the  UK."  The  judge  found
         that despite the evidenced medical conditions of  H,  the  evidence
         did not support that either he or the appellants will be unable  to
         receive effective treatment in India.

     47. At [74] the judge addressed the evidence given by the 2nd appellant
         that H was "awaiting life changing surgery". The judge  found  that
         he had not been presented with "any  medical  evidence  other  than
         that identified and confirmed with the appellants in  the  presence
         of their representative. It is simply not credible that if H had  a
         hearing  problem  approaching  that  describe  his  parents   then,
         notwithstanding the current pandemic, I find  that  there  will  be
         documentary evidence of this, and I would have been presented  with
         the same." The judge concluded  that  the  evidence  given  that  H
         needed "life changing surgery" was a "complete and deliberate  over
         exaggeration of his medical issues."

     48. In terms of whether treatment was available in  India  for  H,  the
         judge observed that when cross-examined the 1st appellant  stressed
         the cost but eventually conceded that he hadn't  asked  or  checked
         about this issue. The  judge  also  rejected  the  2nd  appellant's
         evidence that she would not know who to contact to obtain treatment
         for the fluid behind H's ears. The judge found that she had  a  BSC
         in nursing and it was not credible that she would have  "so  little
         knowledge of treatment".

     49. Whilst Mr Holmes refers to both children in the context of  medical
         treatment, it is plain from the evidence that  the  thrust  of  the
         case advanced related to H and the only issue  relating  to  A  was
         having "skin issues" (at [69]).

     50. The conclusions reached by the judge were summarised at  [92].  The
         judge found that the appellants but particularly the 2nd  appellant
         had significantly over exaggerated the medical conditions of H. The
         judge found that he was not  presented  with  evidence  that  would
         indicate H needed life changing surgery or that travel will be life-
         threatening or that he could not receive  treatment  in  India  and
         that if that were the position he would have  been  presented  with
         evidence in support.

     51. It was against that factual background and analysis of the evidence
         that the judge addressed the best interests  of  the  children  and
         properly stated  at  [94]  and  [95]  that  they  were  a  "primary
         consideration".

     52. At [95] the judge referred to the medical evidence  relevant  to  H
         stating, "H was born prematurely, and there is evidence that he has
         medical conditions as described from the evidence above."  I  pause
         at this stage because Ground 3 (a) asserts that the judge failed to
         have regard to "H suffering from a small ventricular septal  defect
         in his heart" and that it did not feature in the  assessment.  That
         is plainly incorrect as the reference made by the judge at [95]  to
         the "medical conditions  as  described  from  the  evidence  above"
         necessarily included the evidence  relating  to  the  heart  defect
         which the judge had set out previously at [71].

     53. At [95] the judge took into account the medical  evidence  that  he
         had previously  summarised  and  that  when  considering  H's  best
         interests "I have not been presented with evidence that  he  cannot
         receive adequate medical treatment in India. "As to the  suggestion
         on behalf of the appellants that travel to India  would  place  his
         life "in jeopardy" the judge found that the suggestions  made  were
         "neither remotely reasonable and is not evidenced". He concluded "I
         have found that the appellants have over  exaggerated  H's  medical
         conditions and I have not been provided  with  evidence  he  cannot
         receive treatment in India."

     54. There had been no dispute that the best interests of both  children
         given their young ages (having been born in 2018 in 2019) would  be
         for them to remain  with  their  parents  and  their  family  unit;
         neither child had established a private life independent  of  their
         parents.

     55. The issue that the judge had to consider was  whether  the  medical
         issues of H in were such that his best interests were to remain  in
         the UK. In the light of the factual findings made by the FtTJ it is
         plain that H's  circumstances,  including  those  relating  to  his
         medical condition, did not lead to the conclusion that  they  could
         not be met in India.

     56. When looking at the  analysis  of  the  evidence  and  the  factual
         findings made by the judge there was no evidence to suggest it  was
         not reasonable to expect both of the children to  return  to  India
         with their parents as a family unit or that such a return would  be
         contrary to their best interests. As the respondent  submits  there
         was nothing in the evidence nor in the ground  to  demonstrate  why
         both children's needs (medical or otherwise) could not  be  met  in
         India or to show why their parents could not continue to meet their
         best interests and their needs and that the family would be able to
         obtain necessary treatment on return.

     57. The assessment of the best interests  of  a  child  must  be  taken
         conducted by reference to  the  real-world  context  in  which  the
         child's parents find themselves. In the present matter that context
         is as follows. Both parents are  citizens  of  India.  Neither  had
         leave to remain in this country; that is the context  within  which
         the assessment of their child's best interests was  to  have  taken
         place and in  the  light  of  the  factual  findings  that  I  have
         summarised earlier.

     58. In KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
         UKSC 53, Lord Carnwath endorsed what was said in EV (Philippines) v
         The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
         874 concerning this issue at [58]. Lord  Carnwath  said  that  the
         approach of the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) to  assessing
         the best interests of children was sound.  At  [58]  the  Court  of
         Appeal said:

             "In  my  judgment,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the must be made on the basis that the  facts  as
             they are in the real world if one  parent  has  no  rights  to
             remain, but the other does, that  is  the  background  against
             which the assessment is conducted. If neither parent  has  the
             rights to remain, then that is the  background  against  which
             the assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate  question  will
             be: is it right to expect the child to follow the parent  with
             no rights to remain to the country of origin?"

     59. On the factual findings made on the evidence by the FtTJ, for  this
         family and children the "real world" analysis in  which  they  find
         themselves is such that it would not be  unreasonable  or  lead  to
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for them to be expected to  return
         to India. Their best interests were plainly  to  remain  with  both
         their parents.  The factual assessment made by the FtTJ was that as
         citizens of India, the appellants would  be  able  enjoy  the  full
         extent of the rights to which citizens of India are entitled.  They
         are familiar with the language, the culture, and the customs.  They
         will be well-placed to bring their children  up  within  the  wider
         cultural context of their own nationality and ethnicity and in  the
         case of  H  would  be  able  to  undertake  any  necessary  medical
         treatment there as required. Those were findings open to  the  FtTJ
         to make.

     60. Even if the judge had addressed in greater terms the best interests
         of the children  particularly  H,  in  the  light  of  the  factual
         findings that there was no evidence that treatment was  unavailable
         in India  ,  and  the  FtTJ's  rejection  of  the  claim  that  H's
         circumstances were "life threatening " I cannot  see  that  on  the
         facts of  this  case  any  different  conclusion  could  have  been
         reached. In my judgment that analysis would have admitted  of  only
         one  conclusion:  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect   the
         appellants' children to return to India with them, and  their  best
         interests were therefore to be with their  parents,  wherever  they
         were.

    Ground 3 (b):

     61. I now turn to  consider  the  remainder  of  ground  3  (b)  having
         addressed ground 3 (a) above.

     62. It is submitted on behalf of the appellants that the  judge  failed
         to have regard to a material matter namely that the  2nd  appellant
         had 9 years and 3 months of lawful residence and that this was  not
         properly weighed in the balance in favour of the appellants.

     63. In my judgement this submission is without merit.  The  judge  gave
         express consideration to the history of  both  appellants  and  was
         aware  of  the  2nd  appellant's  length  of  residence  which  had
         concluded on 17 September  2018  following  the  dismissal  of  her
         appeal before Judge Pickup in October 2017 and after permission had
         been refused by both the First tier and the Upper Tribunal. She was
         appeal rights exhausted on 17 September 2018  thus  her  period  of
         lawful leave ended on 17 September 2018. The FtTJ was plainly aware
         of her history at [44] and referred to her leave at paragraph [80].
         The judge was entitled to take into  account  that  while  she  had
         lawful leave in the UK for that period of time, she could not  meet
         the Immigration Rules (on the basis of either 10  years  continuous
         lawful residence) or on the  basis  of  20  years  residence  under
         paragraph 276ADE, and that the private life established  was  at  a
         time when both she and her husband's  leave  to  remain  was  on  a
         temporary basis and that the 1st appellant's leave was based on his
         wife's status.

     64. I agree with the submission made on behalf of the  respondent  that
         the judge had adopted the previous findings of fact which also  had
         regard to the length of the appellants  residence  (see  paragraphs
         57, 77 - 81, 89 - 91, 100, 103).  As  such,  the  judge  cannot  be
         criticised  for  finding   that   the   appellants   could   return
         notwithstanding the length of residence.

     65. The matter of weight attached to the period of lawful residence was
         entirely a matter for the judge and was required to be seen in  the
         context of the circumstances as a whole. Their  residence  was  but
         one factor that the tribunal considered in the round and would have
         only carried limited weight given the precarious  nature  of  their
         residence. Applying subsection 5; little weight should be given  to
         a private life established by a person at a time when the  person's
         immigration status is precarious. In Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58
         the Supreme Court held that any leave other than  indefinite  leave
         is "precarious".

     66. Consequently it has not been demonstrated that there was  any  such
         failure to take account of the 2nd  appellant's  period  of  lawful
         residence in the UK.

    Ground 1:

     67. Dealing with ground 1, it is submitted by Mr Holmes that the  judge
         erred  by  holding  against  the  appellant  the  previous  adverse
         credibility findings of  Judge  Pickup  and  then  further  holding
         against the appellant a  failure  to  maintain  what  the  previous
         tribunal had found to be untrue. Mr Holmes refers to  paragraph  81
         (vi) of the FtTJ's decision.

     68. It is submitted that the judge had already considered  the  adverse
         findings of the previous tribunal  and  weighed  them  against  the
         appellant but suggested that the appellant's  failure  to  maintain
         what the tribunal previously found to be untruthful  again  damaged
         the appellant's credibility. Thus it was submitted  that  this  was
         "double accounting" and the judge's  approach  to  credibility  was
         therefore flawed.

     69. At paragraph 81 (vi) (in relation to the 1st appellant  only),  the
         judge appeared to state that the first appellant  had not  referred
         to the previous assertions made of "family  issues  in  India"  and
         that as he had previously asserted a set of circumstances which  he
         now did not mention,  it damaged his credibility.

     70. This has to be seen in the context of  the  claim  advanced  before
         him. The judge set out the accounts of both  appellants  that  they
         had no contact with their families in India (at[80]) and  it  seems
         to me that the judge was making the point that as he  had  made  no
         reference  in  his  witness  statement  to  any  problems   (either
         previously or now)  that the  failure  to  make  reference  to  his
         previous claim in his recent statement damaged his credibility.

     71. However even if it were correct that the judge gave the  appearance
         of holding an earlier adverse finding against the 1st appellant  in
         2 ways, it does not demonstrate that the overall  decision  of  the
         judge concerning proportionality was not open to the judge to make.
         The point made at paragraph 81 (vi) does not appear to have had any
         or any great weight in the assessment of proportionality.

     72. Furthermore, when assessing the credibility of both appellants, the
         FtTJ identified other credibility issues which were not set out  at
         paragraph 81.

     73. At [80] the FtTJ properly took as his starting  point  the  factual
         findings made by Judge Pickup which was set out at paragraphs 76  -
         80, which included the  reference  to  "numerous  adverse  credibly
         findings" and that he was not satisfied that "either the  appellant
         or her husband had been disowned by their own family or  that  they
         face hostility from either side of the family." Judge Pickup  found
         that they were "no more than economic migrants" had come to the  UK
         to better lives in the UK. FtTJ Mack cited that  Judge  Pickup  not
         only rejected their account have been disowned  by  their  families
         but also found that their claims had been "contrived".

     74. Applying the principles in Devaseelan, the FtTJ took  into  account
         those factual findings as his "starting point" but was entitled  to
         consider that in the light of the claims made before him. The judge
         stated,  "I  note  that  the  hearing  before  me  both  appellants
         maintained that they do not have any contact with their families in
         India." The judge then undertook  an  analysis  of  their  evidence
         given before him and  that  notwithstanding  that  claim,  the  1st
         appellant was able to state that  his  wife  had  nephews  although
         became vague and when the 2nd appellant  gave  evidence  it  became
         clear that the nephews were not born when she  stated  she  stopped
         having contact with the  family.  The  judge  considered  that  her
         explanation for the discrepancy was "unlikely and not credible  and
         I do not accept that both the appellants would conclude her brother
         had 2 children based on an apparent call from someone  who  saw  in
         the children." The judge also  considered  that  neither  appellant
         could give a good reason for the many trips to  India  and  reached
         the conclusion that the likelihood is "the  reason  they  travelled
         there in 2009, 2011, 2014 and 2015 is to see family  for  at  least
         some of the time. Other reference was made to oral  evidence  given
         concerning his wife's student  fees  and  being  paid  for  by  her
         parents. The judge concluded on his analysis that "on  the  balance
         of probabilities both appellants  are  maintaining  the  fictitious
         narrative that was previously found to lack credibility and equally
         I found that it was not a true reflection of  the  contact  between
         extended family in India."

     75. A further adverse credibility point that was made  related  to  the
         appellant's description of the medical evidence and the judge found
         that it was [74] and [95] that the appellant had  over  exaggerated
         H's medical issues.  At  [75]  the  judge  did  not  find  the  2nd
         appellant's evidence credible on the issue of  treatment  available
         in India given her qualification in nursing.

     76. Therefore, and for those reasons, I am not satisfied that  even  if
         there was an error at paragraph  81(vi)  it  was  material  to  the
         outcome given the other adverse credibility issues that  the  judge
         had identified.

     77. Drawing those conclusions together, for the reasons given I am  not
         satisfied that the grounds of challenge on behalf of the appellants
         are made out. It therefore follows that it has not been shown  that
         the decision of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point
         of law. I dismiss the appeal and the  decision  of  the  FtT  shall
         stand.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall stand.




Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Dated 20 June 2021





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if  the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working  days  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

