
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/01377/2017
                                                               HU/05255/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House
     Decision Promulgated
On 6th July 2018
          On 5th October 2018




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                     MS. LATIFAT OMOBOLANTE ADUKE ALADE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant: Mr. M Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor,
Solcitors.
For the respondent: Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria who came to the United Kingdom
      on 24 May 2013 as a student on a Visa valid until 30 April 2015. On 7
      May 2015 she made an application for leave to remain on the basis of
      her family and private life. She had married a Mr Moses Olasimo on 5
      March 2015.  He is originally from Cote d' Ivory and has a confirmed
      right of residence under European Treaty provisions.

   2. Her application was refused on 6 January 2017. It was considered under
      the 10 year route. The refusal letter accepted that the appellant's
      marriage is genuine and subsisting. The respondent had regard to EX 1
      and concluded there were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant
      and her partner going to Nigeria. In terms of her private life again
      the respondent concluded that there would not be very significant
      obstacles to her integration back into Nigeria. No other exceptional
      circumstances were identified justifying the grant of leave outside
      the rules.

   3. Her appeal was heard on 11 December 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Griffith. Her husband was not in attendance and the appellant advised
      the judge that he had been out celebrating the night before and had
      taken too much alcohol. The appellant explained why she did not want
      to return to Nigeria. This included a lack of accommodation and
      employment and concerns about the general security situation. She said
      that her husband was aware of her immigration status when they
      married.

   4. The judge commented that there was uncertainty as to her husband's
      immigration status. It appeared he had been granted confirmation of a
      right of permanent residence under European Treaty provisions. The
      judge commented the appellant had been in the United Kingdom a
      relatively short time and for a temporary purpose.

   5. The judge did not find it established that there were insurmountable
      obstacles to return to Nigeria. The judge did find that family life
      was engaged but concluded the respondent's decision was proportionate.

The Upper Tribunal

   6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge failed to
      apply section 117 B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002. The appellant spoke English and was not a charge public funds
      having been supported by her husband and her relatives. The
      appellant's husband had a permanent right of residence under European
      law and it was submitted that the judge erred in suggesting he could
      travel outside the EU to be with his wife.

   7. Mr. Murphy referred me to paragraph 6 and 32 where the judge referred
      to the couple returning to Nigeria and pointed out that in fact her
      husband was not Nigerian. The trust of the appeal was that it was
      accepted the relationship with genuine and subsisting, began when the
      appellant was here lawfully, and the judge failed to consider the
      public interest factors set out in section 117 B which the appellant
      satisfied when considering the proportionality of the decision.

   8. Ms Fijiwala's response was that specific consideration of section 117
      B would not have made any difference to the outcome. In this regard
      she relied upon the decision of Rhuppiah -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803.
      I am grateful to her for being able to provide me with a copy of this
      decision and the other authorities referred to. In that case the
      appellant sought to remain outside the rules and based on her private
      life. She relied upon her relationship with an ill friend whom she
      assisted; her charitable works and her fluency in English and the fact
      she was not financial burden on the State.

   9. The Court of Appeal considered the effect of being proficient in
      English or being financially independent as set out in section 117
      B(2) and (3) respectively and concluded that these were neutral
      factors. If a person could not speak English that would have been a
      negative factor to be considered when considering the public interest
      question and the person's ability to integrate and so forth. However,
      it did not follow the because someone was able to speak English that
      it was in the public interest they should be given leave to enter or
      remain. The same reasoning applied in respect of financial
      independence. Furthermore, the notion of financial independence meant
      financially independent of others (para 63) and the appellant here was
      not. Consequently, Ms Fijiwola submitted there was no material error
      in the judge not referring to section 117 B because this would not
      have affected the outcome.

  10. Ms Fijiwola also provided me with the decision of the Upper Tribunal
      in Rajendran (S117 B -family life) [2016] UKUT 00138 (IAC) which dealt
      was family life developed whilst the person either was here illegally
      or whose immigration status was precarious. The Upper Tribunal found
      that the reference to `little weight 'in the statute was confined to
      private life established by a person when their immigration status was
      unlawful or precarious. However, the provisions in section 117 A-D
      were not exhaustive. Where family life has developed in precarious
      circumstances then public interest considerations were relevant in
      line with established jurisprudence. Consequently, she submitted the
      judge was entitled to place little weight upon the appellant's family
      life in the circumstances.

  11. I was also referred to the decision of Ageyako [2017] UKSC 11 and
      paragraph 47 to 48 which required the tribunal to consider if the
      immigration rules were met and then to see if they were unjustifiably
      harsh consequences. She submitted that the judge adequately did this
      at paragraph 38 to 39. Whilst the judge had referred to her husband
      returning to Nigeria there was no evidence led that he could not enter
      or remain in Nigeria and the burden to show this was upon her.

Conclusions

  12. I have had regard to the points raised by the presenting officer in
      relation to section 117 B and the case law she has referred me to. It
      is correct that the judge does not refer to section 117 B albeit it
      was raised at the hearing by the presenting officer in submissions.
      However, in light of the authorities quoted I do not see how the
      failure to refer to the section would have made any material
      difference to the outcome. This is because the ability to speak
      English and being financially independent are neutral factors. In
      fact, the appellant was not financially independent but was reliant
      upon her husband. The point at issue is net and my conclusion
      therefore is that no material error of law has been demonstrated and
      the decision shall stand.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Griffith. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge         Date 18th September 2018













