
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01383/2016
     HU/01391/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th March 2018                            |On 10th May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         aysha [b] (first appellant)
                       farjana [b] (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Mawla, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are respectively mother and daughter.  They are citizens
    of Pakistan.  They had applied for entry clearance under Appendix FM to
    enter and live with their husband/father in the UK.  Those applications
    were originally refused by Notice of Refusal dated 14th December  2015.
    The second Appellant was at date of application  a  minor  having  been
    born on 13th March 2001.  Her Notice of Refusal is dated 14th  December
    2015.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Housego sitting at Hatton Cross on 5th June 2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  6th  June  2017  the  Appellants'
    appeals were dismissed.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.  It was  noted  in
    those Grounds of Appeal that the Appellants were Bangladeshi  nationals
    who had made their applications as a  spouse  and  child  of  a  person
    present and settled in the  UK  and  that  the  applications  had  been
    refused under paragraph EC-C.1.1(d) of Appendix FM and on the basis  of
    relationship requirement EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM  and  also  on  the
    basis of the English requirement.  The Grounds of  Appeal  stated  that
    the judge had failed to give cogent reasons for findings on the English
    test results.  It is on that basis alone that  Grounds  of  Appeal  are
    lodged to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds were lodged on 2nd  August
    2017.

 4. On 23rd December 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Birrell  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Birrell noted that  the  grounds  asserted
    that the judge had erred and  that  his  findings  in  respect  of  the
    English language test certificates  were  inadequate  when  he  had  no
    evidence in the unreliability of the test certificates  before  him  or
    that the Appellant had been offered the chance for a free re-test.

 5. I am advised that  no  Rule  24  response  has  been  prepared  by  the
    Secretary of State.  It is on that basis that the appeal  comes  before
    me to determine whether or not there is a material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Appellants  appear  by
    their  Sponsor  Mr  Uddin  and  by  their  legal  representative.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Duffy.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. It is accepted by the Secretary of State that the judge has dealt  with
    the position relating to cohabitation and that the  only  extant  issue
    relates to the taking of the English language test.  Mr Mawla relies on
    the Grounds of Appeal.  It is submitted that at  paragraph  49  of  his
    decision the judge had erred by comment that it was much harder for the
    embassies around the world to check up on test centres than  it  is  to
    check up on centres in the UK.  He notes that the  Appellant's  English
    certificate was issued by City and Guilds  and  the  certificates  were
    issued from the UK.  Mr Mawla acknowledges that embassies cannot go and
    check up on test  centres  around  the  world  and  that  that  is  the
    responsibility of the issuing  authority.   He  acknowledges  that  the
    Appellant's test certificate issued by City and Guilds as  an  approved
    English test provider was valid and accepted for spousal  applications.
    The Entry Clearance Officer had alleged that  the  English  certificate
    which was issued by City and  Guilds  confirmed  that  they  identified
    inconsistencies   in   testing   in   Bangladesh   in   the   resulting
    investigations conducted  by  the  City  and  Guilds  in  UK  Visa  and
    Immigration Authorities in Dhaka.  However it was  contended  that  the
    Respondent had not enclosed any evidence confirming the veracity of the
    allegations made against the Appellant and no evidence  from  City  and
    Guilds that her certificate had been revoked or  that  there  were  any
    inconsistencies in the test centre.

 7. Mr Mawla relies on paragraph  FM-SE.32(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    That paragraph states that:

         "Where the decision-maker has:

         (a)  reasonable cause to doubt that an  English  language  test  in
             speaking and listening at a minimum of level A1 of the  Common
             Framework of Reference for Languages relied on at any time  to
             meet a requirement for limited leave to  enter  or  remain  in
             Part A or Appendix FM was genuinely obtained; or

         (b)  that the test certificate or results awarded to the  Applicant
             had been withdrawn by the test provider for any reason,

             The decision may discount the document and the Applicant  must
             provide a new test certificate  or  result  from  an  approved
             provider which shows that they meet the requirement,  if  they
             are not exempt from it."

 8. Consequently relying on that ground and on the current  IDIs  Mr  Mawla
    submits that there was a requirement upon the  Respondent  to  ask  the
    Appellant to take a new test.  He submits that the error of law  is  to
    be found at paragraph 42  of  the  judge's  decision.   That  paragraph
    states:

         "Assuming that the decisions do interfere  with  family  life,  the
         first point to consider is the language test.  The first  Appellant
         did not meet the provisions of Appendix FM in the provision of  the
         test results as well as the certificate."

 9. He submits that there is nothing to suggest that the test result has to
    be submitted and that the Rules do not reflect this.  He then  goes  on
    to consider paragraph 43 where the judge states:

         "If she had met those provisions, the ECO did not accept  the  test
         certificate having reason to doubt the test certificates issued  at
         that particular centre.  There is no objective evidence  that  this
         particular certificate was obtained by deception and it is  not  so
         alleged.  The ECO  said  there  was  uncertainty  about  some  test
         certificates so that this certificate  was  not  accepted  at  face
         value, but the first Appellant could not be re-tested at  no  cost.
         She made a choice not to do so."

10. Mr Mawla goes on to point out that at paragraphs 45 and  46  the  judge
    has stated:

         "To be offered the opportunity to retake the test without charge  I
         find meets the requirements  of  the  balance  between  immigration
         control and  fairness.   ...  the  application  did  not  meet  the
         Immigration Rules as the test results  were  not  provided  but  my
         conclusion is the  same  even  if  they  had  been  provided.   The
         decisions met the test of inherent fairness."

11. It is the submission of Mr Mawla that there was no opportunity given to
    retake the test.  He submits that there should have been and thus there
    is a material error consequently in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

12. Mr Duffy is most constructive in his approach towards this matter.   He
    admits that there is an error insofar  as  the  judge  has  interpreted
    paragraph FM-SE 32(b) and that the Appellant should have been given the
    opportunity to retake the test and this appears to have  been  properly
    denied and not properly accepted by the judge.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

15. Having heard the submissions of the legal representative in this matter
    and having given due and proper consideration to paragraph FM-SE  32(b)
    of the Immigration Rules and having given due and proper  consideration
    to paragraphs 42, 43, 45 and 46  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision I am satisfied that there are material errors of  law  insofar
    as firstly there is nothing to  say  that  a  test  result  has  to  be
    submitted with the test certificate and secondly there is  no  evidence
    upon which the judge can draw his conclusion that  the  opportunity  to
    retake the test was given and consequently  the  judge  in  making  his
    findings at paragraph 46 fell into material error.

16. It does thereafter fall upon the Tribunal to consider what the best and
    proper approach is.  It is the agreed approach of both  representatives
    that the pragmatic stance that I suggest would  be  the  best  approach
    because merely rehearing this matter by way of remittal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal would probably achieve  very  little.   The  question  is
    whether or not the first Appellant  can  or  cannot  meet  the  English
    language test requirement.  To that end it is agreed that  the  correct
    approach is to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal insofar
    as I have found a material error of  law  but  to  stay  any  rehearing
    pending the outcome of the first Appellant being offered a rehearing of
    her English language test.

17. The Sponsor is in attendance.  It is disheartening from  this  side  of
    the bench to note that the Sponsor does not speak English.   His  legal
    representative advises that he will explain the position  to  him.   As
    the very essence of this appeal appears to rise and fall on the ability
    of the Appellant's spouse to speak English the fact that in  the  event
    that she is successful she is unlikely to communicate in  English  with
    the Appellant does not stand well so far as the basis  upon  which  the
    English  language  test  certificate  is  made.   Further  it  is   not
    challenged that the finding at paragraph 44 that the  second  Appellant
    has any fluency in English is inaccurate.  In such circumstances whilst
    it is obiter to these proceedings I have emphasised to the Sponsor that
    it would be for the best if it is his intention ultimately to  maintain
    family life in this country for not only him but his family  to  ensure
    that they can speak English and therefore integrate into  our  society.
    However before that issue can be  addressed  in  any  way  it  will  be
    necessary for the first Appellant to satisfy the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  The following directions are given:

 1) That it being accepted that the only issue outstanding  is  whether  or
    not the first Appellant can satisfy the  requirements  of  the  English
    language test certificate in  order  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM that the remittal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  be  stayed
    pending the first Appellant taking a further English language test.

 2) In the event that the Appellant fails that test then it would  be  open
    to the Appellant's instructed solicitors to apply  for  directions  for
    the  matter  to  be  relisted  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Any
    relisting should effectively be consolidated with any application  that
    is made against a refusal at that stage by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    to grant entry clearance.

 3) That in the event that the first Appellant meets the requirement of the
    English language test then the Appellant do provide to the  immigration
    authorities a  copy  of  that  test  certificate  and  the  immigration
    authorities/Entry Clearance Officer do advise thereafter as to  whether
    or not they are satisfied that  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules are met.  In the event that  they  are  then  there  will  be  no
    further need to restore the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4) That in the event that the appeal is at any stage restored to the First-
    tier Tribunal then it is a  requirement  that  in  the  event  that  an
    interpreter is needed it is the responsibility of the Appellant's legal
    representatives  to  notify  the  Tribunal  within  seven  days  of  an
    application to restore.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
