
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    HU/01782/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/01786/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|                                     |On 22 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  J N & G N
                                                                 Respondents


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers  to
    them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellants are mother and son, both  citizens  of  Nigeria.   Their
    human rights case was based on  the  health  condition  of  the  second
    appellant, 5 years old.  FtT Judge  Rose  allowed  their  human  rights
    appeals by a decision promulgated on 19 August 2019.

 3. The SSHD has permission to appeal to the UT on one  ground,  headed  as
    "material misdirection in law", set out  in  three  sub-paragraphs,  in
    summary as follows:

         [1]  misunderstanding of AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWC A Civ 64; the FtT
         was bound by N v SSHD [2005] 2 AC 296 unless and until overruled by
         the Supreme Court; the criteria in N were not satisfied because the
         second appellant did not face a risk of imminent death upon  return
         to Nigeria;

         [2]  alternatively, article 3 test in Paposhvili [2017] Imm AR  867
         not met; health facilities in Nigeria may not generally be as  good
         as in the UK but that does not make removal to Nigeria  of  someone
         who suffers from biliary atresia a breach of article 3; no evidence
         that the second appellant will suffer anything  like  the  serious,
         rapid and irreversible decline in his health resulting  in  intense
         suffering ... required by Paposhvili ... whatever the outcome of AM
         in  the  Supreme  Court  may  be  ...  as  serious  as  the  second
         appellant's condition clearly is, his case falls far short  of  the
         article 3 threshold;

         [3]  error in the alternative findings on article 8, which required
         some separate element to engage article 8, and was not  engaged  by
         inadequacy of medical treatment alone.

 4. The UT granted permission on 27 January 2020, and directed the  hearing
    to be listed after decision of AM in the Supreme Court.

 5. The appellants filed a response, dated 26 February 2020, to  the  grant
    of permission.  Along with that, they applied for admission of  updated
    medical reports, yet to be obtained.  Such material might be admissible
    if the decision were to be remade, but the application does not suggest
    that it is relevant to whether the FtT erred on a point of law.

 6. On 29 April 2020, the Supreme Court decided AM [2020] UKSC 17.

 7. The UT issued directions on 5 May 2020, with a view to deciding without
    a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so, whether its decision
    should be set aside.   Parties  were  also  given  the  opportunity  to
    submit on whether there should be a hearing.

 8. The time limits for complying with directions have expired.   Any  time
    extensions necessary for considering parties' responses are granted.

 9. The SSHD's response, dated 18 May 2020, relies upon  the  grounds,  and
    runs thus (in summary, and following the numbering of the submission):

         [4]  error in applying Paposhvili when it had no force in  domestic
         law; not clear that had  AM  been  applied,  as  clarified  by  the
         Supreme Court, that the FtT would have decided as it did;

         [5]  substantive article 3 test in Paposhvili "not in fact  applied
         at all by the judge";

         [6]  misdirection at [11] of the decision on the standard of proof;
         conflation at [25] of the approaches to articles 3 and 8;

         [7]  repeats [4], and adds - no identification and  application  of
         the relevant test; no reasons for key findings at [21-25]; unclear,
         other than erroneous reference to proportionality, what standard of
         assessment was used.

10. Finally, the SHD asks for  the  decision  "to  be  set  aside  with  no
    findings preserved".

11. The SSHD does not submit on any  need  for  an  oral  hearing,  and  so
    presumably considers the case to  be  suitable  for  decision  "on  the
    papers".

12. The appellants' response, dated 26 May 2020, says that there should  be
    an oral hearing (unless the UT considers there to be no error of  law).
    On the substance of the case, the response runs (again in summary,  and
    following the numbering of the submission):

         [10-12]  on (sub) ground  [1],  the  question  is  whether  if  the
         Supreme Court's decision had been available at the time, that would
         have made any material difference;

         [14-15]  the SSHD's submissions on standard of proof and absence of
         reasons seek to introduce new grounds, on which permission has  not
         been granted;

         [17-18]  no error by FtT on  the  (very  modest)  extent  to  which
         Paposhvili  relaxed  the  article  3  test;  Supreme   Court   less
         restrictive on that relaxation than the Court  of  Appeal,  so  any
         error cannot be material;

         [19] on seriousness of condition of the second  appellant,  grounds
         are disagreement, not error of law;

         [20-25]  factors identified by FtT sufficient to meet the article 3
         test;

         [26] misrepresentation of decision to suggest it is based simply on
         inferior health facilities in Nigeria;

         [27]  in  line  with  Paposhvili  and  AM  approach,  evidence   of
         inadequacy of Nigerian healthcare was produced, and  not  countered
         by the SSHD;

         [29] if no error on article 3, article 8 ground irrelevant;

         [30] in any event, best interests of second appellant were engaged,
         and therefore private life.

13. Having considered all the above,  I  prefer  the  submissions  for  the
    appellants, for the following reasons.  It is  therefore  possible,  in
    terms of rules 2 and 34, to resolve the case without an oral hearing.

14. The nub of AM is at [34], where the Supreme Court found no question  of
    refusing to follow Paposhvili, and decided to depart from N.   The  FtT
    directed itself at  [10]  to  apply  N  subject  to  the  "very  modest
    relaxation" established by Paposhvili.  That relaxation is now seen  to
    be slightly less modest that the FtT thought.

15. The SSHD's grounds and submissions show no material error by the FtT in
    identifying the legal threshold for  article  3.   I  see  no  lack  of
    clarity in the standard of assessment applied to the evidence.

16. The SSHD's submissions on "standard of proof" are not  covered  by  the
    grant of permission or by any application to advance  further  grounds.
    In any event, the complaint is vague, and leads nowhere.

17. The grounds directed against  the  FtT's  findings  on  the  facts  are
    confused, vague,  and  do  not  fairly  represent  the  decision.   The
    submissions for the appellant are correct  in  pointing  out  that  the
    decision is not based on health facilities being "not generally as good
    in Nigeria ... as in the UK".  The grounds accept that the  appellant's
    condition is serious,  but  not  that  it  comes  "anywhere  near"  the
    Paposhvili  threshold.   Without  any  reference  to   the   underlying
    evidence, that is nebulous disagreement, not identification of anything
    which might amount to an error on a point of law.

18. The  decision  at  [1]  records  apparent  agreement  that  the  second
    appellant is "extremely sick".  He had a liver  transplant,  in  India,
    when aged 9 months.  At [23 a - c] the  Judge  specifies,  briefly  but
    clearly,  the  medical  evidence  and  history  which   underpins   his
    conclusion at [23 d], "Consequently, there is no prospect of the second
    appellant's condition being managed successfully  in  Nigeria  and,  if
    returned there, his  condition  will  swiftly  deteriorate,  his  liver
    transplant will fail and he will die.  The worsening of  his  condition
    will be hugely distressing and painful for a child of [his] age".

19. The Supreme Court in AM at  [31]  made  observations  on  the  relative
    significance of reduction in life expectancy of persons  aged,  in  the
    examples they gave, 74 and 24.  The  relatively  high  significance  of
    reduction in life expectancy in this case is a factor on which the  FtT
    was entitled to found,  and  which  is  reflected  at  [23  d]  of  its
    decision.

20. The SSHD has failed to develop any argument that the evidence cited did
    not amount to a legally adequate basis for its conclusion on the facts.
     It is a conclusion which justifies the outcome of the appeal.

21. I doubt whether there is any substance in the appellants'  response  on
    the article 8 alternative; but, as  they  say,  given  the  outcome  on
    article 3, that need be taken no further.

22. The SSHD has not disputed that if the second  appellant  succeeded,  so
    did the first.

23. The grounds and submissions for the SSHD do not show any material error
    in the FtT's self-directions on the law;  in  its  conclusions  on  the
    facts; or in applying the law to the  facts  found,  and  allowing  the
    appeal.  The decision of the FtT shall stand.

24. The anonymity direction made on 5 May 2020 is maintained.

25. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.


    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    9th July 2020




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

