
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/01066/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 February 2018                       | On 04 April 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                             mr abdulla al-mamun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel, instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 21 March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Matthews
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh, against
    the decision made by the respondent on 18 December  2015  refusing  him
    leave to remain.  The grounds are four-fold.   They  contend  that  the
    judge erred (i) by failing to consider the appellant's case outside the
    Immigration Rules or in treating failure under  the  Rules  as  an  end
    rather than a start-point; (ii) by failing to apply the principles  set
    out by the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11  as  regards  what
    constitutes insurmountable obstacles and also the meaning given to that
    term in para EX.1 of the Rules; (iii) in making irrational findings  in
    respect of the appellant's difficulties with his work, the  appellant's
    return to work, the ability of the appellant's partner  to  sell  their
    property,  the  appellant's  inheritance  and  the   ability   of   the
    appellant's partner to accompany him to Bangladesh; and (iv) by failing
    to consider s.117 of the NIAA 2002 and  the  fact  that  the  appellant
    spoke English and was not a burden on taxpayers.


2.    I  am  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their  well-presented
    submissions.  Mr Nasim emphasised in relation to (ii), that this ground
    of challenge also complained of a failure on the part of the  judge  to
    take account of the documentary evidence, in particular  that  relating
    to his wife's medical difficulties and the couple's ties to the UK.

3.   Addressing ground (i) first, it  focuses  in  particular  on  what  the
    judge said at para 40:

         "40. Taking account of the decisions  above,  I  do  not  find  any
             compelling circumstances that have no already been considered.
              A further Razgar  assessment  would  require  a  weighing  of
             proportionality  that  would  mirror   the   process   already
             undertaken,  and  would  lead  in  my  judgment  to  the  same
             conclusion, that a decision to return that I have found to  be
             reasonable, would not be a  disproportionate  interference  in
             the article 8 interests advanced in this appeal."

4.   Taking this paragraph in isolation one can  see  how  it  comes  to  be
    suggested  that  the  judge  did  not  conduct  a  separate  Article  8
    assessment  outside  the  Rules.   However,  the  paragraph  refers  to
    preceding paragraphs citing case law (paras 37-39) which  in  turn  are
    prefaced by para 36, which states:

         "36. I must also consider the  wider  Article  8  position  of  the
             appellant and his wife who is closely impacted  of  course  by
             the present decision.  In doing so I have regard  to  sections
             117A to 117D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
             2002 (as amended)."

5.   Read as a whole, it is manifest that the judge did conduct a  two-stage
    assessment and did properly understand that the Rules had to  be  given
    weight as an  expression  of  public  interest  factors.   The  grounds
    complain that the judge relied on R (AQ & Others) [2015] EWCA Civ  250,
    even though that case  was  concerned  with  a  foreign  criminal  case
    falling under s.117C.  However, the proposition  the  judge  drew  from
    R (AQ & Others) was a general one voiced in  many  reported  cases  on
    Article 8, namely that assessment outside the  Rules  has  to  be  made
    through the lens of the new Rules and the reasons why a claimant  fails
    to meet the requirements of the Rules (see e.g. Pitchford LJ's  remarks
    at [36]).  Further, the judge says nothing to suggest that  he  treated
    the Rules as determinative:  even  the  curiously  worded  para  40  is
    effectively  saying  that   in   the   appellant's   case   the   wider
    proportionality assessment would encompass very much the  same  factors
    as were addressed under the Rules.

6.   I find no arguable merit in ground (ii).  In addressing  the  issue  of
    insurmountable obstacles, the judge did not refer to Agyarko nor to the
    definition contained in para EX.2 of the Rules, but there is nothing to
    suggest that the  judge  construed  insurmountable  obstacles  to  mean
    impossible obstacles.  The  findings  on  which  the  judge  relied  to
    support his conclusion that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to
    the couple resuming their family life in Bangladesh were  more  than  a
    sufficient basis for concluding (to use the wording of EX.2) that there
    would not be "very significant difficulties" or "very serious hardship"
    for the appellant or his wife.  These findings encompassed the issue of
    whether he would be the subject of any adverse interest  in  Bangladesh
    from anyone (para 20-21), the appellant's wife's  medical  difficulties
    (paras 22-24) and the extent of family support the  couple  would  have
    available in Bangladesh (paras 25-27).

7.   Insofar as it is alleged  that  these  findings  failed  to  take  into
    account all relevant matters, I do not find this allegation  made  out.
    The judge noted at para 6 that  he  had  taken  into  account  all  the
    evidence as set out in the papers and in submissions; and  in  para  17
    the judge stated that he had given careful  consideration  to  all  the
    documents before him.  Mr Nasim sought to submit that there was a clear
    failure to take into  account  relevant  evidence  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's wife's medical circumstances.  I  reject  this  submission.
    Whilst the judge did not go through the  medical  reports  and  letters
    item by item, he records at para 22 that he had  "read  with  care  the
    medical reports and updates submitted".  Mr  Nasim  helpfully  took  me
    through the various letters including those  from  University  Hospital
    Birmingham confirming that the appellant's wife  had  had  a  cadaveric
    renal transplant in 2013 and needs lifelong medication  and  expressing
    confidence that she would not receive the high quality  care  that  she
    receives in the UK.  He also took me  to  a  letter  from  Dr  Williams
    referring to the wife's psychological problems.  I  am  satisfied  that
    the judge had these and the other medical documents in mind when noting
    at para 24 that there was no evidence to indicate that  she  would  not
    receive "appropriate treatment" in Bangladesh.

8.   The judge also considered the accessibility of such  treatment  to  the
    wife given the costs of such treatment and at para 25 gave  sustainable
    reasons  for  concluding  that  she  could  afford  the  treatment   in
    Bangladesh.  The judge did not refer in terms to  the  letter  from  Dr
    Williams, but that did not identify serious psychological  difficulties
    and, as the judge noted, it was the appellant's own evidence  that  she
    had been able to return to some work as a teacher (whether she  was  no
    longer working at the date of hearing did not negate the fact that  she
    had been able to return to work after her health problems).

9.   Ground (iii) amounts in my judgment to a series of  disagreements  with
    the judge's findings of fact.  I do not therefore propose to go through
    all the points ventilated thereunder.   Mr  Nasim  argued  particularly
    hard that it was irrational of the judge to disregard the  evidence  of
    difficulties the appellant would face from the cousin just  because  he
    had not made a protection claim.  At the level of  abstract  theory  Mr
    Nasim is undoubtedly right that difficulties a  person  might  face  on
    return may be relevant even if they  do  not  cross  the  threshold  of
    persecution  or  ill-treatment,  but  looking  at  the  judge's  actual
    reasoning in respect of the appellant's particular circumstances, it is
    apparent that (1) he considered this evidence (see para 20ff); and  (2)
    he regarded the failure to claim international protection  as  relevant
    to his assessment of that evidence.  Given  that  the  appellant's  own
    witness statement averred that he  had  made  an  asylum  claim  on  24
    February 2011, but it was not pursued when it was returned for lack  of
    a fee, it is clear that the appellant did at one time consider he faced
    a real risk of persecution.  Yet on broadly the same  evidence  he  was
    now seeking to say that these were just difficulties.  I note also that
    the appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  made  no
    reference to difficulties with the cousin.

10.  Issue is taken with the judge's assessment of  the  couple's  financial
    circumstances and the fact that the judge did  not  specifically  check
    whether the appellant could benefit from his inheritance in  Bangladesh
    and whether his wife's share of a property in the UK could be "realised
    by a sale".  However, it was for the appellant to prove that  he  would
    not receive his inheritance and that his wife could  not  realise  some
    assets from her share in a UK property.  The judge's finding  on  these
    two matters at para 25 were entirely within  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses.

11.  I see nothing in ground (iv); as Mr Nasim accepted, it  was  really  an
    extension of ground (i).  The judge noted  at  paras  36  and  39  that
    s.117B considerations had to be taken into account.  There is no reason
    to suppose he failed to weigh in the balance that the  appellant  spoke
    English.  It is somewhat inconsistent of the appellant to argue that he
    is financially independent  since  he  does  not  work  and  sought  to
    maintain that he and his wife lacked financial resources, but  be  that
    as it may, these considerations were ones that the  judge  was  clearly
    cognisant of and entitled to weigh as he did.

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in  law.   His  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's   appeal   must
    accordingly stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]                               Date: 30 March 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
