
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/01433/2017
                                                             & HU/01878/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House in London       |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On   3 June 2019                     |On   26 July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      R
                                      H
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Shamsuzzoha (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                       Notice of Decision and Reasons

1.    This was to have been  an  appeal,  brought  by  each  claimant,  from
decisions of the Secretary of State, of 10 April  2017,  refusing  to  grant
either of them leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules. Each  of  them
had been granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by  a  Judge  of
the First-tier Tribunal. However, on 28 March 2019  one  of  the  appellants
(the one I shall call R) was granted indefinite leave to remain. In  looking
at the content of rule 17(A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 and Section 104(4A) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002, that meant R's appeal was to be treated, by operation of  law,  as
having been abandoned. There was no dispute between the  parties  that  that
was so. In light of the content of rule 17(3) of the above Rules, the  Upper
Tribunal is required to notify each party, in writing, that a withdrawal  of
the appeal has taken effect and that the proceedings are no longer  regarded
by the Upper Tribunal as  being  pending.  Accordingly,  this  part  of  the
decision of the Upper Tribunal constitutes  such  notice  under  rule  17(3)
with respect to the claimant I have called R.

2.    When the tribunal heard the appeals of R and H,  which  it  did  at  a
hearing of 1  November  2018,  it  heard  from  both  of  them.  By  way  of
background, both are nationals of Bangladesh, both are adults,  and,  it  is
accepted, they are partners. They have a child who was born  in  the  United
Kingdom (UK) on 30 September 2017. The birth certificate records R as  being
the mother and H as being the father of that child. Both of  the  appellants
and the child are nationals of Bangladesh. R has been in  the  UK  since  30
September 2007 and H since 28 August 2009.

3.    R and H, having been refused leave on 6 January 2017, appealed to  the
tribunal. Both were treated  as  appellants  before  the  tribunal  but  the
appeals were considered at a joint hearing. Essentially,  it  was  contended
that they should succeed under article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on
Human Rights (ECHR) outside the Immigration Rules.

4.    The tribunal received much evidence as to  difficulties  it  was  said
would await both R and H if they had to return to Bangladesh.  The  tribunal
took much time and care, in its written reasons  of  28  February  2019,  in
setting out the detail of that evidence. It  performed  a  similar  function
with respect to evidence about claimed ties to the UK. Having  assessed  the
evidence, the tribunal resolved  matters  against  each  claimant  and  said
this:

    "24.   There was no substantive challenge by Ms Javed  [the  Presenting
    Officer before the tribunal] to the claims but rather Ms  Javed  relied
    upon the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 6 January 2017. There was  no
    general discussion or calling of evidence concerning the length of time
    that they had been in the United Kingdom but Ms Javed's submissions did
    not ultimately take any point on the matter,  save  to  recognise  that
    there was a child and the best interest of the child lay in being  with
    her parents in Bangladesh. Secondly, she said  that  their  status  had
    become precarious in the United Kingdom and even if the appellants  had
    been here over ten years lawfully that was not a complete answer to the
    point. For the appellants it was submitted that article 8  was  engaged
    and that there were difficulties in showing  that  they  could  succeed
    under the Rules. It was generally argued that the presence of the child
    was not determinative of the issues and  that  the  general  issues  of
    ability and willingness to work, English language skills and the period
    of time in the UK did not, on an article 8 ECHR basis, demonstrate that
    the appeal should succeed. Rather it was said that  of  those  and  all
    those facts and those that related to the  difficulties  faced  on  the
    return, that the respondents' decisions were disproportionate.

    25.    The ten years presence of the  First  Appellant  in  the  United
    Kingdom which appeared on the face of it likely to be established was a
    significant factor to weigh on the issue of proportionality.  In  doing
    so I follow the thinking in the cases of Mostafa [2015] and TZ  [2018].
    It is clear that there will only be a few cases which  can  succeed  on
    article 8 grounds. It seems  me,  at  the  date  of,  the  respondent's
    decision was right in respect of the basic factual matters. Taking into
    account the length of time the First Appellant has now been here; it is
    plain that that is a factor which I have to weigh  up.  I  do  not  and
    cannot on the evidence from the appellant's father resolve the issue of
    what is the current status of dispute  between  the  families  and  /or
    appellants in Bangladesh.

    26.    I, taking the appellants case at its highest, accept that  there
    would be a measure of hardship on a return and assume a lack of  family
    support from the families in Bangladesh. It seemed to me that  hard  as
    it might be there are not very significant obstacles nor  would  it  be
    unduly harsh to a return to Bangladesh. Both the appellants grew up for
    a long period of their life and whilst they may well have  difficulties
    finding employment,  although  whether  it  is  as  bad  as  the  first
    appellant said again the evidence does not support her view, I take the
    view that on the basis of the application when made in 2016 it  is  not
    disproportionate to require them to leave. They have an application yet
    to be determined and they can  through  that  process  advance  further
    material  and  information  which  may  bear  on  compliance  with  the
    provisions of the rules, particularly paragraph 276".

5.    Permission  to  appeal  was  sought  and  in  those  grounds,  it  was
contended that the tribunal had conducted an  inadequate  factual  analysis,
that  its  findings  did  not  demonstrate  that  the  evidence   had   been
considered, that having decided the appellants had certain points  in  their
favour it should not have then ultimately  resolved  matters  against  them,
and that it had  failed  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the  child.
Permission to appeal was granted and  the  granting  judge  relevantly  said
this:

    "The judge had set out in some detail the evidence in  this  case.  The
    judge was essentially looking at that factual matrix  in  terms  of  A8
    ECHR where the issue was one of proportionality. It is further the case
    the judge needed to examine S117B 2002 Act and the  best  interests  of
    the child. The consideration of the  lengthy  evidence  was  short  and
    arguably the  judge  applied  the  test  of  whether  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to re-integration. It is also arguable that there
    needed to be rather more analysis of  the  factual  background  perhaps
    best set out in terms of the balance sheet exercise as noted in  Hesham
    Ali. It is arguable the analysis of the evidence in this case  was  not
    sufficiently detailed nor the correct test applied."

6.    The matter  was  then  listed  before  me,  for  a  hearing,  so  that
consideration could be given to the question of whether or not the  tribunal
had erred in law and, if it had, what should flow from  that.  At  the  time
the hearing was listed it was no doubt anticipated that I would  be  dealing
with appeals  from  each  appellant.  However,  as  noted,  there  had  been
developments which had led to R being granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
and to her appeal now being treated as  being  having  withdrawn.  That,  of
course, left the appeal of H. I heard from the parties as to  how  I  should
proceed.  Mr  Shamsuzzoha  raised  the  possibility  of  my  adjourning  the
proceedings. He explained that an application had been  made  on  behalf  of
the  child  for  British  citizenship  and  that  it  was  expected  (absent
something not currently anticipated) that that  application  would  succeed.
So,  there  might  some  benefit,  he  thought,  in  the  proceedings  being
adjourned until that application had been dealt with. He also argued that  a
relevant consideration as to how I should proceed was that,  as  he  put  it
"the main refusal doesn't exist" on the basis of the decision which had  now
been taken with respect to R. He also contended, as I  understand  it,  that
the new circumstances should be taken into account, even with respect  to  a
consideration as to whether the Tribunal had erred  in  law  or  not,  under
rule 15 (2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Mr
Kotas argued that there was no necessity for an adjournment. The  appeal  of
R had been abandoned but that of H remained in place. Matters  with  respect
to H were simply at the error of law  stage,  new  material  should  not  be
admitted as to the question of error  of  law  because  matters  had  to  be
assessed on the basis of how they stood  when  the  tribunal  had  made  its
decision, and there was nothing to prevent me from going ahead dealing  with
the appeal of H.

7.    I decided that, since there were two appeals one  relating  to  R  and
one relating to H, and that since R's appeal was treated as  abandoned,  H's
appeal  remained  in  place  before  me.  I  decided  that  whilst  the  new
developments and evidence of it which Mr Shamsuzzoha wanted to  adduce,  was
in front me, it could not  be  relevant  to  the  question  of  whether  the
tribunal had erred in law. That had to be  assessed  on  the  basis  of  the
material before that tribunal and the circumstances as they then  stood.  On
that basis I heard submissions from the representatives  as  to  whether  or
not there was an error of law in the tribunal's decision relating to H.

8.    Mr Shamsuzzoha relied largely upon the tribunal's failure to  consider
and decide what  was  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child.  As  to  the
materiality of any such error, his contention was that if there  was  an  of
error  of  law  materiality  was  irrellevant.  He  also  said  that,   with
hindsight, it had been shown that the best interests of the child  would  be
to remain in the UK. Mr  Kotas,  suggested  that  the  written  grounds  had
merely amounted to a contention that the tribunal had failed to make  proper
or sufficient finding of fact. The tribunal, though, had taken the  case  of
the then two claimants before it at its  highest  but  had  still  concluded
requiring  them  to  leave  the  UK  would  not  have  unjustifiably   harsh
consequences. Whilst the tribunal might not have  specifically  referred  to
Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  those
would, from the perspective of H, be only neutral factors at  best.  It  was
an error not to consider the best interest of the child but that was  not  a
material error because the child was  not  a  qualifying  child,  there  was
nothing to suggest that the child had health  concerns,  and  there  was  no
basis upon which the tribunal could have concluded  that  the  child's  best
interests would impact upon the outcome.

9.    As set out above, I have asked myself whether, on the material  before
it, the tribunal erred in law with  respect  to  its  consideration  of  and
dismissal of the appeal of H. I  have  summarised  the  written  grounds  of
appeal, and I have summarised what was said to me  by  the  parties  at  the
hearing.

10.   The tribunal, as Mr Kotas  points  out,  decided  to  take  the  claim
advanced by each claimant, at its highest. That obviated the  need  for  any
more detailed fact finding with  respect  to  claims  which  had  been  made
concerning family links to the UK and  difficulties  that  the  couple  were
likely to face if they were to have to  return  to  their  home  country  of
Bangladesh. The tribunal did not, in the  section  of  its  written  reasons
given over to explaining its decision, specifically refer  to  the  criteria
it was required to consider as result of the content of section 117B of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It is right  to  say  that  it
ought to have addressed those considerations. However,  it  was  not  argued
before me nor in the written grounds that H would be able  to  benefit  from
the content of that section of that Act. On the basis  of  my  own  scrutiny
and bearing in mind that Mr Kotas's point as to that  was  not  specifically
opposed, I conclude that the tribunal did not err in law  or  at  least  not
materially, in failing to, as perhaps as it should  have  done,  go  through
each and every one of those requirements.

11.   As to any suggestion that the tribunal might have  applied  the  wrong
test with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR outside the Rules it did, as  the
granting  Judge  points  out,  talk  of  "very  significant  obstacles"   at
paragraph 26 of its written reasons. But  it  also  made  reference  to  the
question of undue harshness.  In  my  judgment  it  was  not  simply  asking
itself, for the purposes of an outside the rules  article  8  consideration,
whether there were very significant obstacles to reintegration. It was  also
clearly asking itself whether such was unduly harsh.

12.   The most concerning aspect of the tribunal's decision  is  that  which
relates to R and H's child. Indeed, Mr Kotas accepts that it did err in  law
in failing to give proper consideration to the interests of that child.  But
he says such error was not, in the circumstances of this  case  material.  I
did ask Mr Shamsuzzoha to deal with that specific contention.  His  response
was really (as I understand it and as I have already touched  upon)  to  the
effect that if an error of law has been made then  its  materiality  is  not
relevant when considering whether a decision should be set aside  for  legal
error. If that was his contention then I do not agree with  it.  Once  error
of law is established the Upper Tribunal has a discretion as to  whether  or
not to set aside a decision. It does not follow that once such an  error  is
established a decision must be set aside.  So,  materiality  is  a  relevant
consideration. In this case the child was, at  the  time  the  tribunal  was
considering  matters,  very  young.  The  child's  focus  would,  therefore,
inevitably have been upon his parents and  immediate  surroundings.  It  had
been decided that his parents could return to Bangladesh  without  offending
the provisions of article 8. Ordinarily, as a matter of  logic,  if  parents
can be expected to return to their home country (at least  absent  something
unusual) the child would be expected to go to and, not only that,  it  would
surely be in the child's best interest to do so. In  those  circumstances  I
accept the submission of Mr Kotas to the effect  that  whilst  the  tribunal
did err in that specific regard, the error it did make was  not  a  material
one because it could not have impacted upon the outcome.

13.   In light of the above H's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

14.   Of course, there are now  on  going  matters  regarding  the  family's
situation in the sense that citizenship is being sought  for  the  child.  I
would simply say, by way of observation,  I  would  find  it  surprising  in
those circumstance if the Secretary of State were to  take  any  enforcement
action against H whilst that citizenship application was pending.  It  seems
to be sensible for the situation with respect to H to be reviewed  once  the
citizenship has been decided and of course it is always open to H to make  a
fresh application for leave anyway in view of  R  being  given  status.  But
that is not a matter for me.

Decision

The appeal of the claimant I have called R is treated as abandoned.

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  concerning  the  claimant  I  have
called H, did not involve in the making of an  error  in  law.  Accordingly,
that decision shall stand.

The claimants were  each  granted  anonymity  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
Nothing was said about that before me. However, I have decided  to  continue
that grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
2008. Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall name either  of  the
original claimants to this appeal  or  any  member  of  their  family.  This
applies to all parties to the proceeding. Failure  to  comply  may  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date 25 July 2019

Mr Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

