
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01196/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th August 2018                           |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            miss ruramai manguwo
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs U Sood (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James, promulgated on 28th April 2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 31st March 2017.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Zimbabwe, and was born on  14th
    May  1997.   She  applied  for  entry  clearance  to  settle  with  her
    sponsoring mother,  Rosina  Manguwo  under  paragraph  352B(i)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This was a second application by  her  being  dated
    March 2015.   In  the  refusal  letter,  dated  28th  March  2015,  the
    relationship had been conceded.

Submissions

 3. At the hearing before me on  15th  August  2018,  there  was  consensus
    between Mrs Sood, for the Appellant, and Mrs Aboni, for the Respondent,
    that there was confusion in the decision  regarding  the  date  of  the
    decision under appeal.  Judge James,  as  Mrs  Aboni  made  clear,  had
    treated the challenge decision dated 28th January 2015 (see paragraph 1
    of the determination), with  the  judge  stating  that  "the  Appellant
    appeals against that decision".  However, the actual decision  that  is
    under challenge is "undated", but Mrs Aboni  was  able  to  elicit  and
    ascertain from her documents that it was dated 20th May 2015.

 4. Mrs Sood pointed out that in that case, this  was  an  old  Section  82
    appeal, which was not  limited  to  human  rights  arguments,  and  was
    receptive to all manner of argument.  Mrs Sood stated  that  the  judge
    had overlooked this fact  and  having  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    satisfied the Rules, stated that the Appellant could not appeal.

 5. Mrs Sood submitted that where in Article 8  human  rights  argument  is
    raised, then the third limb of the Razgar test, which specifies that an
    Article 8 decision must be in accordance with the law, allows an appeal
    where the Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance  with  the
    law.

 6. It was agreed by both parties that this  was  the  case  and  that  the
    appeal could not be limited  to  a  decision  that  is  unlawful  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.   The  full  rights  of  appeal
    under the points-based system were ended on 2nd March 2015, and for all
    other cases on 6th April 2015.  This was  a  decision  dated  20th  May
    2015.

Error of Law

 7. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the making of the decision by
    the judge involved the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law  (see
    Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision.
    I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge James
    on the correct legal premise.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(a).

 9. No anonymity direction is made.

10. This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd September 2018

