
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/01038/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 June 2016                      |On 13 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 CHANEL [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lewis, Counsel instructed by Binberg Pierce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this case was the  Respondent  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Respondent was the Appellant. For ease of reference  I
    refer to them as the Secretary of State and Claimant respectively.  The
    Secretary of State served the  Claimant  with  a  decision  to  make  a
    deportation order against him in accordance with section 32 (5) of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007 on 10 November 2014. The Secretary of State decided
    to refuse his human rights claim dated 10 January 2015  and  maintained
    the decision to deport him as it was not accepted that he  fell  within
    any of the exceptions set out in section 33 of the 2007 Act.

 2. The Claimant appealed against this decision under section 82 (1) of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal was  heard  by
    Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Peart  and  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Moller.  They  allowed  his  appeal  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 1 December 2015 under Article 3 of the 1950  Convention.
    They found that the exception to automatic deportation  at  section  33
    (2) (a) of the UK Borders Act 2007 applied and the  Claimant  satisfied
    the human rights exception at paragraph 397 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision. The grounds assert that the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    misdirected itself in law as to the Claimant's circumstances and failed
    to give  adequate  reasons  on  material  matters,  namely  the  public
    interest.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies on
    6 May 2016 on the grounds that the First-tier Tribunal appeared to have
    made no reference to the public interest  or  to  have  taken  it  into
    account.




    The Hearing

 5. Ms Isherwood argued that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  She submitted  that  the  Claimant  had  continually  offended
    bringing him into paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules  and  had  to
    show there were very compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraph 399 and 399A. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    refer to the public interest in considering the  Claimant's  claim  and
    the Secretary of State's decision. The decision focused on the  medical
    evidence from the Claimant. The Claimant relied on  evidence  from  the
    WHO which showed that mental health facilities were available and there
    was country information showing that it was  available.  Dr  Skogstad's
    assessed him before the Secretary of State and at R7 of  the  Secretary
    of State's bundle it could be seen that he expressed no  symptoms.  The
    Tribunal had relied on the Claimant's report which conflicted with  the
    Secretary of State's evidence.  This  issue  needed  to  be  addressed.
    Evidence was produced to show that medical treatment was available  and
    because it was a lesser service  did  not  mean  that  it  reached  the
    Article 3 threshold. At paragraph 39 of the determination it was  noted
    that in 2011 the Claimant said he would not commit  offences.  He  then
    committed a further criminal act and did not  plead  guilty  until  the
    very last point. The Tribunal had not  sufficiently  explained  why  Dr
    Durkin's report could not be considered. Para 54 of  the  decision  the
    panel had failed to consider the evidence in  the  round  because  they
    considered Dr Durkin's evidence to be inconsistent. There was  in  fact
    no contradiction. Then from paragraph 69 the  Tribunal  considered  the
    availability of treatment in Angola. Dedicated provision did not  exist
    but there was some availability and even in the findings  the  Tribunal
    did not consider all the evidence.  There was no consideration  of  the
    objective evidence provided by the Presenting Officer at  the  hearing.
    With regard to the risk of suicide the reliance placed on Dr Skodstad's
    report was in error. If I were to accept that they could  place  weight
    on that expert report there was no reference  to  public  interest.  It
    clearly needed to be considered. The Tribunal had to and did  not  give
    reasons why there were very compelling circumstances.

 6. Mr Lewis submitted that fundamental to this appeal was that it was  not
    allowed under Article 8 and the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  was
    misconceived.  This  was  a  very  experienced  panel  who  heard   and
    determined the appeal.  The  panel  actually  heard  evidence  from  Dr
    Skogstad who was  cross-examined  with  regard  to  his  opinions.  The
    Tribunal had regard to his evidence and the fact that his  opinion  was
    not undermined. Reference was made to Dr Durkin's report at U2-3 of the
    Secretary of State's bundle. Mr Lewis' submission in relation  to  this
    report was that if you looked at  it  very  significant  mental  health
    issues had been identified and the conclusion that this was not present
    in 2015 was inconsistent with the actual report. Against that there was
    the  evidence  from  the  prison  where  he  had  been   a   consultant
    psychiatrist. The Claimant presented as a risk of further self-harm. It
    was suggested by the Secretary of State that Dr  Skogstad's  assessment
    was wrong because he  erred  in  the  conclusion  in  relation  to  re-
    offending. He dealt with  this  in  his  report.  He  made  very  clear
    reference  that  this  conclusion  was  dependent  upon  the   Claimant
    receiving proper treatment. Tragically he was  not  provided  with  any
    such treatment. Rather than his assessment being undermined  there  was
    no reason to reject it. It was open to the panel to place  emphasis  on
    this. The Claimant was a refugee and a minor and he was  a  witness  to
    the most horrific trauma of the rape and torture of his niece  and  the
    murder of his parents at the age of 8. He was never given any treatment
    or therapy. The assessment of  risk  was  on  the  basis  of  the  very
    extensive prison records to which Dr Skogstad had regard and to his own
    assessment of the Claimant. There was no challenge to J v  SSHD  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 629 which made clear that a case could succeed on the basis of
    the risk of suicide. It was open to the panel to accept  Dr  Skogstad's
    opinion and base their opinion on this. It was open  to  the  panel  to
    have regard to the evidence that  there  was  insufficient  psychiatric
    care. There was no evidence  to  show  that  this  condition  could  be
    managed. They considered he would  continue  to  be  at  risk.  It  was
    accepted at a previous hearing that he had a deep-seated  fear  and  no
    connections. His condition had been created  there  and  there  was  an
    absence of any support network. In determining the appeal the panel had
    very clear evidence in relation to this. On the basis of  his  evidence
    and the absence of an ability to manage his  condition  and  having  no
    connections there it was open to them to find that it would be  inhuman
    and  degrading  treatment.  The  focus  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge was one of the clearest examples of a disagreement  with  the
    findings rather than a material error  of  law  given  that  J  v  SSHD
    identified that Article 3 could succeed and the reasons were  adequate.
    On the very particular  facts  of  this  case  they  were  entitled  to
    conclude that there was a real  risk.  The  determination  was  perhaps
    admirably brief. He asked  me  to  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal.




    Discussion and Findings

 7. Section 32 (5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 provides that  the  Secretary
    of State must make a deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal
    subject to section 33 of the same Act. The exception relied on  by  the
    Claimant in section 33 (2)  was  that  his  removal  would  breach  his
    Convention rights. Paragraph 397 of the Immigration Rules provides that
    a deportation order will not be made if the person's removal  would  be
    contrary to the UK's obligations under the Refugee  Convention  or  the
    Human Rights Convention. Where deportation would  not  be  contrary  to
    these obligations, it will be only be in exceptional circumstances that
    the public interest is outweighed.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal under Article 3 of the  ECHR
    and therefore did not move on to consider the Claimant's  rights  under
    Article 8 either  within  or  outwith  the  Immigration  Rules.  Having
    concluded that Article 3 would be breached the First-tier Tribunal  was
    not  required  to  consider  the  public  interest  considerations   in
    paragraphs 398 to 339 of the Immigration Rules  and  the  Secretary  of
    States Grounds 2 and 3 are misconceived as indeed is the grant of leave
    in this case.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal under Article 3 because  the
    panel concluded at paragraph 92 that there was a  real  risk  that  the
    Claimant would take his own life. The  Secretary  of  State  challenges
    this finding in Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal. The  basis  for  the
    challenge at 1 (a) to (c) is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    concluding that the  limited  assistance  available  in  Angola  was  a
    determinative factor. However, the submissions in the grounds  and  the
    case law relied on relate to Article  8  and  not  Article  3  and  are
    therefore not relevant to this appeal.

10. The Secretary of State impugns the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  in
    relation to Article 3 at paragraphs 1 (d) to (l).  The  alleged  errors
    of law are that:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal concludes that there is an Article 3 breach
         without any explanation of how the Claimant's  circumstances  reach
         the very high threshold required save for  the  lack  of  treatment
         available;

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the case of  GS  (India)
         SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40;

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal placed far too much weight on the report of
         Dr Skogstad provided by the Claimant which had already proved to be
         incorrect;

     iv) The First-tier Tribunal had based their entire reasoning on whether
         the Claimant could seek medical assistance in Angola based  on  the
         report of Dr Skogstad and a report from WHO. The Tribunal  did  not
         consider the report provided  by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
         hearing and found in favour of  the  Claimant  because  he  had  no
         financial or other resources;

      v) The First-tier Tribunal  noted  that  the  Claimant  had  not  been
         entirely truthful but  placed  significant  weight  on  the  report
         provided by the Claimant which was based on his evidence;

     vi) The First-tier Tribunal failed to take note of relevant  paragraphs
         of J V SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  629  and  consider  the  question  of
         whether the fear of ill-treatment was well-founded. It is  asserted
         that there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that  the
         Claimant would not be able to access  any  assistance  upon  return
         that would work as an "effective mechanism";

    vii) It is also asserted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  take  a
         holistic approach to all the facts of the case and it is said  that
         the Claimant has family in the West Bank.

11. The last point  is  clearly  an  error  and  I  disregard  it.  I  have
    considered firstly whether the Secretary of State has demonstrated that
    the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the expert evidence  was  flawed.
    The Tribunal had before it a  medical  report  dated  12  January  2015
    written by  Dr  Catherine  Durkin,  Specialist  Registrar  in  Forensic
    Psychiatry. She was asked by the Home Office  to  answer  a  number  of
    questions in relation to the Claimant's mental health and had access to
    his medical records during his time in custody.  She  also  interviewed
    him in January 2015. She concluded that his presentation was  variable.
    On assessment he  presented  as  calm  with  no  evidence  of  suicidal
    ideation. She also stated that he did present as a risk of further self-
    harm or attempted suicide were he to be placed under significant stress
    which he appeared to cope poorly with.

12. The First-tier Tribunal also had before it  the  report  of  Dr  Wilhem
    Skogstad, Consultant Psychiatrist in Psychotherapy  dated  18  December
    2014. The Tribunal also heard oral evidence from Dr  Skogstad  who  was
    cross-examined. Dr Skogstad reviewed the Claimant's medical records  in
    his report and examined him for two hours.  At paragraph 5.4.3  of  his
    report he concluded that there would be a serious deterioration in  the
    Claimant's mental state if he were deported and regarded  the  risk  of
    committing suicide as very serious once he had arrived  in  Angola.  He
    noted in this context that there had been a very serious  deterioration
    in his mental state  that  occurred  as  a  result  of  the  threat  of
    deportation in 2007 leading to serious suicide attempts.

13. I find that there was no error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    approach to the medical evidence for the following reasons.  The  first
    criticism made of the approach is that the report of  Dr  Skogstad  has
    proved to be incorrect. Whilst this ground is  clumsily  expressed,  it
    appears that the Secretary of State means that Dr  Skogstad's  evidence
    was to be  treated  with  circumspection  because  he  had  been  wrong
    previously about the Claimant's propensity to re-offend. The Claimant's
    previous appeal against deportation was allowed on 10 May 2011 and  the
    Tribunal in that case record at paragraph 36 that  Dr  Skogstad  stated
    that he was quite sure that if allowed to stay the Claimant  would  not
    slip backwards in his life. However, the First-tier Tribunal noted this
    submission at  paragraph  50  of  the  decision  and  addressed  it  at
    paragraph 58 of the decision and accepted that the basis  on  which  Dr
    Skogstad predicted that he would not re-offend was that he would obtain
    the treatment he required. That conclusion was open to the Tribunal  on
    the evidence as Dr Skogstad had stated at paragraph 5.2.3 of his report
    that the absence of support was in his view what ultimately led to  his
    renewed offence.

14. The grounds further assert that Dr Skogstad's report was based  on  the
    evidence provided by the Claimant who the  Tribunal  had  noted  was  a
    dishonest witness.  It  is  clear  from  reading  the  report  that  Dr
    Skogstad's report diagnosis was not dependent on an assumption that the
    account given by the Claimant was to be  believed.  The  diagnosis  was
    made after assessing the Claimant's medical records and a comprehensive
    analysis of his medical history and  symptoms.  The  Tribunal  did  not
    therefore fall into  the  error  identified  in  JL  (medical  reports-
    credibility) [2013] UKUT 00145 of attaching  too  much  weight  to  the
    report on the basis that the diagnosis was dependent on  an  assumption
    that the  account  was  to  be  believed.  The  Tribunal  assessed  the
    Claimant's  credibility  at  paragraphs  35  to  46  and   specifically
    considered, at paragraph 40, whether his re-offending, when he said  he
    would not, undermined his evidence as to symptoms of PTSD and  risk  of
    suicide. The Tribunal subjected Dr Skogstad's conclusions both  in  his
    report and oral, to analysis at paragraphs 47 to 61  of  the  decision.
    They found his account credible as it was consistent and  supported  by
    other evidence (paragraph 49). The First-tier Tribunal did not, as  the
    grounds assert, accept the report of Dr Skogstad at face value.

15. Nor do I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  failed,  as  Ms  Isherwood
    asserts, to give adequate reasons for preferring  the  evidence  of  Dr
    Skogstad over that of Dr Durkin. The Tribunal gave clear  and  adequate
    reasons for preferring the evidence of Dr Skogstad at paragraphs 52 and
    53. Those reasons were that his qualifications were excellent  and  his
    experience gained over many years; his report was detailed  and  cogent
    and his opinion was based on  facts  that  flowed  logically  from  the
    substance of his findings. In contrast they found that  Dr  Durkin  was
    not a consultant and did  not  justify  the  conclusions  she  reached.
    Further, the three page report did suggest that Dr Durkin reviewed  the
    Claimant more than once and there was no indication  whether  the  time
    spent  with  the  Claimant  was  in  private.  The  reasons  given  for
    preferring the evidence of Dr Skogstad, whose evidence  was  tested  in
    cross-examination were open to them on the evidence before them.

16. I therefore find that there is  no  error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    approach to the expert evidence and the Tribunal gave adequate  reasons
    to justify accepting Dr Skogstad's evidence that the risk of suicide if
    deported was very high. In so doing the Tribunal took  account  of  the
    fact that the Claimant had an undisputed history of suicidal  ideation,
    deliberate self-injury and suicide attempts.

17. I have therefore considered whether the First-tier Tribunal misdirected
    itself on the law and failed to give any  explanation  as  to  why  the
    Claimant's circumstances reached the  very  high  threshold  set  under
    Article 3 save for the lack of treatment in Angola and failed to direct
    itself in accordance with the guidance given by the Court of Appeal  at
    paragraphs 30 and 31 of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

18. In principle, the  risk  of  suicide  can  engage  Article  3  but  the
    threshold is very high. In  N  v  UK  Application  26565/05  the  Grand
    Chamber upheld the decision of the House of Lords and concluded that in
    medical cases Article 3 only applied in very exceptional  circumstances
    particularly as the suffering was not the result of an intentional  act
    or omission of a State or non-State body.  The fact that  the  person's
    circumstances,  including  his  or  her  life  expectancy,   would   be
    significantly reduced was not sufficient in itself to give  rise  to  a
    breach of Article 3. Those same principles apply  in  relation  to  the
    expulsion of any person afflicted with any serious, naturally occurring
    physical or mental illness which might cause suffering pain or  reduced
    life expectancy and required specialist medical  treatment  that  might
    not  be  readily  available  or  which  might  only  be  available   at
    considerable cost.  In J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 the Court of Appeal
    held  that  in  a  foreign  case  the  Article  3  threshold  would  be
    particularly high and even higher where the alleged  inhuman  treatment
    was not the direct or indirect responsibility of the public authorities
    in the receiving state and  resulted   from  some  naturally  occurring
    illness whether physical or mental.  The Court of Appeal  set  out  the
    test in Article 3 cases: (i) the feared ill  treatment  must  be  of  a
    minimum level of severity; (ii) a causal link must be shown between the
    act of removal and the inhuman treatment relied on; (iii) in a  foreign
    case the Article  3  threshold  will  be  particularly  high;  (iv)  in
    principle it was possible for an Article 3 case to succeed on the basis
    of a risk of suicide and (v) in a foreign case of suicide risk it would
    be relevant to consider whether  the  fear  of  ill  treatment  in  the
    receiving state was objectively well founded; if not, this would  weigh
    against there being a real risk of there being a breach;  and  (vi)  it
    would also be relevant to consider  whether  the  removing  and/or  the
    receiving state had effective mechanisms to reduce the risk;  if  there
    were, this would also weigh against  there  being  a  real  risk  of  a
    breach.

19. The First-tier Tribunal directed itself properly  in  relation  to  the
    threshold required in Article 3 cases at paragraphs 74 and  75  of  the
    decision.  The Tribunal accepted the expert evidence that  there  would
    be a very high risk of suicide if the Claimant were  deported.  A  very
    high risk of suicide is, on the authorities, capable  of  reaching  the
    high threshold required. The conclusion was based on the evidence of Dr
    Skogstad, which, I have held, the Tribunal did not  err  in  accepting.
    Further,  the  Tribunal  made  clear  findings  of  fact  based  on  Dr
    Skogstad's evidence, in relation to the risk of suicide at paragraph 81
    of the decision.  The Tribunal found that the recent  deterioration  in
    the Claimant's mental state  was  directly  linked  to  the  threat  of
    deportation; psychological help and medication  would  assist,  but  as
    long as the threat of  deportation  remained,  would  not  relieve  his
    symptoms of PTSD; being deported to Angola would have  a  very  serious
    impact  leading  to  severe  deterioration  in  PTSD  and   depression;
    symptoms, if  reminded  of  the  trauma,  include  intrusive  memories,
    flashbacks,  nightmares  and  insomnia;  he  was   deeply   afraid   of
    deportation due to his traumatic history, lack of  relatives  or  other
    support, inability to speak the language and  vulnerability;  he  would
    experience despair and depression;  the  impact  of  the  psychological
    trauma would be a very high risk of suicide.

20. It is clear in my judgement that the First-tier Tribunal manifestly did
    not as the Secretary of State asserts, fail to  give  any  reasons  for
    finding the high threshold would be met save for  in  relation  to  the
    lack of treatment. On the contrary, full reasons rooted in the evidence
    were given.

21. Contrary to the Secretary of State's assertion in the grounds of appeal
    the Tribunal also specifically considered the  fifth  question  of  the
    test in J v SSHD at paragraph  76  of  the  decision.  The  fifth  limb
    relates to the objective well-foundedness of the fear of  ill-treatment
    in the receiving state. The Tribunal considered the case  of  Y  and  Z
    (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 and  set  out  the  passages  on
    which the panel relied. In  particular,  the  Tribunal  relied  on  the
    addition to the fifth principle  in  J  that  of  equal  importance  is
    whether any genuine fear  which  the  Claimant  may  establish,  albeit
    without objective foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if
    there is an enforced  return  [16].  The  Tribunal  then  accepted,  at
    paragraph  78  that  the  Claimant's  fear  was  genuine  despite   its
    subjective nature and gave reasons for that  finding,  namely  that  Dr
    Skogstad had said that when  there  was  a  threat  of  deportation  in
    prison, the Claimant made  a  serious  suicide  attempt.  The  Tribunal
    accepted that  this  history  was  an  important  indicator  of  future
    behaviour.

22. The First-tier Tribunal also specifically considered the sixth question
    in J v SSHD, namely whether the removing and/or the receiving state had
    effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.  According  to  the
    Secretary of State's grounds, there was no evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the  Claimant  would  not  be  able  to  access  any
    assistance on return that  would  work  as  "an  effective  mechanism".
    Again, I find that this assertion is  wholly  without  foundation.  The
    Tribunal set out at paragraph 76 of the decision the  passages  from  Y
    and Z in relation to  the  question  of  effective  mechanisms  in  the
    receiving state to reduce the risk of suicide. The  Tribunal  found  at
    paragraph  91  that  on  the  evidence  the  likelihood  was  that  the
    Claimant's only perceived means of escape from the isolation  and  fear
    in which removal would place him would be to attempt suicide  and  that
    as in Y and Z the existence of a rudimentary  health  service  did  not
    attenuate this risk.    The Tribunal devoted paragraphs 69 to 75 of the
    decision to an assessment of the availability of medical  treatment  in
    Angola.  They  considered  the  evidence  of  Dr  Skogstad   that   the
    possibility of managing the risk in Angola was  more  or  less  nil  as
    there were virtually no psychiatrists, community psychiatric nurses  or
    other mental health services. Contrary  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assertion, they did, at paragraph 71 consider the Presenting  Officer's
    Country of Origin Information about Angola. They found, on the basis of
    evidence from the World  Health  Organisation  (WHO),  endorsed  by  Dr
    Skogstad, that the Claimant would  be  unlikely  to  obtain  prescribed
    drugs or treatment and that there were only two psychiatrists in Angola
    for a population of 18 million people. They noted that although  a  few
    citizens may be able to access private treatment the  Claimant  had  no
    financial resources and would not be able to do  so.  They  found  that
    there was no evidence that the risk of  suicide  could  be  managed  in
    Angola.

23. In the light of the evidence and these findings the panel was  entitled
    to conclude, as it did  at  paragraph  88  that  Angola  did  not  have
    effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.





Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

There is no direction for anonymity none having been  made  and  none  being
appropriate on the facts.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L Murray    13 September 2016

