
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01188/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd September 2019                         |On 12th September 2019        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   mrs O A
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lloyd, promulgated on 4th April  2019,  following  a  hearing  in
    Manchester on  28th  March  2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, a female, and was born  on  16th
    December 1983.  She appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 4th January 2019, refusing her leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant had lived in the UK for eight years.   She  had
    originally come on 18th September 2010 on a Tier 4 Student  visa.   She
    had later applied to remain on the basis of her family  life  with  her
    partner, whose student visa expired at the end of March 2019  (and  the
    appeal in this case was heard on 28th March 2019).  He had applied  for
    an extension to his visa but had not yet received a decision  from  the
    Respondent.  He  too  was  a  Nigerian  national  (paragraph  7).   The
    Appellant and her husband have two children, a daughter and a son.  The
    daughter was allergic to certain products, including  dairy,  eggs  and
    soya.  The son was allergic to cow's milk.  The Appellant  herself  had
    high blood pressure.  It was  the  Appellant's  case  that  she  cannot
    obtain dairy free milk and other foods for her children in Nigeria  and
    her son has prescription formula milk in the UK which she cannot obtain
    in Nigeria.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge held that the Appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi).  She had returned to Nigeria herself  five  times
    since she arrived in the UK in 2010.  The judge did not  consider  that
    there were significant obstacles to  her  reintegration  into  Nigerian
    society.  Nor was it accepted that there was no food available for  the
    daughter to eat in Nigeria.  After all, the  Appellant  had  stayed  in
    Nigeria for two months after  the  food  allergy  diagnosis.   Although
    medical notes have been produced "none of the hospital letters say this
    was due to problems related to her eating foods she  was  allergic  to.
    The  latter  illnesses  were  for  conditions  unrelated  to  the  food
    allergies" (paragraph 33).

 4. The judge went on to consider the best interests of  the  children  and
    observed that the children were of a very young age, being 5 years  and
    7 months.  It was in their best interests to be with their  mother  who
    will be returning to Nigeria with them.  Their father could also choose
    to return with the family when his study was  over  or  when  his  visa
    expired at the end of this month, which was March 2019 (paragraph  46).



 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law in failing
    to have due  regard  to  the  allergies  suffered  by  the  Appellant's
    children, failed to have proper regard to the fact that her partner had
    been granted further leave to remain until 1st March 2020  (which  was
    not evident at the time when the appeal was heard on 29th March 2019),
    and that the best interests of the children  had  not  been  adequately
    considered.

 7. On 7th May 2019, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that
    this was an  Appellant  who  had  throughout  been  unrepresented,  and
    continued to be unrepresented, and  it  had  now  transpired  that  her
    partner, had been granted an extension to his student  visa  from  27th
    March 2019 until 1st March 2020, and this was a factor which could  not
    be taken into account in undertaking the balancing exercise,  when  the
    judge considered where the balance of considerations fell.

 8. In the circumstances, given that the appeal was actually determined  on
    4th April 2019, by which time the Appellant's partner had already  been
    granted leave to remain on 27th March 2019, it was arguable that there
    had been some procedural unfairness.  Secondly, in granting permission,
    it was stated that there had been extensive medical evidence before the
    judge relating to the allergies suffered by  both  children  but  there
    were insufficient findings as to the effect of such  allergies  on  the
    wellbeing  of  children.   In  particular,  both  children   had   been
    hospitalised in the previous twelve months prior to  the  date  of  the
    hearing and this had not been recorded by the judge.  Moreover  Section
    55 of the BCIA 2009 had not been adequately considered.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 3rd September 2019,  the  Appellant  relied
    upon the grounds of application.

10. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that there was no error of law because
    the judge did not proceed on the basis that the Appellant's husband did
    not have leave to remain.  The appeal was heard on 29th March 2019  and
    it would appear that the judge had dealt with this on  the  basis  that
    further leave to remain may be granted, and if this was so then, "their
    father can also choose to return with the  family  when  his  study  is
    over, or when his visa expires this  month"  (paragraph  46).   It  was
    implicit in this statement, submitted Mr Mills, that the judge  allowed
    for the possibility that the Appellant's husband  would  be  granted  a
    further period of leave to remain to complete  his  studies,  following
    which he could return back to his country to enjoy a family life there.
     That being so, the judge simply did not proceed on the basis that  the
    Appellant's husband had no leave to remain in this country.

11. Secondly, submitted Mr Mills, given that the Appellant and her  partner
    are now aware of the children's  allergies  and  their  condition,  and
    given that they now have a food regime which enables them  to  maintain
    adequate good health, the Appellant and her partner can  take  adequate
    precautions upon return to Nigeria, so as to ensure that  they  do  not
    suffer any further detriment in their health.

12. In reply, the Appellant submitted that the fact was that at the time of
    the hearing the Tribunal did not have any knowledge of  the  fact  that
    just a day before, on 27th March 2019, her  husband  had  been  granted
    leave to remain in a letter that was dated then, but arrived a few days
    afterwards to the Appellant's home.  The fact remained, she  submitted,
    that given that the judge's determination is dated 4th April  2019,  by
    that stage the Appellant's partner already had extant leave for a week.



13. Second, she submitted that  there  was  documentation  from  Dr  O.  F.
    Adeniyi, of an article entitled "food allergy,  two  case  reports  and
    management challenges in a resource limited setting", by the department
    of paediatrics, and she submitted that this had not been considered  by
    the Tribunal.  She was entirely wrong about this  because  Judge  Lloyd
    did expressly take this into account (at paragraph 36).

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved an
    error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that  I  should  set
    aside the decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First,  there  is  the
    question of the Appellant's partner having been granted  further  leave
    to remain at the time of the hearing on 28th March  2019.   Plainly  he
    had been granted leave only the day before on 27th March  2019.   I  do
    not accept, despite  Mr  Mills'  admirable  submissions  before  me  to
    persuade me otherwise, that the  reference  to  the  fact  that  "their
    father can also choose to return with the  family  when  his  study  is
    over, or when his visa expires this month, implies that the  judge  has
    accepted the possibility of further leave to remain  being  granted  to
    the Appellant's partner.  The basis  for  this  is  insufficient.   The
    matter had to be considered on the basis of the  actual  facts  on  the
    date of the hearing, which was that only a day before  the  Appellant's
    partner  had  been  given  further  leave  to  remain.   When  directly
    addressing this point before me,  the  Appellant  stated  that  at  the
    hearing below before Judge Lloyd, she had taken care to inquire of  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer as to  when  the  Appellant's  partner's
    application for further leave to remain would be  decided  and  he  had
    replied that it would be "very very soon".  It was  not  known  to  him
    that only a day  before  the  Home  Office  had  actually  granted  the
    Appellant's partner further leave to remain.  That was the actual state
    of affairs on the day of the hearing before Judge  Lloyd.   The  matter
    ought to have been considered on the basis that the Appellant's partner
    had leave to  remain  for  another  year  until  1st  March  2020.   In
    consequence, I accept that a procedural unfairness had been caused  to
    the Appellant in this regard.

15. Second, there is the question of the  Appellant's  children's  illness.
    Whereas the judge is entirely correct to conclude that  the  suggestion
    that there is no dairy food in Nigeria is absurd so  that  she  rejects
    it, there is a factual error in terms of the children's continuing  ill
    health.  The judge observes that "since  the  daughter  has  eliminated
    certain foods to which she is allergic  from  her  diet,  it  does  not
    appear she has had further health problems" (paragraph 34).  This fails
    to take into account the fact that both children were  hospitalised  in
    the United Kingdom in the last  year.   The  "best  interests"  of  the
    children under Section 55 of the  BCIA,  accordingly  required  a  more
    detailed consideration in the light of the  copious  medical  evidence.
    It  is  unfortunate  that  the  Appellant  is  unrepresented.    Proper
    preparation in an organised fashion of the evidence that the  Appellant
    wishes to rely upon would assist the Tribunal of inquiry a  great  deal
    in coming to a decision that was not flawed.

16. I accordingly direct that the Appellant prepare her evidence in  future
    in a systematic and organised fashion so that it  is  easy  to  follow,
    with the chronology, and an index page, and it would be altogether more
    preferable if she was represented by a legal representative,  but  that
    is a matter for her.





Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge  Lloyd
    pursuant to practice statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Directions.

18. An anonymity direction is made.

19. This appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019




