
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01942/2020 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 9 November 2020                   |On 17 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Marie Francoise Isabelle Phelps
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions only)
For the Respondent:    Ms G Mellon instructed by Wesley Gryk Solicitors
                    (written submissions only)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO"),  for
    convenience I shall refer to the parties as they  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Haiti who was born  on  2  January  1956.
    She moved to the USA when she was aged 13, she is now 64 years old, and
    has permanent residence in the USA with a 'Green Card'.

 3. The appellant is married to a British citizen, [DA]  who  is  75  years
    old.

 4. On 16 December 2019,  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance to join her spouse in the UK under  the  'partner'  rules  in
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  On 8 January
    2020, the ECO refused her application under the Rules and under  Art  8
    of the ECHR.  As regards the Immigration Rules, the ECO  was  satisfied
    that she met the suitability requirements and all  of  the  eligibility
    requirements apart from the English language requirement in Section  E-
    ECP.4.1. - 4.2.  She had not taken and passed an English language  test
    and was not exempt from that requirement.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Her  appeal  was
    determined, at her request, without a hearing.  In a determination sent
    on 8 July 2020, Judge R A Pickering  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.
    Although he accepted, as had the ECO before  him,  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules because she could not meet
    the English language requirement, he concluded that the  separation  of
    the appellant from her husband in the UK was disproportionate under Art
    8 of the ECHR on the basis that it had unjustifiably harsh consequences
    which outweighed the public interest.   As  a  consequence,  the  judge
    allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The ECO sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew) on 28  July  2020
    on the ground that the judge  had  arguably  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons as to why there were unjustifiably harsh  consequences  if  the
    appellant could not join her husband in the UK.

 7. In the light of the COVID-19  crisis,  on  17  August  2020  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Pitt) issued directions expressing the  provisional  view
    that the issues of whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision  involved
    the making of an error of law and, if  it  did,  whether  the  decision
    should be set aside, should  be  determined  without  a  hearing.   The
    parties were invited to make submissions both  on  the  merits  of  the
    appeal and also on whether the error of law issue could  be  determined
    without a hearing.

 8. In response, both parties made submissions.  Neither party  raised  any
    objection to the appeal being determined  without  a  hearing  and  the
    submissions focused on the substantive issues raised in the appeal.

 9. In the light of the parties' submissions, and in  the  absence  of  any
    objection, and having regard to the overriding objective of determining
    the appeal justly and fairly and the nature of the legal issues raised,
    I am satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to determine this
    appeal without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as  amended)  and  para  4  of  the
    Amended General Pilot Practice Directions: Contingency Arrangements  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal  (14  September  2020)
    issued by (then) Vice  Senior  President  and  (now)  Senior  President
    Tribunals, the Rt. Hon. Sir Keith Lindblom.

The ECO's Grounds

10. The ECO's grounds raise a single point.  Having noted  that  the  judge
    accepted that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  English  Language
    requirement (para 1) and that  the  judge  then  went  on  to  consider
    whether the decision would result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences"
    (para 2), at para 3 the grounds set out  a  reasons  challenge  to  his
    decision as follows:

         "3.  The reasons given are  that  the  sponsor  would  be  assisted
             emotionally and practically by the appellant's presence in the
             UK.   It  is  submitted  that  there  is  no   evidence   that
             unjustifiably harsh consequences will ensue in the appellant's
             absence.  There is no evidence that the sponsor is  unable  to
             cope and is described as having largely recovered from a  road
             traffic accident he suffered in 2017 [28].

         4.   It is therefore submitted that the FTTJ has erred  in  law  by
             failing to give adequate reasons for his findings."

The Judge's Decision

11. The judge reached his decision on the documentary  evidence  submitted.
    He did not hear any oral evidence as the appeal was determined  without
    a hearing.  In large measure, it  is  fair  to  say,  he  accepted  the
    primary facts as set out in the appellant's evidence.

12. He set those facts out at paras 21-29 as follows:

         "21. There is not, any real dispute over the factual matrix in  the
             appellant's case.

         22.  The appellant is a 64 year old Haitian woman who has lived  in
             the USA since the age of 13.  There is no  reason  for  me  to
             doubt this but for clarity, I accept these matters.

         23.  The appellant has provided evidence  that  she  has  permanent
             residence in the USA in the form of a Green Card.   Again,  no
             issue has been taken with this and I accept that the appellant
             is a Haitian National with permanent residence in the USA.

         24.  Since the age of 13,  the  appellant  has  been  educated  and
             worked in the USA.  I accept  that  she  graduated  from  John
             Adams High School in 1973 as she has provided a certificate to
             evidence this.  The appellant explained in her representations
             that she was educated in English.  Again, this seems  entirely
             plausible, given  the  USA  is  a  majority  English  speaking
             country.  Therefore I accept, as a fact that the appellant was
             educated in English.

         25.  The appellant has provided her Curriculum Vitae, which details
             nearly a decade of experience  in  the  hospitality  industry,
             including a role as the Assistant Manager at the Helmsley Park
             Lane Hotel, New York, from 1983 - 1988.  Since the  mid  1990s
             until 2001, the appellant has been employed  as  an  Executive
             Assistant to those in senior positions at organisations,  such
             as Bank of America and the New York Stock Exchange.

         26.  I have no reason to doubt the appellant's work  experience  as
             set out within her CV and I accept that she  was  employed  in
             the manner described.  When considering the various roles  she
             has undertaken, I accept that the appellant  would  have  been
             required to have, amongst other skills, an  excellent  command
             of the English language in order to discharge the requirements
             of her various different roles.

         27.  Turning to her relationship with [DA], a 75 year  old  British
             Citizen, there is no challenge  to  the  genuineness  of  this
             relationship.  The appellant and Mr [A]  were  married  on  11
             December [2019] but have known each other  since  1988  having
             both worked for the same company.  The appellant  and  Mr  [A]
             met up again in 2017 and have been  in  a  relationship  since
             then.  As there is  no  challenge  to  this,  I  accept  these
             matters and make findings of fact to  that  effect  about  the
             genuineness of the relationship.

         28.  There is no challenge to the fact that Mr [A] was  in  a  near
             fatal car accident in 2017, although  now  largely  recovered,
             this does cause some difficulties in movement of his  shoulder
             joint and right hip.  Mr [A] suffers from Macular degeneration
             in his left eye and short sightedness in both eyes.  Again,  I
             seen no reason to reject these aspects of the evidence.

         29.  Mr [A] has grown up children, as well as grandchildren, living
             in the UK.  He is retired, but works as an author.   He  is  a
             published author of the Encyclopaedia of Real Estate Terms and
             is working on further publications.  I have no reason to doubt
             Mr [A]'s circumstances in respect of his family or work and  I
             accept those matters."

13. Having set those primary facts out,  the  judge  went  on  to  consider
    whether under the 'partner' rule, the appellant met the one requirement
    which was in  dispute,  namely  the  English  Language  Requirement  in
    Section E-ECP.4.1-4.3.  At paras 32-37, the judge  concluded  that  she
    could not.   In  her  submissions  made  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    appellant did not seek to  challenge,  in  response  to  the  grant  of
    permission, the judge's finding that the appellant could not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules as a 'partner' for the reasons he
    gave, namely that she could not meet the English language requirement.

14. Having reached the conclusion that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules, the judge then went on  to  consider  Art  8
    outside the Rules.

15. At para 39, the judge found that there  was  family  life  between  the
    appellant and her husband and  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    interfered with that family life.  At para 40, the judge found that the
    interference was in accordance with the law, namely for the purpose  of
    maintaining immigration control.  He then went on in paras 41 - 48,  to
    consider whether the refusal of entry clearance  was  proportionate  to
    the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control.

16. At para 41, the judge said that in assessing proportionality:  "I  have
    found it helpful to adopt a balance sheet approach".

17. Then, at paras  42-45,  the  judge  considered  ss.117B(1)-(3)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) as follows.

18. At para 42, the judge said this about ss.117B(1) and (3):

         "42. The fact that the appellant is unable to meet the requirements
             of the Immigration Rules is a matter I  have  weighed  against
             her.  The maintenance of effective immigration control  is  in
             the  public  interest  (117B(1)).  The  appellant  meets   the
             financial requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  therefore,
             she is in my judgment  financially  independent.   This  means
             ultimately, she is not going to be a burden  on  the  taxpayer
             and will be better able to integrate into  society  (117B(3)).
             This is a matter that lessens the weight that I have  attached
             to the public interest."

19. At para 43, the  judge  set  out  s.117B(2)  dealing  with  the  public
    interest and an individual's ability to speak English.  In relation  to
    that provision, the judge reached the following conclusion at para 44:

         "The appellant has lived in the US for over 50 years, and has  been
         educated there and worked in occupations that would  have  required
         her to converse confidently in English.  I accept  her  ability  to
         speak English.  This would mean, in line with primary  legislation,
         that she is less of a burden on  taxpayers  and  will  be  able  to
         integrate.   This  reduces  the  weight  I  attach  to  the  public
         interest."

20. At para 45, the judge noted that no other factors in s.117B of the 2002
    Act were relevant which needed to be considered.

21. At paras 46-48, the judge considered the circumstances of the appellant
    and her husband and carried out the balancing exercise under Art 8.2 as
    follows:

         "46. I have considered  the  impact  on  the  appellant's  husband,
             adopting  a  holistic  approach  to  the  family  unit.    The
             appellant's  husband,  is  being  adversely  impacted  by  the
             separation from his  wife.   Having  experienced  a  traumatic
             injury, it is apparent from the evidence that  they  are  very
             close  and  [he  would]  be  assisted   and   supported   both
             emotionally and practically by  his  wife's  presence  in  the
             United Kingdom.

         47.  Therefore weighing matters, against one  another,  the  public
             interest and the interests of the appellant, on the particular
             facts of this case, for the reasons I have given,  I  consider
             that the matters weigh in  favour  of  the  appellant  in  the
             balancing exercise.

         48.  In my judgment, this is a case, where  the  refusal  of  entry
             clearance, results  in  an  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
             (sic), making the decision disproportionate."

The Submissions

22. In respect of the reasons challenge in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    judge's finding that  there  were  "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences"
    sufficient to outweigh the public interest, para 8 of the ECO's further
    submissions elaborate as follows:

         "The  reasons  given  are  that  the  sponsor  would  be   assisted
         emotionally and practically by the appellant's presence in the  UK.
         It is submitted there  is  no  evidence  that  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences will ensue in the appellant's absence.   There  is  no
         evidence that the sponsor is unable to cope, having been  described
         as largely recovered from a road traffic accident  he  suffered  in
         2017 [28] and in an employment, with the presence of various family
         members in the UK [29].  At no point does the FTTJ factor into  the
         assessment that the appellant could like many others facing similar
         obstacles, take the requisite test.  The FTTJ has utilised Art 8 as
         a vehicle to circumvent the requirements of the Rules."

23. In addition, the  ECO's  submissions  make  a  further  point.   It  is
    contended that the judge misdirected himself in law in paras 42 and  44
    in stating that reduced weight should be given to the  public  interest
    as the appellant respectively was financially  independent  (s.117B(3))
    and was able to speak English (s.117B(2)).  It is contended  that  that
    is a misdirection following Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58  as  neither
    of those factors can positively weigh in the appellant's  favour  under
    Art 8 (see [57]).

24. In response to the grounds, the appellant contends that the  judge  did
    give adequate reasons for his conclusion in the light of the  evidence,
    which was not in dispute,  and  upon  which  the  judge  found  in  the
    appellant's favour.  Reliance is placed upon  the  appellant's  husband
    being 79, living alone, having experienced "a traumatic injury"  and  a
    "near-fatal  accident"  in  2017  resulting  in  medical   difficulties
    including  difficulties  with  mobility  and  short  sightedness.    In
    addition, the appellant's evidence that her husband is  suffering  from
    "emotional distress" and reports "isolation and  loneliness".   Further
    reference is made to a letter from the sponsor's doctor, Dr Rafiq  that
    the sponsor was finding it painful to carry out his daily routines  and
    the presence and support of his wife (the appellant)  would  help  with
    his daily activities and care.

25. On behalf of the  appellant,  it  is  contended  that  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons and the grounds are no more than a  disagreement  with
    the judge's findings of fact.

26. In relation to the Rhuppiah point, it is submitted that, the  appellant
    would be granted entry clearance but for the procedural requirement  of
    not taking the English language test, it was entirely  appropriate  for
    the judge to decide the weight to be placed on the public interest.

Discussion

27. Having concluded that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules, the judge correctly  directed  himself  that  in
    order to succeed in her  claim  under  Art  8  outside  the  Rules  the
    appellant  had  to  establish  that  there  were  "unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences"  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  (see  R
    (Agyarko) and Another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [60] per Lord Reed).

28. In carrying out the 'balancing exercise', the judge  dealt  first  with
    the  public  interest  and  then,   secondly   with   the   appellant's
    circumstances and those of her husband.

29. As regards the former, I accept the ECO's submissions  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself as to the effect of the appellant being financially
    independent and having the ability to speak English.

30. At paras 42 and 44 respectively in relation to these issues, the  judge
    concluded that in these circumstances the public interest was  reduced.
    That is a misdirection in the light of the Supreme Court's approach  in
    Rhuppiah.  It, in effect, gives positive weight  to  these  factors  in
    assessing the extent of the public interest.

31. As Lord Wilson pointed out in Rhuppiah at [57],  the  relevance  of  an
    individual speaking English or being  financially  self-sufficient,  is
    that it might be a legitimate factor to take into account in  assessing
    the strength of their private or family life in the UK.  It could  not,
    however, affect the public interest  which  is  engaged  by  s.117B(1),
    namely effective immigration control.  Sections  117B(2)  and  (3)  are
    concerned with the opposite context, namely that if an  individual  was
    not financially self-sufficient or could not speak the English language
    then, as a result of the legislative provisions, that  was  a  negative
    factor weighing against the individual  as  a  further  aspect  of  the
    public interest.  At [57], Lord Wilson said this:

         "So Judge Blundell erred in concluding that  Ms  Rhuppiah  was  not
         financially independent within the meaning of section 117B(3).  The
         further submission on her behalf is and has been that the effect of
         section 117B(2) and (3)  is to cast her ability  to  speak  English
         and her financial independence as factors which positively weigh in
         her favour in  the  inquiry  under  article  8.   But  the  further
         submission is based on a misreading of the two subsections and  was
         rightly rejected by Judge Blundell, upheld by the Court of  Appeal,
         just as an analogous submission was rejected  in  para  18  of  the
         decision in the AM case, cited at para 38 above.   The  subsections
         do not say that it is in the public interest  that  those  who  are
         able to speak English and are financially independent should remain
         in the UK.  They say only that it is in the  public  interest  that
         those who seek to remain in the UK  should  speak  English  and  be
         financially independent; and the effect of the subsections is that,
         if claimants under article 8 do  not speak English and/or  are  not
         financially independent, there is, for the  two  reasons  given  in
         almost identical terms in the subsections, a public interest  which
         may help to justify the interference with their  right  to  respect
         for their private or family life in the UK.  In seeking to  portray
         the strength of their private or family life by  reference  to  all
         their circumstances, claimants may wish to highlight their  ability
         to speak English  and/or  their  financial  independence;  but  the
         legitimate deployment of such factors in  that  context  is  to  be
         contrasted  with  the  erroneous  further   submission   that   the
         subsections propel a conclusion that, where  those  factors  exist,
         there is a public interest in favour of the claims."

32. That latter error is, in my judgment, precisely the error  which  Judge
    Pickering fell into in paras 42 and 44 when he said  that  because  the
    appellant was financially independent  and  could  speak  English  that
    "lessens"  or  "reduces"  "the  weight  ...  I  attach  to  the  public
    interest".

33. In addition, I accept the ECO's submissions that the  judge  failed  to
    give  adequate  reasons  for  his   finding   that   there   would   be
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences" sufficient to  outweigh  the  public
    interest if the respondent's decision to refuse  entry  clearance  were
    upheld.

34. The judge's reasons are, in fact, very briefly expressed  and  are,  in
    essence, limited to para 46 of his determination.  At para 47, he  says
    that "for the reasons I have given" the public interest  is  outweighed
    by the appellant's circumstances.  Of course, the  judge's  reasons  in
    para 46 have to be seen in the light of his factual  findings  that  he
    made, in particular in paras 27-29 concerning the circumstances of  the
    appellant's husband in the UK.  I recognise that an appellate body,  in
    particular on hearing an appeal from a specialist tribunal, should show
    restraint when  considering  whether  reasons  were  adequate.   In  RB
    (Jones)  v  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Criminal  Injuries  Compensation
    Authority [2013] UKSC 19, Lord Hope said at [25]:

         "It is well established, as an aspect of tribunal law and practice,
         that judicial restraint should be exercised when the reasons that a
         tribunal gives for its decision are being examined.  The  appellate
         court should not assume too readily that the  tribunal  misdirected
         itself just because not every step in its reasoning  is  fully  set
         out in it."

35. Despite the UT itself being a specialist tribunal, the  approach  still
    applies.

36. Whilst I accept that the judge's reasons are tolerably clear in para 46
    for his finding - namely relying upon the impact upon  the  appellant's
    husband of the separation - in weighing that impact against the  public
    interest, in part the judge's reasons were that the public interest had
    a lessened or reduced weight.  That, as I have already  indicated,  was
    impermissible  and  resulted  in  flawed  or  inadequate  reasons   for
    concluding in para 47 that the public interest was  outweighed  by  the
    circumstances of the appellant's husband.

37. In Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 (a case to which Ms Mellon  referred
    in her submissions) the Court of Appeal at [68] said this:

         "In considering ... whether there are  'exceptional  circumstances'
         the applicable test is  whether  refusing  leave  to  remain  would
         result in 'unjustifiably  harsh consequences' for the applicant  or
         their partner, such that refusal would not  be  proportionate:  see
         the passage from the Secretary of State's instructions to officials
         quoted at paragraph 11 above and the Agyarko case at paras 54 - 60.
          The essential difference (reflected in the  word  'unjustifiably')
         is  that  the  latter  test  [as  opposed  to  the  'insurmountable
         obstacles' test] is that the latter test requires the tribunal  not
         just to assess the degree of hardship with the applicant  or  their
         partner would suffer, but to balance the impact of  refusing  leave
         to remain on their family life against the strength of  the  public
         interest in such refusal in all the circumstances of the particular
         case."

38. The judge's misdirection in  paras  42  and  43  of  his  determination
    deprived his reasoning of the appropriate foundation when assessing the
    public interest and the "weight" to be given  to  it  when  considering
    whether the impact upon  the  appellant's  husband  was  sufficient  to
    outweigh that public interest.

39. Ms Mellon, in her submissions, recognised that the  judge's  assessment
    of proportionality was not necessarily one which every judge would have
    made in the circumstances.  Whilst that  acknowledges,  and  I  accept,
    that any assessment would need to be irrational,  and  that  is  not  a
    basis upon which the ECO challenges the judge's decision,  it  reflects
    the reality that the outcome of the balancing exercise  was  not  clear
    cut in this appeal.  The  appellant  did  not  have  an  overwhelmingly
    strong case.  The misdirection, therefore, as to the weight to be given
    to the public interest was material to the eventual conclusion made  by
    the judge.  If he had given proper weight, rather than  a  lessened  or
    reduced weight, to the public interest it is  not  inevitable  that  he
    would still have reached the same finding that the circumstances of the
    appellant's husband outweighed the public interest.  All that I am able
    to say is that he might have reached the same conclusion  but,  on  the
    other hand, he might not have.  His  misdirection,  therefore,  led  to
    inadequate reasons being  given  for  his  finding  in  favour  of  the
    appellant that there were unjustifiably harsh  consequences  sufficient
    to outweigh the public interest properly formulated.

40. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8.

Decision

41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 involved the making of  a  material  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

42. In the light of the nature and extent  of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the appropriate disposal of this appeal is to remit it  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Pickering.

43. Although the appeal was originally determined "on  the  papers",  given
    that the appellant is now legally represented,  the  appeal  should  be
    listed for an appropriate hearing unless  the  appellant  notifies  the
    First-tier Tribunal that she does not require such a hearing.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            12 November 2020












