

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01722/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th November 2019                     |On 18th November 2019            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                  ASMA BIBI
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, of Counsel, instructed by Saint Martin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in February 1933,  she
       is therefore 86 years old. She arrived in the UK in March 2006 as  a
       visitor, and in August 2006 applied for indefinite leave  to  remain
       as a relative of  a  settled  person.  This  was  refused,  and  she
       appealed but the appeal was dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Owens in a decision promulgated on 3rd October 2016, and she  became
       appeal rights exhausted in May 2017. In August 2017 she made further
       submissions and then applied for  further  leave  to  remain.  These
       submissions were refused without a right of appeal in February 2018.
       In April 2018 the appellant made a human  rights  application  which
       was refused in the decision of 17th January 2019. Her appeal against
       the decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilding in a
       determination promulgated on the 24th June 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       PJM Hollingsworth on 2nd September 2019 on the  basis  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law  in  failing  to
       provide sufficient reasoning in  the  proportionality  exercise  and
       with respect to the Article 8 ECHR Immigration Rules  regarding  the
       salient facts of the case, particularly  the  appellant's  age;  her
       physical and  mental  health  problems;  and  the  available  family
       support and professional care in Bangladesh.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The grounds of appeal were in part  totally  unarguable  and  wisely
       abandoned by Mr Karim, but what was argued, in summary, was that the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in finding that there  were  no
       very significant obstacles  to  integration  if  the  appellant  was
       returned to Bangladesh as there was a failure to  consider  the  new
       medical evidence; and  further  there  was  a  failure  to  consider
       whether there was family life between the appellant and her  sons  &
       daughters and their families in the UK, given her vulnerability  and
       inability to support herself in the UK in the context of her medical
       conditions, and to balance this in an Article 8 ECHR proportionality
       exercise outside of the Immigration Rules.

    5. Mr Avery accepted that there was an error of law in the decision, in
       at least failing to consider  whether  there  were  Article  8  ECHR
       family life relationships between the appellant and her UK relatives
       and to factor this into the consideration of the  appeal outside  of
       the Immigration Rules on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

    6. I informed the parties that I therefore found  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law, and would set aside the decision and  all
       of the findings. I set out my reasons for the finding that the First-
       tier Tribunal had erred in law in writing below. Both  parties  were
       agreeable to remaking the appeal in the Upper Tribunal, and to doing
       so promptly given the age of the appellant.  Mr  Avery  wanted  some
       time to consider  the  further  medical  report  submitted  for  the
       remaking hearing and to review the papers, and it was  necessary  to
       arrange a Sylheti interpreter for  one  of  the  witnesses,  so  the
       remaking hearing took place later that morning.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    7. The First-tier Tribunal adopts a totally  correct  approach  to  the
       decision of the previous First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Owens,  setting
       out the findings at paragraph 8 of  the  decision,  and  stating  at
       paragraph 9 that in accordance with Devaseelan  that  this  was  the
       starting point for this decision.

    8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  be  criticised  for  not  giving
       significant weight to the statements of the witnesses other than  Mr
       Ohi  Uddin  as  they  were  not  called  to  give  evidence  by  the
       appellant's representative, see paragraph 14 of  the  decision.  The
       findings with respect to Mr Ohi Uddin, at paragraphs 10 to 12 of the
       decision, not being a credible witness are well  reasoned  and  have
       not been shown to be irrational by the appellant.

    9. I find that it was an error of law, however to have failed  to  have
       factored in the medical evidence  of  the  appellant's  GP,  Dr  Ali
       Dogan, that she suffers from dementia,  including  poor  memory  and
       cognitive impairment with short term memory loss,  when  considering
       if it was reasonable not to call her and the weight to be  given  to
       her written statement. The First-tier Tribunal also errs, I find, in
       the consideration of the evidence with respect  to  the  appellant's
       dementia at paragraphs 20 to 22, as I find that the  updated  report
       of Dr Ali Dogan does include a clear diagnosis  that  the  appellant
       suffers from dementia which  leads  her  to  have  poor  memory  and
       cognitive impairment, and sets out that she has been referred  to  a
       memory clinic. Whilst there is no psychiatric assessment,  there  is
       no reason to assume that a GP is not able to make this diagnosis  as
       it is a very  common  condition  in  the  elderly.  The  failure  to
       consider this evidence leads the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  fail  to
       consider relevant evidence for the test under the Immigration  Rules
       at paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  as  to  whether  she  would  have  very
       significant obstacles to integration if returned to Bangladesh.

   10. In addition I find that the consideration of the appeal on Article 8
       ECHR grounds outside of the Immigration Rules  errs  in  law  as  it
       fails to consider and make findings on  whether  the  appellant  has
       family life ties in the UK, which was necessary given  her  accepted
       age and vulnerability and the large number of  close  relatives  she
       has in the UK with whom she lives, and to balance these family  ties
       in the proportionality exercise. Once again a  relevant  factor  was
       not considered in the application of the legal process.

Evidence and Submissions - Remaking

   11. Mr Karim called two  witnesses  in  support  of  the  appellant,  Mr
       Mohammed Zuber Ahmed, son of the appellant, and  Mr  Mohammed  Zohir
       Uddin, grandson of the appellant. Mr Ahmed gave his evidence through
       the Tribunal interpreter whom he confirmed he understood.

   12. The evidence of Mr Mohammed Zuber Ahmed is,  in  short  summary,  as
       follows. He was born in 1966,  and  is  a  British  citizen.  He  is
       married with four children. He had four brothers and  four  sisters,
       but one brother sadly died. One brother and two sisters are  British
       citizens, these siblings are all married and living in the  UK  with
       their spouses and children. Two brothers live in Saudi  Arabia,  and
       two sisters remain in Bangladesh, where they are married with  grown
       up children. Mr Ahmed works as a chef for one of his brother's,  who
       owns a restaurant. His mother suffers from many  medical  conditions
       including: cirrhosis and chronic liver disease, dementia,  diabetes,
       hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, thrombocytopenia,  osteoporosis,  B12
       deficiency, cataract and aortic aneurysm. She is old and  weak,  and
       confused, and suffers from joint pain throughout her body. She needs
       twenty four hour  attention  and  particularly  help  with  walking,
       dressing, eating, and using the toilet. She  is  cared  for  by  the
       whole UK based family and particularly her UK based sons, but  lives
       mostly with him and his family. She is mostly cared for on a day  to
       day basis by his wife, although he helps when he is not at work  and
       does things such as drive her to the doctor.

   13. Mr Ahmed's view is that the appellant should not have to  return  to
       Bangladesh as his sisters there could not provide the care that  she
       is given here by the family due to their responsibilities  to  their
       families. He accepts that there is a family home there,  but  argues
       that she would not get good  medical  treatment  in  Bangladesh.  He
       accepts that the family in the UK have financial  resources  between
       them but argues the appellant should not have to leave  because  the
       bonds that the appellant has with the UK  family  are  profound  and
       that she should be given their care so she can have dignity  in  her
       last few years of life and be allowed to remain with all of them  in
       the UK.

   14. Mr Uddin's evidence is, in summary, as  follows.  He  is  a  British
       citizen born in 1988. He has a BSc business degree, and works as  an
       executive with Lloyds of London. He is well paid for this  work.  He
       is the appellant's grandson.  He  says  that  his  grandmother,  the
       appellant, is hardly able to walk, and suffers  from  confusion  and
       depression. She needs constant supervision and help with things such
       as moving, eating, dressing and using the toilet, which is  provided
       by his father and uncle and their  family  members.  She  could  not
       return to Bangladesh as she could not live alone there in the family
       home; she would not have access to proper medical treatment; and his
       aunties there could not care for her as they have their  own  family
       responsibilities. He believes that she  would  die  if  returned  to
       Bangladesh. She is used to being in the UK now  and  moving  her  to
       Bangladesh  would  be  upsetting  and  destabilising.  Further   the
       appellant is deeply connected with his father and uncle,  and  their
       families, including him, in the UK. She is  always  present  at  the
       frequent family celebrations such as weddings  and  birthdays.  They
       are a very close family in the UK and she has a central part in that
       family. What she has here could not be replicated elsewhere.

   15. Mr Avery submitted that he  relied  upon  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter, which in summary states that the appellant  would  not  have
       very significant obstacles to  integration  as  she  can  speak  the
       relevant languages and has lived in Bangladesh until she was 73, and
       therefore for most of her life, and so she does  not  qualify  under
       paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi); and that it  would  not  be  a  breach  of
       Article 8 ECHR when looked at  more  broadly  because  there  is  no
       evidence that she could not be treated for her medical conditions in
       Bangladesh and she would be able to reintegrate there, possibly with
       the financial support of her children who provide for her in the UK,
       and that it was not considered that she had  family  life  with  her
       children and grandchildren in the UK.  Mr Avery  accepted,  however,
       that there are family life relationships in this  case  due  to  the
       degree of dependency of the appellant on her UK family.

   16. Mr Avery argued that the starting point is  the  decision  of  Judge
       Owens and that no additional evidence had  been  produced  from  the
       appellant's daughters in Bangladesh and  there  was  no  substantial
       oral evidence showing discussions with them from the witnesses. As a
       result the findings of Judge Owens that  she  would  not  have  very
       significant obstacles to integration in Bangladesh  stand,  even  in
       the context of the evidence about the deterioration in  her  medical
       condition. She could reintegrate with the  financial  assistance  of
       the UK family, in the family home  in  Bangladesh  and/or  with  her
       daughters who live there.  As  a  result  the  appellant  could  not
       succeed by reference to paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) of the  Immigration
       Rules. With respect to the appeal outside of the  Immigration  Rules
       the appellant's removal remains proportionate as  although  she  has
       family life with her UK family  she  does  not  speak  English,  her
       private life ties with the UK have little weight and she could  have
       family life with her daughters in Bangladesh, and so her removal  is
       proportionate given the weight that must  be  given  to  the  public
       interest in immigration control.

   17. Mr Karim submitted that things have moved on from the position  when
       Judge Owens considered the evidence three years ago.  At  that  time
       there was no evidence of cognitive impairment and she was able to do
       the majority of her own personal care. There is  now  evidence  that
       she has vascular dementia and that her mental health as deteriorated
       significantly. Similarly,  with  her  physical  well-being  she  has
       deteriorated so that she now needs 24 hour care and her mobility  is
       significantly less. Mr  Karim  referred  me  to  the  definition  of
       integration at paragraph 14 of SSHD v Kamara [2016]  EWCA  Civ  813,
       and argued  that  the  appellant  would  clearly  have  difficulties
       integrating and participating in life in Bangladesh as  due  to  her
       dementia and deteriorated physical health she could not recreate her
       private and family life ties in that country. Whereas in the UK  the
       evidence shows that  she is at the centre of family events.

   18. If looked at outside of the Immigration Rules Mr Karim  argued  that
       her family life ties in the UK can  be  given  proper  weight  under
       s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The
       appellant has been removable since 2007, and the fact that  she  has
       not  been  removed,  despite  having  continued  to  report  to  the
       Immigration Service, means that the respondent's delay  has  led  to
       her  family  life  ties  in  the  UK  strengthening,  applying   the
       principles in EB (Kosovo) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41. In the  balance  is
       not only the appellant's family life ties but those of all of her UK
       based relatives with her. Although she does not speak English she is
       financially independent. She is in her final years of  life  and  it
       would not be proportionate in all of the circumstances to remove her
       from her family ties in the UK given her health conditions.





Conclusions - Remaking

   19. My starting point in this decision is the decision of Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Owens promulgated on 3rd October 2016  in  which
       her key findings were that:  (i)  the  witness  she  heard  was  not
       credible (but he was not a witness called before me); (ii) that  the
       family owned their own home in Bangladesh; (iii) the  appellant  had
       some chronic conditions which were controlled by medication and  did
       not suffer from cognitive impairment; (iv) that  the  appellant  had
       limited mobility; (v)she needed  limited  personal  assistance  with
       dressing and washing; (vi) she does not need long term personal care
       to perform everyday tasks; (vii) she could live with  her  daughters
       in Bangladesh or independently in the  family  home  with  paid  for
       carers and visits from family members; (viii) the  UK  family  could
       fund cheap domestic assistance for their mother and she  could  have
       support  from  her  daughters,   their   grown   up   children   and
       grandchildren in Bangladesh; (ix) that  the  medical  treatment  and
       personal care she needs would be available to her in Bangladesh.

   20. I find that the evidence given before me from Mr Ahmed and Mr  Uddin
       (who was not the same Mr Uddin who gave evidence before Judge Owens)
       was credible and honest. There was  no  attempt  to  deny  that  the
       family had a house, and the appellant had daughters in Bangladesh or
       that the UK family had funds which could be applied to  support  the
       appellant. I do not find there was any exaggeration of the degree of
       support the appellant required as an 86  year  old  wheelchair  user
       with the medical conditions her GP has set out,  as  their  evidence
       was entirely commensurate with this medical evidence.

   21. My first task  is  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  meets  the
       requirements of the private  life  Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi), by showing  that  she  would  have  very  significant
       obstacles to integration if returned to Bangladesh where  she  lived
       until she was 73 years old. As set out in Kamara  this  is  a  broad
       evaluative judgment about whether the appellant would have  capacity
       to participate in society and  to  build  up,  within  a  reasonable
       period of time, a variety of human relationships to  give  substance
       to her private and family life. I find that the appellant no  longer
       has the capacity to start again and reintegrate herself into life in
       Bangladesh,  and  so  would  have  very  significant  obstacles   to
       integration in that country, for the following reasons.

   22. Her GP, Dr Ali  Dogan,  who  has  seen  her  regularly  since  2010,
       describes in  his  letter  of  20th  December  2018  that:   she  is
       "severely frail both physically and mentally"; she "requires support
       for 24 hours as she is at risk of falls/ self-harm, neglect if  left
       alone"; "she has poor mobility and it declined  further  since  last
       year"; she has "Dementia: Poor memory and cognitive impairment.  She
       has short memory loss and cannot recall/  remember  recent  events";
       her "wellbeing heavily depends on her  carers  (family)  and  health
       care services at present. She is not capable of  living,  travelling
       or functioning independently".  The dementia diagnosis was confirmed
       by Dr Reshad Malik, consultant old age psychiatrist of  the  Enfield
       Memory Service in his letter of 5th August 2019 which  records  that
       she had a history of deteriorating cognition over the previous 6  to
       12 months with difficulties with remote and recent memory,  impaired
       concentration,  impaired  registration,  disorientation   to   time,
       topographical disorientation and word finding difficulties. She  has
       a diagnosis of vascular dementia. I find that this medical  evidence
       supports Mr Karim's submission that  the  appellant's  physical  and
       mental condition has worsened significantly since  the  decision  of
       Judge Owens three years ago when  she  only  need  limited  physical
       assistance and had no cognitive  impairment.  It  follows  that  the
       decision I reach may be different from that of Judge Owens.

   23. The appellant would have a home to return to in Bangladesh, she does
       speak Sylheti and it would be possible to  arrange  for  carers  and
       medical services given the financial resource of the UK  family  and
       their concern for her  and  loving  commitment,  and  no  doubt  her
       daughters and their families would provide her with  social  visits.
       However, at this stage in the appellant's life and in the context of
       her extreme physical and mental frailty I find that  she  would  not
       have the capacity to reintegrate herself and create  a  private  and
       family life in Bangladesh with them. The medical evidence before  me
       is that she does not have the sufficient memory or registration  and
       would be disorientated by this change in her  circumstances  due  to
       her dementia, and is lacking the mobility  and  physical  energy  to
       start again to rebuild any semblance of a private and family life in
       Bangladesh with her daughters and their family. I thus find that she
       fulfils  the  requirements  of  paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
       Immigration Rules.

   24. As I have found that the appellant meets  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules there is no public interest in her removal and she
       is entitled to succeed in her Article 8  ECHR  appeal,  however  for
       completeness, and in case I am wrong  in  my  assessment  under  the
       Immigration Rules, I consider the appeal on  wider  Article  8  ECHR
       grounds as well.

   25. In this broader assessment I acknowledge  that  I  can  give  little
       weight to the appellant's private life ties with the UK formed  over
       the past 13 years, and that it stands against her in this assessment
       that she cannot speak English. She is financially independent as she
       is fully supported by her family, but this is a neutral  matter.  In
       her favour is her extensive family life  in  the  UK  with  her  two
       daughters and two sons and her 23 grandchildren many of whom are now
       adults. All of these people are British citizens. I  find  that  the
       appellant is at the centre of  family  life  between  these  people,
       being taken to very frequent family celebrations and get  togethers,
       and being the focus of love and affection from all  family  members.
       This was clear from the evidence of both of the witnesses.  I  find,
       applying EB Kosovo, that these family life  ties  have  strengthened
       due to the fact that the appellant  has  not  been  removed  despite
       being  prima  facie  removable  since  2007  and  reporting  to  the
       Immigration Service regularly, although I appreciate that she made a
       number of  applications,  which  given  they  were  not  dealt  with
       promptly prevented this for much of this time. If I am  wrong  about
       the appellant  being  able  to  satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  at
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  I  must  balance  the  public  interest  in
       upholding immigration control against the family life ties  of  this
       appellant and her British citizen relatives, in the context  of  her
       having at the very least serious difficulties in  returning  to  her
       country of origin and re-establishing her family and private life in
       the last years of life whilst coping with a panoply of physical  and
       mental health  problems  which  result  in  complete  dependency  on
       others. On consideration of all of the  evidence  I  find  that  the
       removal  of  the  appellant  would  not  be  proportionate  to   the
       legitimate aim, and thus  also  allow  the  appeal  when  considered
       outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on Article 8  ECHR
      human rights grounds.





Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   13th  November
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






