
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/01818/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 May 2019                           |On 22 May 2019                  |
|                                         |                                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                     GAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                         Appellant

                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                              Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:         Appeared in person but was assisted at court by
                      Mr. P. Nathan of counsel on a pro bono basis
For the Respondent:         Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is  a  national  of  Cameroon.  She  entered  the  United
    Kingdom, as a visitor, on 28 March 2012 and  remained  here  after  her
    visa expired on 3 May 2012.  Her son was born here on 20 August 2013.

2.   On 18 August 2016 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds. Her application was refused on 11  December  2017.  She
    appealed against this decision, but First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    dismissed her appeal in a decision promulgated  on  9  July  2018.  The
    Appellant appealed and on 20  August  2018  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson granted her permission to appeal.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   At the start of the hearing, Mr. P. Nathan of counsel, who was  present
    in court in another case, informed me that he was willing to assist her
    on a pro bono basis. I put the Appellant's case back  in  the  list  to
    enable him to  take  instructions.  Both  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer and counsel for the Appellant made oral submissions in relation
    to the substance of the appeal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson did not grant the Appellant
    permission to appeal in relation to the assertion that it would be a
    breach of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights. Instead
    she stated:

     "there did appear that there was an arguable basis that the Decision
    disclosed a falling into error in the treatment of the appellant's EU
    claims when assessing Article 8 human rights, with reference to her
    claims of derivative rights of residence concerning her son, who she
    claimed to be a Polish national as the son of a Polish national, having
    been conceived in the UK as the result of rape by that Polish national
    father".

5.   Regulation 16 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2016 states:

     "(1) A person has a derivative right to reside during any period in
    which the person-
         (a) is not an exempt person, and
         (b) satisfies each of the criteria in one or more of paragraphs
    (2) to (6)
     ...
     (3) The criteria in this paragraph are that-

         (a) any of the person's parents ("PP") is an EEA national who
resides or has resided in       the United   Kingdom;

         (b) both the person and PP reside or have resided in the United
Kingdom at the same        time, and during such a period of residence, PP
has been a worker in the United              Kingdom; and

         (c) the person is in education in the United Kingdom.

     (4) The criteria in this paragraph are that-

         (a)  the person is the primary carer of a person satisfying the
criteria in paragraph (3)       ("PPP"); and

         (b) PPP would be unable to continue to be educated in the United
Kingdom is the             person left the United Kingdom for an indefinite
period.

     (7) In this regulation-

         (a) "education" excludes nursery education...

         (b) "worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person treated as  a
worker under regulation         6(2)

     (8) A person is the "primary carer" of another person ("AP") if _

         (a) the person is a direct relative of legal guardian of AP; and

         (b) either-

         (i) the person has primary responsibility for AP's care




6.   In paragraph 33 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    stated:

     "As to the evidence that L is a national of Poland, I note that the
    only evidence I have is a copy of a passport stated to be that of the
    father of the Appellant's child. There is nothing before me to confirm
    that the Respondent has ever had sight of the original of the passport
    and, of course, copies are unreliable as it is not possible to see if
    changes have been made before or during the copying process. I have a
    copy of the birth certificate of the Appellant's child and, within it,
    it is not stated that the father of the child is a Polish national".

7.   However, the record of proceedings indicates that, at the start of the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer
    accepted that the Appellant's son was a polish national. There was no
    also suggestion that the Respondent had submitted that the copy of the
    child's father's passport had been tampered in any way or that his
    father was not a Polish national.

8.   In addition, the Appellant's son's birth certificate confirms that his
    father is N D F and I also note that Mr. F's passport was issued on 13
    July 2012 which was prior to the Appellant's son's birth. This is
    significant as section 14 of the Polish Citizenship Act 2009 states
    "The child shall acquire Polish citizenship at birth when: 1) at least
    one of the parents has Polish citizenship". Therefore, if his father is
    a Polish national, the Appellant's son would have acquired Polish
    citizenship merely on account of his birth.

9.   In paragraph 35 of her decision First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    noted that the Polish Embassy had required her to obtain a court order
    authorising her to apply for her son's passport without his father's
    consent. I have taken into account the fact that the provision of a
    passport provides evidence of citizenship. It does not confer
    citizenship on an individual. As a consequence, First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Robertson approach in paragraph 36 was not correct. In that
    paragraph, she found: "the evidence before me does not establish that
    it is a given that Polish nationality will be granted to the
    Appellant's child, and no expert evidence was adduced to establish what
    processes must be followed and when, in the absence of the father, in
    order to establish that that L is a citizen of Poland".

10.  Furthermore, in paragraph 36 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Robertson stated that the Appellant "also provided what appears
    to be a further order which has the substantive provisions redacted but
    which purports to confirm that "Permission is granted to the mother to
    issue a Polish passport for the child without the consent of the
    Father"".  However, she erred in taking this document into account and
    finding that it was a document which had "difficulties", which tended
    to suggest that the Appellant's credibility had been damaged by its
    submission.  This was not a copy of an order issued in the proceedings
    being brought by the mother in the Family Court in Coventry. It was
    merely a sample order provided by the Polish Embassy to the Coventry
    Refugee and Migrant Centre in order to assist the Appellant to seek
    permission from a Family Court for an order where a father was not
    giving his consent to a passport being issued.

11.  In addition, in paragraph 25 of her decision First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Robertson noted:

     "The Appellant states that according to the Polish Citizenship Act,
    her son is Polish and he is exercising Treaty rights as he is in
    education. She quotes case law in her witness statement as to his
    rights of residence on the basis that he is in education, and her
    rights as his primary carer".

12.  However, she failed to go on to reach any findings about whether the
    Appellant had a derivative right of residence and, if so, how this
    impacted on her consideration of proportionality in the context of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

13.  For all of  these  reasons,  I  find  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson did make errors of law in her decision.

 Decision

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Robertson or Simpson.

Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 20 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


