
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01823/2016
     HU/01831/2016
     HU/01863/2016
     HU/01859/2016
     HU/01851/2016
     HU/01845/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On  3 October 2017                           |On 20 October 2017            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                              MRS GHAZALA KHAN
                            MR MUHAMMAD YAR KHAN
                               MISS HINA KHAN
                              MISS ZAINAB KHAN
                              MISS SALEHA KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr O'Ryan, Counsel instructed by Malik Legal
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction in this matter pursuant to Rule 14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellants are citizens of  Pakistan  with  the  first  and  second
    appellants being husband and wife and the  remaining  appellants  being
    their children.

 3. At the outset of the  hearing  Mr  O'Ryan  confirmed  that  whilst  all
    appellants were listed in these  appeals  neither  the  third  nor  the
    fourth named  appellants  had  rights  of  appeal  within  the  current
    proceedings as they had only been given out of  country  appeals.  They
    now had pending appeals in the First-tier Tribunal which were listed on
    October 11, 2017 for a CMR,  bearing  case  numbers  HU/27623/2016  and
    HU/27612/2016. Hereafter, any reference to the appellants  collectively
    will not include the third and fourth-named appellants.

 4. On September 10, 2015 the appellants applied for leave to remain  under
    the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR. The respondent refused  their
    applications on January 7, 2016 and grounds of appeal  were  lodged  by
    them on January 15, 2016.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Taylor
    (hereinafter called the Judge) on December 7, 2016 and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on January 18, 2017 he dismissed their appeals.

 6. The appellants appealed those decisions and permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio on August 1, 2017.

 7. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard submissions  on
    the error of law from both representatives following which  I  reserved
    my decision.

 8. Mr O'Ryan handed in a skeleton argument which set out  the  grounds  of
    appeal more succinctly than those lodged by his instructing solicitors.
    He relied on all grounds save for Ground 3 which  he  accepted  had  no
    basis. He subsequently agreed with me that grounds 1, 4 and 5 were  the
    main grounds he pursued albeit the remaining grounds were not conceded.





    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr O'Ryan submitted that grounds 1 and 4 and to a lesser extend  ground
    5 should be considered  together.  He  submitted  the  Judge  erred  by
    failing to follow correctly the guidance and findings in MA  (Pakistan)
    EWCA Civ 705 by failing to give adequate  reasons  to  explain  why  it
    would be reasonable for the sixth-named appellant to leave  the  United
    Kingdom. The Court of Appeal made clear in MA (Pakistan) that there had
    to be powerful reasons for a Judge to find it would be reasonable for a
    child with over seven years residence in  this  country  to  leave  the
    United  Kingdom.  Whilst  the  Judge  had  considered  the  appellant's
    situation he submitted that none of the reasons given by the Judge were
    "powerful reasons". Too much weight had been attached to  the  parent's
    immigration history and none of the reasons given by the Judge in  [39]
    to [41] of the decision were powerful reasons as envisaged by the Court
    of Appeal in MA (Pakistan). The Judge further  erred  when  considering
    reasonableness by not attaching sufficient weight to  his  findings  in
    [33] of the decision and in particular the findings  on  the  appellant
    becoming westernised.

10. With regard to the remaining grounds Mr O'Ryan submitted:

      a) Ground 2-The test as set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) HC 395  was
         the same test as that under section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. If the
         Judge's approach under section 117B(6) had been erroneous  then  it
         was similarly erroneous under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).

      b) Ground 6-Mr O'Rory pointed to the first sentence  in  [23]  of  the
         decision albeit he accepted that the Judge  noted  the  sixth-named
         appellant spoke excellent English later in the decision.

      c) Ground 7-The Judge had erred by giving inappropriate weight to  the
         fact the children had attended school in  the  United  Kingdom  and
         received a  free  education.  Legally  the  adult  appellants  were
         required to educate their children when they were of school age.

      d) Ground 8-The Judge erred by finding the sixth-named  appellant  was
         not at a critical stage of her education. She  had  been  attending
         school since being here and weight should have been given  to  this
         factor.

      e) Ground 9-The Judge concentrated only on the  sixth-named  appellant
         and did not address the remaining appellants  who  would  all  face
         very significant obstacles were they to be returned.

11. Mr Bates adopted the  Rule  24  response  dated  August  30,  2017  and
    submitted there had been no error in law. He referred to  the  decision
    in MA (Pakistan) and drew a difference between the child identified  in
    [103] of MA (Pakistan) and the  sixth-named  appellant.  The  Court  of
    Appeal made it clear that when looking at a child who has been here for
    over seven years the Court must firstly consider the child's  best  and
    then the reasonableness of any return. Mr Bates submitted that this  is
    exactly what the Judge did. The Judge found the sixth-named appellant's
    best interests were to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  he  then
    correctly considered the reasonableness of return and he  set  out  the
    powerful reasons that led him to conclude it  was  reasonable  for  the
    child to return to Pakistan.

12. The Court made clear in MA (Pakistan) that  regard  can  be  had  to  a
    parent's immigration history. Their history was very poor and the Judge
    had concluded the sixth-named appellant's parents delayed  leaving  the
    country  by  lodging  meritless  applications  with  the  intention  of
    dragging out the removal process. The Judge considered  the  issues  of
    the family being westernised  and  the  fact  some  spoke  English  but
    nevertheless gave reasons for finding it was reasonable for the  sixth-
    named appellant to leave the country (with her family). In doing so the
    Judge applied, where relevant, all the factors set out in section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.

13. Mr Bates concluded his submissions by arguing the Judge was entitled to
    find:

      a) The sixth-named appellant was  not  at  a  critical  stage  of  her
         education.

      b) The family were not financially independent.

      c) Their family and private life had always been precarious.

      d) Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) HC 395 applied a higher test than paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iv) HC 395  considered  in  respect  of  the  sixth-named
         appellant. If the sixth-named appellant  could  not  succeed  under
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) then the Judge did not err  by  failing  to
         specifically consider the wider position because the parties  would
         clear be unable to succeed. The appellants had  to  show  something
         above mere hardship or difficulty and the Judge found they had not.



    ERROR OF LAW

14. Extensive grounds of appeal were lodged in this matter but in  reality,
    the main grounds that concerned me in today's appeal were grounds 1,  4
    and 5.

15. The appellants' original representative recognised the appeals  centred
    around the sixth-named appellant. The Judge also  recognised  this  and
    identified that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) HC 395 and section  117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act applied to this particular appellant.

16. It is against this  background  that  I  have  considered  Mr  O'Ryan's
    submissions that there has been an error in law. The Judge was  clearly
    aware of current case law because there are numerous references to that
    law between [25] and [28] of the decision.

17. Mr O'Ryan's primary submission is that the Judge erred because  he  did
    not  identify  any  powerful  reasons  for  rejecting  the  sixth-named
    appellant's claim.

18. The Judge's decision must be read as a whole and  in  doing  so  it  is
    clear the Judge structured his approach to the issues correctly.

19. In particular, the Judge identified that when dealing with  the  sixth-
    named appellant the child's best interests had to be considered  as  an
    integral part of the proportionality assessment under article  8  ECHR.
    The Judge noted the importance of the child's  best  interests  and  at
    [29] he carefully considered  her  current  situation.  The  Judge  was
    clearly aware she had established friendship groups  and  had  spent  7
    years in education but he rejected, with reasons, the  submission  that
    she was at a critical stage of her education.  Mr  O'Ryan's  submission
    that the Judge did not have regard to the length of time she  had  been
    educated here has no merit as evidenced by [29] of  the  decision.  The
    Judge was entitled to find the sixth-named appellant was not a critical
    stage of her education.

20.  At  [31]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  considered  the   sixth-named
    appellant's ability to speak Urdu whilst  recognising  her  ability  to
    speak English fluently. Those factors formed  part  of  his  subsequent
    assessment on both best interests and reasonableness. At [32] the Judge
    noted there were no medical issues affecting the sixth-named appellant.
    At [30], [33] and [34] the Judge referred to other matters relevant  to
    his decision and at [35] he reminded himself that he needed to  firstly
    make a finding on the best interests of the sixth-named  appellant.  He
    accepted that her best interest lay with her remaining here.

21. This approach is  clearly  in  line  with  the  guidance  given  in  MA
    (Pakistan) and the Judge cannot be faulted in the way he approached the
    evidence.

22. The Judge at [36] recognised that the child's best  interest  could  be
    outweighed but the fact she had been here over eight years at the  date
    of hearing established a starting point that unless there were powerful
    reasons to the contrary she and her  parents  should  succeed  with  in
    their appeals.

23. The Judge considered whether there were any powerful reasons and whilst
    Mr O'Ryan argued that the factors given were not powerful reasons I  am
    satisfied that the reasons  advanced  by  the  Judge  were  capable  of
    amounting to powerful reasons.

24. The parent's immigration history was not something  that  was  relevant
    when considering the child's best interests but was a  factor  to  have
    regard to when considering reasonableness.  The  Judge  highlighted  in
    [38] their immigration history and he concluded the  parents'  numerous
    applications to stay had little merit and were designed to delay  their
    removal. The  Court  in  MA  (Pakistan)  made  it  clear  that  a  poor
    immigration history was a relevant factor  to  take  into  account  hen
    considering reasonableness.

25. Grounds 1 and 4 argue that the Judge erred in his  approach  but  I  am
    satisfied there is no material issue with regard to this issue.

26. Similarly, ground  5  challenged  the  Judge's  approach  to  what  the
    appellants faced in Pakistan and the failure to attach more  weight  to
    them being westernised. The Judge clearly considered this and Ground  5
    is nothing more than a mere disagreement with his approach.

27. Whilst he mentioned at [25] that none  of  the  financial  or  language
    requirements were met I am  satisfied  this  was  aimed  at  the  adult
    appellants as the Judge clearly recognised  the  sixth-named  appellant
    spoke English and he factored that into his reasonableness assessment.

28. Ground 7 concerned the fact the Judge made a finding the  children  had
    been educated at public expense.  Mr  O'Ryan  argued  that  this  could
    amount to an error because the parents were legally obliged to  educate
    their children. Mr Bates made the point that  this  did  not  mean  the
    children should be educated at public expense  in  circumstances  where
    they were not entitled to be. No error is identified on this ground  as
    the Judge's finding was both correct and open to him.

29. The final issue relates to the fact Mr O'Ryan  argued  that  the  Judge
    should have considered the appellants separately. However,  it  appears
    accepted from the tone of [4] of  the  decision  that  the  appeal  was
    focused on the sixth-named appellant.

30. Having  dismissed  the  sixth-named  appellant's  claim  under  section
    117B(6) and article 8 ECHR and paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) HC 395 the Judge
    could have then considered the remaining appeals  applying  the  higher
    test of "very significant obstacles" set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
    HC 395. The fact the Judge did not go into this aspect of the claim  in
    any detail does not amount to an error in law because all  factors  had
    already been considered for the sixth-named appellant and the test  for
    the remaining appellants was higher under the Rules  and  no  different
    under an article 8  proportionality  assessment  without  reference  to
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Those claims were doomed to failure in
    light of his previous findings in respect of the sixth-named appellant.



31. This was a very detailed decision  which  addressed  all  matters.  The
    challenges made  either  have  no  merit  or  they  amount  to  a  mere
    disagreement.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

32. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   I  uphold  the  original
    decision save there was no  jurisdiction  to  consider  the  third  and
    fourth-named appellants as they had no appeals before the Tribunal.


Signed                              Date     02.10.2017

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made as I have dismissed the appeal.



Signed                              Date     2.10.2017

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
