
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01357/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th September 2018                        |On 9th October 2018          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     RK
                        (Anonymity has been directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Claire, Counsel on behalf of A2 Solicitors,
London
For the Respondent:    Mr Withwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  17  December  1993.   She
    appealed the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department's  decision
    dated 18 December 2017 refusing her application for leave to remain  on
    the basis of her private life in the United Kingdom, as  it  was  found
    that the application did not meet the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and did not fall for a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules, as
    there were no exceptional circumstances in her case and the removal  of
    the  appellant  to  India  would  not  breach  the   United   Kingdom's
    obligations under Article 8 of the Convention.  The appeal was heard by
    Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Richards-Clarke on  1  June  2018  and
    dismissed on human rights grounds in a decision promulgated on 20  June
    2018.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal EM Simpson on 25 July 2018.
     The permission states that it has been granted purely on  the  Judge's
    treatment of the appellant's Article 8 private life claim  and  as  the
    appellant's immigration history is that she came to the United  Kingdom
    at the age of 13 years with family members  and  overstayed  her  visit
    visa with them, her unlawful and  precarious  status  was  outside  her
    control from the  outset.  Her  family  also  made  an  application  to
    regularise their status, on which the appellant  was  a  dependent,  in
    August 2011. The decision on this was not made until 21 August 2015 and
    this was a refusal.  The  permission  states  that  there  is  arguable
    scope, with reference to the  statutory  considerations  under  Section
    117B (4) and (5), to accord greater regard to her combined minority and
    lack of capacity when assessing the weight to be given to  her  private
    life claim and the overall Article 8 balancing exercise, when assessing
    proportionality.  The permission goes on to state that the weight given
    in the decision, to the appellant's marriage to an Indian  national  in
    February  2017,  detracted  from  the  arguably  necessary  independent
    assessment of the constituents of private life that the  appellant  had
    established in the United Kingdom during the 11 years from the time she
    was 13, particularly when, on reaching 18 she found herself  unable  to
    pursue higher education because of her status and then  facing  medical
    problems which included anxiety and depression because of the  possible
    separation from her close family  members  with  whom  she  has  always
    lived.  The appellant has married a man from India without  any  status
    in the United Kingdom.  In 2015 the appellant's brother was granted  30
    months discretionary leave but by that time the appellant was 22  years
    old.

The Hearing

 3. Counsel for the appellant referred me to paragraphs 30 and  31  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Judge's decision, submitting that  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 30 the  Judge  concludes  that  the  appellant's  immigration
    status was precarious and so in accordance with Section  117B  (4)  and
    (5) little weight should be given to her private life  formed  at  this
    time.  He submitted that when  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her family she was 13 years old and had  no  control  over
    her situation or her status and the Judge's findings about her  private
    life in the UK are unfair.  He submitted that the fact that her brother
    was under 18 years old and was granted discretionary leave put  her  at
    an unfair disadvantage as she had been a minor when she arrived in  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. He then submitted that the Judge finds that public  interest  outweighs
    this appellant's private life but she was a minor for five years in the
    United  Kingdom  until  she  was  18  years  old,  and  there  must  be
    compassionate factors in this case.


 5. I was referred to the appellant's bundle  in  which  there  is  medical
    evidence being a GP report and  evidence  from  Anchor  Counselling  to
    which she has been referred because of her depression and anxiety.  She
    also had to have an abdomen and pelvis  ultrasound  and  urinary  tract
    ultrasound. She has been to Hounslow IAPT Service, which is  a  talking
    therapy service for people experiencing depression and/or anxiety.   In
    2018 she was referred to Primary Care Plus  for  further  support  with
    emotional regulation/reducing self-harm.  Counsel submitted  that  this
    appellant was abused at the age of 13 when she arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom and submitted that the Judge has not adequately considered  the
    compassionate aspects of this claim.


 6. Counsel then submitted  that  the  Judge  has  misdirected  herself  by
    placing too much weight on the fact that the appellant has  married  an
    Indian national who has no status in the United Kingdom and  has  given
    insufficient weight to the appellant's private life in  the  UK,  which
    was established well before she got married.


 7. He referred me to the case of Kumara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and  submitted
    that this appellant would have  considerable  problems  integrating  in
    India now.  Although she is Indian she might well not be enough  of  an
    insider to participate in life in India and might well not be  accepted
    there.  Since she was  13  she  has  never  been  back  to  India.   He
    submitted that she has done well in her studies in the United  Kingdom,
    is in contact with the Sikh community in the United Kingdom and  speaks
    Punjabi.  He submitted however, that this does not mean that  she  will
    be able to integrate and be able to  enjoy  her  private  life  in  her
    country of origin.


 8. He submitted that these are all errors of law  and  the  permission  in
    this case was properly granted.


 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that this appeal is based only on  the
    appellant's private life.


10. He referred me to paragraph 18 of the decision in which  the  Judge  is
    considering the appellant's private life under the  Immigration  Rules.
    She deals with this in the next few paragraphs and then at paragraph 24
    refers to the various medical problems the appellant is suffering from.
     In this paragraph she refers to the case of N [2005] UKHL  31  and  he
    submitted that the case of N is not appropriate in this case as this is
    not an  asylum  case.   The  Judge  finds  that  the  facts  about  the
    appellant's medical condition have not been challenged and he  referred
    me to paragraph 28 of the decision in which the Judge states  that  the
    requirements of Immigration Rules set out in paragraph 276ADE cannot be
    satisfied. He submitted that this finding has not been  challenged  and
    the Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 27 the  Judge  gives
    reasons for her finding  that  there  would  not  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the  appellant's  integration  into  India  and  that  the
    appellant's primary concern seems to be the pursuit of her education at
    university.  The Judge is satisfied that she could  pursue  her  higher
    education goals in India.  The Judge points out that she lived in India
    until she was 13 and  is  now  married  to  an  Indian  national.   She
    therefore could return to India as a married woman with a  husband  who
    has family with property in India.  He only came to the United  Kingdom
    in 2012 as an adult.  The Presenting Officer  submitted  that  none  of
    this has been challenged and the Judge then goes  on  to  look  at  the
    appellant's situation outside the Rules and the  principles  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27.

11. The Judge finds that there is private life and at paragraphs 30 and  31
    deals with the core  of  the  account.   The  Judge  accepts  that  the
    appellant's private life rights are sufficient to engage Article 8  and
    deals with  proportionality.  She  notes  that  the  appellant  is  not
    financially  independent  and  therefore  Section  117B(3)  cannot   be
    satisfied and she relies on a private life established when she was  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully.   The  judge  therefore  finds  that  in
    accordance with Section 117B (4) and (5) she can give little weight  to
    this private life.  The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Judge's
    findings about  this  are  not  unlawful  and  he  submitted  that  the
    remaining grounds are merely a disagreement with the Judge's  findings.
    The Judge has properly considered the appellant's medical condition and
    although she finds that the appellant has a significant  private  life,
    she finds that public interest outweighs this and in carrying  out  the
    proportionality exercise she notes in particular that the terms of  the
    Immigration Rules  cannot  be  satisfied  so  the  claim  can  only  be
    considered  outside  the  Rules.  She  finds  that  there  is   nothing
    significant which would stop the appellant and her husband returning to
    India.  The Presenting Officer submitted that  although  the  appellant
    was a minor when she came to the United Kingdom she is now 24 years old
    and is married.  She is part  of  the  Sikh  community  in  the  United
    Kingdom and her husband only left India in 2012.  He submitted that the
    Judge has given proper reasons for her conclusion and finds  in  favour
    of the respondent.  He submitted that as this is purely a  disagreement
    there is no error.

12. Counsel for the appellant referred to paragraph 24,  stating  that  the
    case of N is not relevant when  Article  8  is  being  considered.   He
    submitted that it is correct that this claim cannot meet the  terms  of
    the Immigration Rules but although this is a strong point he  submitted
    that it is not determinative.  He submitted that if all claims were  to
    fail because the terms of the Immigration  Rules  cannot  be  satisfied
    then Article 8 outside the Rules would never require to  be  considered
    and Article 8 outside the Rules is important in this  claim  when  this
    appellant's history is considered and when her health issues are  taken
    into account.


13. I asked the Presenting Officer if he finds that the Judge has given too
    much weight to the fact that the appellant has married  an  Indian  who
    has no status in the United Kingdom. He stated that  that  is  not  his
    finding but this had to be taken into account when the Judge  made  her
    decision.  He submitted that this appellant can relocate to  India  and
    this would not be a breach of Article 8.


Decision and Reasons


14. I have carefully considered the appellant's immigration history and the
    fact that she had no control over her situation when she  came  to  the
    United Kingdom with her family.  By the time a decision was made in her
    family's application to regularise their status in 2011  there  was  no
    decision until 2015 and by that time the appellant was 22 years old, so
    although her brother was granted discretionary leave she was not.

15. The Judge took this into account when carrying out her  proportionality
    assessment.


16. This appellant is not financially independent and is now 24 years  old.
    The Judge has carefully considered her medical situation and  has  also
    taken into account her  history  before  reaching  her  decision.   The
    appellant is now married to an Indian national with no  status  in  the
    United Kingdom and this had to be considered by the Judge when reaching
    her decision.  If the appellant returns to India she will be  with  her
    husband who has family there and his family has property there and  the
    appellant lived in India until she was 13 years old so  she  must  have
    memories of India and she plays an active part in the Sikh community in
    the United Kingdom and also has an A Level in Punjabi.


17.  The  Judge  has  carried  out  a  perfectly  adequate  proportionality
    assessment and has given proper reasons for finding  that  when  public
    interest is weighed against the  appellant's  and  her  family's  human
    rights, public interest must succeed. Sections 117B(4) and  (5)  cannot
    be satisfied.  The fact that the application fails to meet the terms of
    the Immigration Rules has  to  be  given  considerable  weight  in  the
    proportionality assessment.  There  is  no  reason  why  the  appellant
    cannot continue her studies at university in India and when  the  Judge
    finds that any interference with the appellant's rights under Article 8
    is justified necessary and proportionate, she  was  entitled  to  reach
    this conclusion and make this finding.


Notice of Decision


There are no material errors of law in the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
20 June 2018 and I find that her decision must stand. The appellant's  claim
is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 2 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge IAM Murray
