
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/01295/2017
     HU/01297/2017
     HU/01296/2017
     HU/01299/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                              |On 16th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     QC
                                     SH
                                     RC
                                     MC
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


 1. The appellants appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  against
    decisions to refuse leave to remain  on  Article  8  grounds.  The  FtT
    dismissed the appellants' appeals. Permission  to  appeal  against  the
    FtT's decision was granted to the appellants by a judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The respondent has provided a 'rule 24' response in which it is  stated
    that the respondent "does not oppose the  appellants'  application  for
    permission to appeal". I have taken that to mean that the actual appeal
    is not opposed since permission has already been granted.

 3. The respondent then states in the rule 24 response that  she  makes  an
    application to withdraw her case pursuant to rule 17  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ("the Procedure Rules") as it  is
    intended to grant the appellants leave to remain.

 4. However, there is a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  which  stands
    unless and until  it  is  set  aside.  It  seems  to  me  that  in  the
    circumstances this matter can be dealt with pursuant to rule  40(3)  of
    the Procedure Rules given that both parties in effect  agree  that  the
    decision of the FtT involved the making of an error on a point  of  law
    and should be set aside with the appeals being allowed.

 5. In the circumstances, and considering the  decision  of  the  FtT,  the
    grounds of appeal in relation to its decision, the grant of  permission
    to appeal, and all other relevant documentation, I  am  satisfied  that
    there is an error of law in  the  decision  of  the  FtT  and  set  its
    decision aside. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeals of  each
    appellant.

 6. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given the ages of the minor appellants,  unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellants are granted  anonymity.   No  report
of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  them  or  any
member of their family.  This direction applies both to the  appellants  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            10/10/18
