

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/01909/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 17 January 2017                        |on 19 January 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Manila
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DAVE ANGELO VALDEZ
                                                                  Respondent

For the appellant, Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent, no legal representative; sponsor present

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The ECO appeals against a determination by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blair, allowing on human rights grounds an  appeal  by  the  respondent
    against refusal of entry clearance to join his mother, the sponsor,  in
    the UK.

 2. The rest of this decision refers to the parties as  they  were  in  the
    FtT.

 3. The grounds of appeal to the UT found  upon  TD  (Yemen)  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049, and contend that there  was  evidence  of  contact  between  the
    appellant and his father; there was a relationship between  father  and
    son; if not close, it was not  an  abdication  of  responsibility;  the
    judge had not made a finding to that effect; the circumstances did  not
    amount to compelling family or other  reasons  making  the  appellant's
    exclusion from the UK undesirable; the requirements of the  rules  were
    not met;  refusal  was  proportionate;  the  judge's  finding  of  sole
    responsibility erred in law, and the decision should be set aside.

 4. Mr Matthews submitted that although the question of sole responsibility
    was for a judge according to the evidence, there was not enough in  the
    decision to justify the outcome as a matter of law.  Where  the  second
    parent was still present, there had to be  evidence  of  abdication  of
    responsibility.  The judge had not referred to TD.   The  evidence  and
    the findings fell short of what was required.

 5. I indicated that the SSHD's appeal did not succeed.

 6. As the Presenting Officer acknowledged, there  can  be  and  have  been
    cases (admittedly extreme) of sole responsibility even when  the  child
    lives under the same roof as the other parent.  The evidence  here  was
    that the  appellant  sees  his  father  about  every  two  months.  The
    affidavit by the appellant's father can be read  as  an  abdication  of
    responsibility.  The judge did not use the precise language of  TD  (to
    which he was not referred) but that  is  not  a  critical  requirement.
    There is and could be no quarrel with the  findings  of  the  sponsor's
    "very clear and close involvement on an ongoing basis"  (paragraph  27)
    and "direct control and direction ... albeit at a distance"  (paragraph
    29).  The judge did not  accept  that  the  father's  affidavit  showed
    "responsibility ... to any significant or  material  degree"  (emphasis
    added;  paragraph  30).   The   findings   of   "sole   responsibility"
    (paragraphs 31 and 36) were thereby justified.  It is clear that if the
    judge had been asked to couch his conclusions in the terms of TD and in
    terms of the immigration rule, he would have had no difficulty in doing
    so.  The judge did in effect find  abdication  of  responsibility,  and
    justified that conclusion.  It followed from the terms of such  a  rule
    being satisfied that the appeal had  to  be  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.  No error of law has been shown.

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            18 January 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




