
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02235/2017
      HU/01941/2017
                                                               HU/01943/2017
                                                               HU/01945/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 28 November 2018                    |On 13 December 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                           HIS HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 SJ & OTHERS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted  an  earlier  stage  of  the  proceedings
because the  case  involves  child  welfare  issues.  We  find  that  it  is
appropriate to make a direction for anonymity. Unless and until  a  tribunal
or court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted  anonymity.  No  report
of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
member of his family. This direction applies both to the  appellant  and  to
the respondent.



Representation:
For the appellant:           Mr K. Smyth of Kesar & Co.
For the respondent:          Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first appellant is the father of the family, who appealed  against
    the respondent's decision dated 24  January  2017  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim in the context of deportation proceedings. The second  and
    third appellants are his wife and 16-year-old  son  ("A"),  who  appeal
    against the respondent's decision dated 16 January  2017  to  refuse  a
    human rights claim.  We note that the decision dated  16  January  2017
    also relates to the first appellant, but he must  overcome  the  higher
    legal hurdles relating to the decision dated 24 January 2017, which was
    made in  the  context  of  deportation  proceedings,  to  succeed.  The
    appellants also have a 9-year-old daughter ("B") who was born in the UK
    and will be eligible to register as a British citizen  in  two  months'
    time. It is unclear why she was not included  on  the  application  for
    leave to remain made on 02 March 2015. The respondent did not refuse  a
    human rights claim so she had no valid appeal. However, it is  accepted
    by both parties that  her  position  must  form  part  of  the  overall
    assessment of the family circumstances: see Beoku-Betts v  SSHD  [2008]
    UKHL 39.

2.     First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Buckwell  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeals in a decision promulgated on 07 August 2018.

3.     The  appellants  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

       i) The judge  failed  to  apply  the  correct  legal  framework,  in
          particular, he failed to consider whether the third appellant met
          the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  immigration
          rules or the second appellant met  the  requirements  of  section
          117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the
          NIAA 2002")  given  that  neither  appellant  was  subject  to  a
          deportation decision.


      ii) The judge failed to give  adequate  reasons,  in  particular,  he
          failed to make any clear findings relating to the best  interests
          of the children and failed to make findings  on  the  independent
          social worker report.


     iii) The judge mischaracterised  the  nature  of  the  second  child's
          medical condition as a "common ailment"  without  conducting  any
          proper analysis of the severity of  her  condition.  The  medical
          evidence shows that she suffers from  the  most  severe  form  of
          sickle cell disease (SCD).


      iv) The judge failed to consider a large number of  relevant  factors
          in assessing whether it would be 'unduly harsh' for the  children
          to return to Nigeria or to be separated from their father if they
          remained in the UK.


Decision and reasons

Error of law

4.    It is not necessary to set out our reasons for  finding  an  error  of
    law in the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  in  any  detail  because  Mr
    Bramble conceded that the reasoning was wholly  inadequate.  The  judge
    failed to apply the  correct  legal  framework.  The  judge  failed  to
    conduct an adequate assessment  of  the  children's  circumstances.  He
    failed to take into  account  relevant  considerations  such  as  their
    length of residence, ties to the  UK  and  compassionate  circumstances
    surrounding the second child's undoubtedly serious  medical  condition.
    The judge failed to make any  clear  findings  as  to  where  the  best
    interests of the children lay or to show that he had given  appropriate
    weight to their interests as a primary consideration. The fact that the
    judge set out the background to the case over 14 pages of the  decision
    is not a substitute for the core task required of a  judicial  decision
    maker, which is to make sufficiently detailed and reasoned findings  on
    the evidence with reference to the relevant legal framework. The First-
    tier Tribunal decision failed on both fronts and is set aside.

Remaking

Public interest considerations

5.    It is not necessary to set out the  factual  circumstances  in  detail
    because they are not disputed. The appellant and his wife have  a  very
    poor immigration history. The first appellant entered the UK in 2004 on
    a visit visa and claims that he returned to Nigeria a few months later.
    The first and second appellants claim that they entered the UK in March
    2007 on a visit visa with their son,  who  was  four  years  old.  They
    knowingly remained in the UK without leave  for  11  years  and  worked
    illegally; both immigration offences.

6.    On 03 November 2015 the first appellant was convicted  of  two  counts
    of using a false instrument and  seven  counts  of  dishonestly  making
    false representations and  one  count  of  possession  of  an  identity
    document with intent. He was sentenced  to  a  concurrent  term  of  12
    months' imprisonment.  At first blush this appears to be a single court
    appearance, but the judge's sentencing remarks indicate a clear pattern
    of dishonest behaviour over a long period of time.

            "About ten years ago, as set out in the pre-sentence report, you
           came here on a six-month visa. You  returned  to  your  home  in
           Nigeria and, because you were made  redundant  in  Nigeria,  you
           came back to this country, still within the operation period  of
           that visa, bringing your wife with you. The six-month  leave  to
           remain ended, but you remained here,  so  you  were  an  illegal
           immigrant. It meant that you could not lawfully work.


            You asked yourself the obvious  question:  How  am  I  going  to
           support myself and my wife? I will have to find work,  you  said
           to yourself, and in order to do that you had  to  prove  to  any
           potential employer that you were lawfully in  this  country  and
           able to work."


7.    The judge then set out a long list of indictments  ranging  from  2005
    to 2015 including (i) obtaining a false leave to remain  stamp  in  his
    passport; (ii) using a false  National  Insurance  card;  (iii)  making
    false representations to gain employment;  (iv)  using  false  Nigerian
    passports and National Insurance cards  to  gain  employment;  and  (v)
    using a false French passport  and  National  Insurance  card  to  gain
    employment. The judge concluded:

            "During the last ten years, you  have  been  obtaining  work  by
           using any  number  of  fraudulent  documents.  I  simply  cannot
           overlook the seriousness of these offences."

8.    We note that the second appellant admits  that  she  has  also  worked
    illegally in the UK although the details are unclear. There is  nothing
    to indicate that she had been prosecuted for any immigration offences.

9.    The evidence shows that the first and second appellants  have  a  very
    poor immigration history aggravated by numerous document  offences  for
    which the first appellant was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment. The
    Upper Tribunal gives significant  weight  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining a system of immigration control and the public interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals in such circumstances.

Best interests of the children

10.   In assessing the best interests of the children,  we  have  considered
    the principles outlined in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC4, Zoumbas v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874. The best interests of children are a primary consideration.

11.   The respondent must have regard to the need to safeguard  the  welfare
    of children who are "in the United Kingdom". We take into  account  the
    statutory guidance "UKBA Every  Child  Matters:  Change  for  Children"
    (November 2009), which gives further detail about the  duties  owed  to
    children under section 55. In the guidance, the respondent acknowledges
    the importance of international human rights instruments including  the
    UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes  on
    to confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the requirements of these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." The UNCRC sets  out
    rights including a child's right to survival and development, the right
    to know and be cared for by his or her parents, the  right  not  to  be
    separated from parents and the  enjoyment  of  the  highest  attainable
    standards of living, health and education without  discrimination.  The
    UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility of both parents for the
    upbringing and development of a child.

12.   The appellants' son has resided in the UK for a  period  of  11  years
    from an early age. He has spent an important  developmental  period  of
    his life in the UK during which time it is likely that  he  has  forged
    close connections to this country. All his education, thus far has been
    in the UK. He is now at an important stage of  his  GCSE  studies.  The
    respondent recognises that a child who has been resident in the UK  for
    a continuous period of seven years will have  established  strong  ties
    and this factor must be given significant weight: see MA  (Pakistan)  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705. In this case, A has been resident in  the  UK
    for a considerably longer period than seven years.

13.   Although A is old enough to express his own views,  and  is  aware  of
    the family's precarious immigration status, it appears that no  witness
    statement was prepared in support of the appeal. However, his views are
    outlined in the social work report of  Ms  Cynthia  Kelchure-Cole.  She
    outlines her qualifications and experience  in  the  report,  which  is
    unchallenged. We accepted that she is a  social  worker  of  30  years'
    experience who also has experience in therapeutic services. We give her
    opinions due weight. She interviewed the parents and spoke to A  twice.
    She has had the opportunity to assess the children with  their  parents
    in the family home.

14.   A said that he thought he  was  British  and  was  confused  when  his
    parents told him that they were in the UK  without  papers.  Before  he
    found out about the family situation he had started to think about  his
    future and life beyond school, which included taking  A  levels  before
    going to university. Since he found out, he feels anxious and  overcome
    with sadness sometimes. He tries to hide it from his parents because he
    does not want to  worry  them.  He  has  no  memories  of  Nigeria  and
    considers himself British. He said that it  would  make  him  extremely
    unhappy if they had to return to Nigeria because he would feel that  he
    was being rejected by the country that he considers his home.  All  the
    opportunities that he currently has would no longer be available to him
    and he may  not  achieve  his  ambition  of  attending  university.  Ms
    Kelchure-Cole says that she considered background evidence relating  to
    the educational system in Nigeria. In her view  there  was  no  obvious
    transfer point for A between the education systems given the  stage  he
    is at in his education in the UK. His chances of being able  to  attend
    university in Nigeria would be greatly reduced. She  says  that  A  was
    unaware of his parents' first  language  (Yoruba).  He  thought  people
    spoke English in Nigeria. She thinks it unlikely that A would  be  able
    to become fluent in a new language quickly enough to adjust to his  new
    environment. Ms Kelchure-Cole  concluded  that  A  was  suffering  from
    situational anxiety. If he was  forced  to  relocate  to  Nigeria,  his
    emotional well-being would be impacted by the change in circumstances.

15.   We have considered the evidence relating to the appellants'  daughter.
    B was born in the UK and has known no other home. In two  months'  time
    she will be eligible to register as a British  citizen.  It  is  likely
    that she also considers herself to be British and is  fully  integrated
    into life in the UK. Again, she has lived in the UK for a  considerably
    longer period than seven years. Her length of residence alone should be
    given significant weight.

16.   A letter from Dr A. Leigh,  Consultant  Paediatrician,  dated  01  May
    2018 states:

            "I am the consultant looking after [B] at Whipps Cross Hospital.
           [B] has sickle cell disease (HbSS), which  is  the  most  severe
           form of sickle cell  disease.  Sickle  cell  disease  carries  a
           significant risk of painful episodes, chest problems, stroke and
           death in childhood if untreated. In the UK and from Whipps Cross
           Hospital, [B] has regular  hospital  appointments  and  hospital
           admissions to treat acute complications of sickle cell  disease.
           She is also on a disease modifying drug called  Hydroxycarbamide
           that  has  significant  side  effects,  including  bone   marrow
           suppression which can render her at  risk  of  serious  invasive
           bacterial infections. It is essential that she has regular blood
           test monitoring and clinic appointments to ensure that she stays
           safe on these medications.


            Without these medications, follow up and hospital care there  is
           a significant risk of death in childhood (approximately 10%) and
           a significant risk of stroke.


            I urge you to reconsider [B]'s  application  for  the  right  to
           remain in the UK, as if she were  to  return  to  a  low  income
           resource poor country, she would be likely to suffer significant
           adversity, pain and significant risk of death or  stroke.  These
           risks with  current  treatment  and  following  in  the  UK  are
           significantly abated."

17.   The medical records contained in the appellants' bundle shows  that  B
    has had a large number of hospital admissions as a result of  SCD.  Her
    mother says that B will suffer from the disease the rest of  her  life.
    She can become tired very quickly and  cannot  play  as  long  as  most
    children. She is prone to bacterial infections and often  has  to  take
    penicillin. She must be  taken  to  hospital  regularly  where  she  is
    prioritised and often has to be given  morphine.  She  is  at  risk  of
    stroke and must have regular brain scans. B's school provide  her  with
    support and they have received training from medical  professionals  to
    understand the disease. In 2014 B had to have an  operation  to  remove
    her spleen because it was not working properly. The  medicines  she  is
    given help but she is  still  admitted  to  hospital.  She  is  closely
    monitored by doctors, teachers and school staff as well as her  family.
    At the time she made the statement, she said that B might need to go to
    a specialist school because of the brain damage the disease has already
    caused. In future, B might also have issues with her kidneys due to the
    medication. Her mother acknowledges that some treatment is available in
    Nigeria but she does not think that they would be able  to  afford  the
    high level of treatment that their  daughter  currently  requires.  She
    does not think that her daughter would have survived to this age if she
    had been born and raised in Nigeria.

18.   Due to  her  young  age  the  family  have  not  told  B  about  their
    precarious immigration status. For this reason,  Ms  Kelchure-Cole  did
    not interview B about the prospect of returning  to  Nigeria.  However,
    she was able to observe her in the family home and had a chance to talk
    to her parents and her older brother. Ms Kelchure-Cole did not seek  to
    comment on matters  outside  her  expertise  relating  to  B's  medical
    condition. However, she noted that the background evidence showed  that
    treatment for SCD is available in Nigeria. The Sickle  Cell  Foundation
    based in Abuja said that Nigeria  has  the  highest  number  of  people
    living with sickle cell in the world, but with little or  no  funds  to
    treat the disorder. Some  of  the  treatments  that  are  available  in
    countries such as the UK and the USA  are  available  in  Nigeria,  but
    people who need the treatment generally cannot  afford  it.  She  noted
    that the medical evidence indicates that a reduction in  the  level  of
    treatment would be detrimental and potentially  fatal.  She  said  that
    despite the seriousness of her condition B is doing well at school  and
    is meeting her academic targets. However, her parents were worried that
    this may be affected by admissions to hospital. Ms  Kelchure-Cole  says
    that educational support is provided in hospital in the  UK,  but  that
    was unlikely to  be  the  case  in  Nigeria.  She  concluded  that  B's
    relocation to Nigeria clearly would be contrary to her best interests.

19.   Ms  Kelchure-Cole  considered  the  impact  of  separating  the  first
    appellant from the children if they  remained  in  the  UK  with  their
    mother. We do not propose to set out her findings in any detail because
    it is self-evidently  not  in  the  children's  best  interests  to  be
    separated from a parent with whom they have a close relationship.

20.   We bear in mind that the interests  of  the  child  must  be  assessed
    without reference to the conduct of their  parents.  In  light  of  the
    above evidence, we conclude that the best interests  of  both  children
    point strongly to them remaining in the UK with both parents.

21.   In the case of B, it is very strongly in her  interest  to  remain  in
    the UK to maintain the  continuity  of  treatment  that  she  currently
    receives for the most severe form of SCD. Even with that  treatment  it
    is obvious that her health is  severely  affected,  and  that  constant
    monitoring is required  to  prevent  the  more  serious  risks  of  the
    disease. A 'real world'  assessment  of  her  situation  involves  some
    consideration as to whether her parents could afford the high level  of
    treatment she requires if the family returned to Nigeria. We note  that
    her parents are not highly educated  and  undertook  fairly  low-income
    employment in Nigeria (her father as a  driver  and  her  mother  as  a
    market trader). The evidence shows that the employment they  were  able
    to find (illegally) in the UK was also low income. In the 'real  world'
    it is highly unlikely that they would be able to afford even  the  most
    basic care for B let alone the high level of care  she  requires.  Even
    with the level of care she is given in the  UK  she  faces  significant
    adversity and will face serious long-term health problems. The  medical
    evidence indicates that if returned to Nigeria she is "likely to suffer
    significant adversity, pain and significant risk of death or stroke".

Findings in the context of the legal framework

22.   Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes it unlawful for a  public
    authority to act in a way that it incompatible with a Convention right.
    This duty is placed on the Secretary of State as  well  as  courts  and
    tribunals. The requirements of the immigration rules and the  statutory
    provisions are said to reflect the respondent's position on  Article  8
    of  the  European  Convention.  However,  the  complicated   provisions
    relating to  private  and  family  life  and  the  separate  provisions
    relating to deportation bear little resemblance to the  approach  taken
    by the European Court of  Human  Rights  when  conducting  a  balancing
    exercise under Article 8. The  Strasbourg  court  conducts  a  holistic
    assessment of all the relevant circumstances of  a  case  weighing  the
    individual's circumstances against the public  interest  considerations
    without artificially separating different aspects of a  claim.  We  are
    bound to assess the appeal with reference to the immigration rules  and
    relevant statutory provisions, but it must always  be  remembered  that
    those provisions are intended to give effect to, and  are  said  to  be
    compatible with, the underlying principles enshrined in  Article  8  of
    the European Convention.

23.   The highest hurdle in this case comes within the context of the  legal
    framework  relating  to  the  deportation  proceedings  in  the   first
    appellant's case. The first appellant was  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least 12  months  and  therefore  comes  within  the
    category of cases that  might  engage  the  exceptions  to  deportation
    outlined in paragraph 399(a) and section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002.

24.   It is not  disputed  that  the  first  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting   parental   relationship   with   'qualifying    children'.
    Unhelpfully, the provisions are not the  same.  The  immigration  rules
    include a two-stage test considering whether it would be 'unduly harsh'
    on a child to live in  the  country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be
    deported, and in the alternative, whether it would  be  'unduly  harsh'
    for a child to remain in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
    deported. The statutory provision contained in section 117C(5) contains
    a single composite question of whether the effect of deportation  would
    be 'unduly harsh' on a child.

25.   We bear in mind  that  the  threshold  to  show  that  the  effect  of
    deportation would be 'unduly harsh' is a stringent one. Something  more
    than the usual negative effects of deportation on a  child  is  needed.
    However, it is not such a high threshold that it  cannot  be  overcome.
    The fact that the first appellant's offence attracted a lower  sentence
    means that he is eligible to argue an  exception  to  deportation.  The
    test  is  less  stringent  than  the  'very  compelling  circumstances'
    required to overcome deportation in cases involving sentences  of  four
    years' imprisonment or more.

26.   Having considered the evidence set out above about  the  very  serious
    nature of B's medical condition we have no hesitation in  finding  that
    it would be 'unduly harsh' for her to relocate to  Nigeria.  The  'real
    world' fact is that her parents would be unable to afford the level  of
    medical treatment and support she requires. The  consequences  outlined
    by her consultant paediatrician are without  doubt  severe,  bleak  and
    potentially life threatening. Her  medical  condition  alone  would  be
    sufficient to make a finding that it would be 'unduly harsh' to  expect
    her to relocate to Nigeria, but when coupled with the fact that she was
    born in the UK and has never been to Nigeria, we are satisfied that  it
    would be 'unduly harsh' for at least one of the children to  return  to
    Nigeria.

27.   The first appellant should be able to succeed even if  the  effect  of
    deportation is 'unduly harsh' on only one of his children. Although A's
    situation is less compelling, his length of residence  is  greater  and
    the difficulties he would face in completing  his  secondary  education
    are significant. He is fully integrated into life in the UK  and  would
    still find it extremely difficult to adjust to life in Nigeria. We  are
    satisfied that it would also be 'unduly  harsh'  for  A  to  return  to
    Nigeria, but even if we are wrong on that  point,  it  matters  not  in
    light of our other findings relating to his human rights appeal set out
    below.

28.   Having found that it would  be  'unduly  harsh'  on  the  children  to
    relocate to Nigeria it is not necessary to spend  much  time  analysing
    whether it would be 'unduly harsh' to expect them to remain in  the  UK
    without their father. It is clearly not in their best interests  to  be
    separated from a parent, especially in light  of  B's  serious  medical
    condition, which requires the full support of both parents.  The  point
    can be circumvented by the fact that the respondent's  decision  letter
    dated 24 January 2017 accepts that it would be 'unduly harsh'  for  the
    children to be separated from their father in the long term. For  these
    reasons we conclude that the first appellant meets the requirements  of
    the exceptions to deportation  outlined  in  paragraph  399(a)  of  the
    immigration rules and section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002.

29.   The appeals of the second and third appellants are determined  by  the
    finding that it would be 'unduly harsh' for the children to relocate to
    Nigeria.  The Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53
    recognised that the expression 'unduly harsh' is  clearly  intended  to
    introduce a higher hurdle than that of 'reasonableness'.

30.   A has been continuously resident in the UK for a period  of  11  years
    and had been continuously resident for a period of 8 years at the  date
    of the application.   He  engages  the  private  life  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules.  KO  (Nigeria)  makes
    clear that the assessment of 'reasonableness' is directed solely to the
    position of the child  without  reference  to  the  misconduct  of  his
    parents. If there is any residual doubt  as  to  whether  it  would  be
    'unduly harsh' to expect A to leave the UK we have no doubt  whatsoever
    that his circumstances, if focussed directly on his position, show that
    it would be unreasonable to expect him  to  leave  the  UK.  For  these
    reasons, we find that he meets the private  life  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.

31.   Although we are conscious of the fact that B is not party to a  formal
    appeal before us, on the findings  we  have  made  above,  it  is  also
    patently clear that, in a hypothetical application for leave to remain,
    she would also meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of  the
    immigration rules.

32.   The second appellant is not subject to deportation proceedings. It  is
    not  disputed  that  she  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with 'qualifying children'  for  the  purpose  of  section
    117B(6) of the NIAA 2002. The Supreme Court decision  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    has left the position relating to, what is on the face of it  the  same
    test of 'reasonableness', somewhat unclear in so far as section 117B(6)
    might include a real world  assessment  of  the  circumstances  of  the
    children, including the position  and  perhaps  the  conduct  of  their
    parents. However, we are satisfied that on the facts of this  case  the
    circumstances of both children, and  in  particular  the  compassionate
    circumstances  surrounding  B's  medical  condition,  are  sufficiently
    compelling to outweigh any public  interest  considerations  raised  by
    their  parents'  undoubtedly   poor   immigration   history.   If   the
    circumstances are  sufficiently  bleak  to  show  that  the  effect  of
    deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on the children, they easily  reach
    the lower threshold to show that it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect
    them to leave the UK.

33.   For the reasons given above  we  conclude  that  the  first  appellant
    meets the requirements of paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules and
    section 117C(5) of the NIAA 2002  because  the  effect  of  deportation
    would be 'unduly harsh' on his children. That finding  alone  leads  to
    the conclusion that removal would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 for the other members of the family.

34.   The second appellant meets the requirements of section 117B(6) of  the
    NIAA 2002, which is a self-contained provision stating that the  public
    interest does not require removal in such circumstances.

35.   Our findings  relating  to  the  deportation  element  are  more  than
    sufficient to show that the third appellant's removal would amount to a
    breach of Article 8, but in  any  event,  he  meets  the  private  life
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in his own right.

36.   At the crux of the  assessment  are  the  compassionate  circumstances
    surrounding B's severe medical condition. Although she is not a  formal
    party to these appeals it follows that she cannot be removed.

37.   We conclude that the removal of the appellants from the  UK  would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The decision is remade and the appeals are ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date     10 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

