
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01690/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 June 2020                      |On 8th July 2020                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                                 MANIKA [R]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant was born in Nepal and  was  refused  entry  clearance  to
    join her parents in the United Kingdom as an adult  dependent  relative
    on 10 December 2018. She appealed against this decision, but her appeal
    was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 31 July 2019.

2.   She appealed against this decision and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Keane
    granted her permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  10  March
    2020. He found that it was  arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett had not made the necessary  findings  of  fact  or  considered
    whether a historic injustice had occurred.

3.   On 2 April 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson gave directions about  the
    future conduct of the error of law proceedings  in  the  light  of  the
    restrictions imposed in response to the Corona Virus Pandemic. She also
    said that she was minded to find that there had been a  material  error
    of law in First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett's decision, to  set  aside
    her decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   She gave the parties 21 days to object to this course of action and  no
    such objections have been received  to  date  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Therefore, I have proceeded to decide whether there was an error of law
    on the papers, as it is in the interests of justice for there to be  no
    further unnecessary delay in this appeal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

5.   Counsel for the Appellant had set out the  relevant  case  law  in  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument but First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett
    did not refer to this document or its contents in any particularity. At
    most, in her very short decision, she  referred  to  Ghising  &  Others
    (Gurkhas/BOC'S: Historic  Wrong;  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  567  (IAC)  in
    passing.

6.   She failed to refer to R (Gurung) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and the historic injustice  principle  and
    possible remedy. It  is  clearly  arguable  that  this  undermined  her
    consideration of proportionality for the purposes of  Article  8(2)  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

7.   Her findings of fact in relation to dependency were also undermined  by
    the fact that the allegation about the funds sent  being  used  by  the
    Appellant's siblings was never put to her sponsor  or  challenged.  She
    was also not asked about the  Appellant's  grandfather  and  the  Judge
    merely assumed that he  was  still  alive.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett also failed to take into account the  letter  confirming  that
    the Appellant was not in employment in Nepal. In addition, she did  not
    refer or apply the decision in Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 32 and Rai v  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320. All of these errors undermined First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett's findings in relation to family life for  the  purposes
    of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

8.    For  all  of  these  reasons,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett's
    decision contained material errors of law.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett.

Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 23 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


