
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01246/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2019                             |On 21 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               mrs Suhua Cheng
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Onoufriou
    which was promulgated on 2 January 2019.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of China born on 1 August 1955 who  appealed
    a decision of the respondent dated  22  November  2017  to  refuse  her
    application for entry clearance as the partner of her sponsor, Mr [CP],
    under the provisions of paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) and E-ECP.2.6,  2.10  and
    3.4 of Appendix FM of HC 395.

3.   It is plain that the central issue which the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    to determine was whether or not the appellant and the sponsor were in a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.  They had married in 2005 but  had
    lived apart for a substantial period.

4.   The matter was before Immigration Judge Farrall, as long ago  as  2008,
    who came to a view at that there was an absence of genuineness  in  the
    claimed relationship.  What in  effect  this  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    doing was reassessing the matter in the light of a passage of nearly  a
    decade.

5.   The judge  came  to  the  view,  supported  by  an  assessment  of  the
    evidence, not least the apparent durability of the claimed relationship
    in the intervening ten years, including visits made by the  sponsor  to
    the appellant of some duration during which he lived with the appellant
    in China. This was  reinforced  by  what  seemed  to  have  been  fully
    documented daily telephone conversations.  The  judge  decided  on  the
    evidence provided that this was a genuine and subsisting  relationship,
    as is recorded in paragraph 28 of the determination.

6.   It is the content of paragraph 29 that has given rise to  this  appeal.
    The judge stated:

         "The remaining issue is the adequacy of the accommodation.  In this
         respect, I am not satisfied that the sponsor has provided  evidence
         that there is adequate accommodation available.  He has provided  a
         tenancy agreement which is over 12 years old.  It does include  the
         name of the appellant as a permitted occupant  and  it  does  state
         that it is a two bedroom flat, but there is no evidence as  to  the
         up to date condition of the property and its suitability for  their
         joint occupation.  However, there is clear up to date evidence that
         the sponsor resides there in the form of a utility bill.   However,
         there is no evidence as to whether there are  any  other  occupants
         currently, other than the sponsor, or whether the condition of  the
         property contravenes public health regulations.  Therefore, in this
         respect,  the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of
         paragraph E-ECP.3.4 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules."

7.   On any account this is a slightly odd  finding,  in  two  ways.   First
    when one looks at the evidence advanced on behalf  the  appellant,  the
    sponsor's statement includes at paragraph 11 the following,  which  was
    unchallenged:

         "My wife and I have been married for more than 13 years  now.   Our
         relationship is genuine and subsisting.  We want to  live  together
         as husband and wife.  I am nearly 90 years old.  I have one adopted
         daughter who I do not live together [sic].  I am really lonely  and
         I miss my wife.  I constantly suffering  stress  and  pressure.   I
         cook for myself, I go to GP by myself when I need to.  I look after
         myself but I am afraid that I might not be able to  carry  on  like
         this anymore.  I am afraid if one day I would fall over and not  be
         able to get up in the house but nobody knows."

8.   It is both implicit and arguably explicit in that paragraph  that  only
    one construction can be placed on it, namely  that  the  sponsor  lived
    alone.  Were the judge to have had any concern, that ought to have been
    put to the sponsor during the course of the hearing, afforded  him  the
    opportunity of comment. It was not open to the judge to say that  there
    was no evidence as to whether there are any other  occupants  currently
    residing there.  To the contrary, there was relevant  and  unchallenged
    evidence pointing to the strong likelihood (at  least)  that  he  lived
    alone.

9.   The absence of evidence on the public health  regulations  is  again  a
    surprising observation. I have been taken by Mr Jones for the appellant
    to the Immigration Directorate Instruction, Family Migration,  Adequate
    Maintenance  and  Accommodation  (August,  2015)  and   in   particular
    paragraph 8.4.5 which concerns public health regulations and  reads  as
    follows:

         "It is likely to be  rare  that  the  property  contravenes  public
         health  regulations.   However,   if   the   decision   maker   has
         satisfactory evidence that that is or will be the  case,  they  may
         determine that the accommodation is not adequate."

    I cannot see how this case could possibly have come  within  that  rare
    category.  I have been taken to the  tenancy  agreement,  the  landlord
    here being Clapham Park Homes, a charitable housing corporation.   This
    is social housing and  there  are  statutory  obligations  placed  upon
    social  housing  landlords  to  ensure  that  minimum   public   health
    regulations are complied with. Mr Jones referred me to a document  from
    Citizens Advice in this regard. It was not properly open to  the  judge
    to enter into  speculation  on  this  matter,  still  less  to  draw  a
    conclusion adverse to the appellant.

10.  Further I accept the point made by Mr Jones, and conceded by  Ms  Jones
    for the Secretary of State, that the matter  which  led  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's refusal in relation to the  accommodation  did  not
    concern it being overcrowded or in some way unfit for human habitation.
    It was simply the fact that upon trying the telephone number there  had
    been no response.  In other words the  issue  was  as  to  whether  the
    property was genuinely occupied by the  sponsor,  not  whether  it  was
    overcrowded or in breach of public health regulations.

11.  As was rightly conceded by Ms Jones, this is an error of  law  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

12.  Having set it aside, with the concurrence of counsel, it  falls  to  me
    to remake the decision.  Ms Jones properly accepted that having  regard
    to the judge's finding as to the genuine and subsisting nature  of  the
    relationship of the appellant and the  sponsor  (in  respect  of  which
    there  was  no  cross-appeal),  the  countervailing  considerations  in
    relation to the adequacy of the accommodation should be  determined  in
    the favour of the appellant. The  evidence  pointed  to  the  appellant
    living alone in a two-bedroom property  and  there  was  no  evidential
    basis for raising any public health concerns.

13.   It  therefore  follows  that  this  appeal  must  succeed  under   the
    Immigration Rules and I so direct.


Notice of Decision

   1) An error of law having been found,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal is set aside;
   2) The decision is remade, allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
      Rules.
   3) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


