
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/01616/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2020                            |On 21 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD UIST
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Aitken, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shamash ("the judge") dated 28  October  2019
    allowing KK's appeal against deportation on human rights  grounds.  The
    first ground of appeal is that the judge made a  material  misdirection
    in law when considering KK's social and cultural integration in the UK,
    and, in particular, that she was  wrong  in  law  at  para  79  of  her
    decision to rely on the ratio of Akinyemi v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 36. The second ground of appeal is that
    the judge materially erred in law when seeking to  distinguish  Binbuga
    (Turkey) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA  Civ
    51 at para 78 of her decision on the different facts of the case. It is
    submitted that the Court of Appeal's findings at para [58]  of  Binbuga
    are applicable to the facts of the present case despite KK's  residence
    in the UK since birth. It  is  asserted  that,  in  light  of  KK's  40
    convictions for 130 offences covering every year of his life since  the
    age of 15 and his high risk of reoffending, the judge was bound to find
    that he was not socially and culturally integrated in the UK. The third
    ground of appeal is that the judge failed to provide  adequate  reasons
    for her finding at paras 50 (xi) and (xii)  and  82  that  due  to  his
    physical problems KK was dependent on his  family  and  required  their
    help to complete his basic needs so that he would face very significant
    obstacles to integration in Tanzania and her finding  at  para  50(xiv)
    that the treatment available to him in the UK would not be available to
    him in Tanzania. At  para  50(xi)-(xii)  she  found  that  due  to  his
    physical problems KK was dependent on his  family  and  required  their
    help to complete his basic needs. That was a material consideration  in
    her finding that he would face very significant obstacles in  Tanzania.
    In looking at the medical evidence the judge did not  exercise  anxious
    scrutiny in considering all the evidence about  his  medical  problems.
    The medical evidence noted by her from paras 50-53 made no reference to
    his acquiring assistance or a carer to carry out his daily tasks and no
    inference to that effect could be drawn. The oral evidence  should  not
    have been accepted uncritically since his mobility issues stemming from
    2012 did not prevent him committing further offences, including driving
    offences. Had she had due regard to  the  objective  evidence  and  his
    offending behaviour she would have reached a  different  conclusion  on
    the issue of very significant obstacles. It followed that  her  finding
    on KK's family life with his siblings  was  inadequately  reasoned  and
    could not stand. She also made a material error of law when finding  at
    para 50(xiv) that medical treatment available to KK in the UK would not
    be available to him in Tanzania. Although the  health  care  system  in
    Tanzania may  have  shortcomings,  the  judge  had  failed  to  provide
    sufficient reasons why his limited treatment in the  UK  would  not  be
    available to him in Tanzania.

 2. The judge made the following  findings  of  fact  at  para  50  of  her
    decision (in which we substitute  "KK"  for  "the  appellant")  on  her
    assessment of the oral and written evidence:

       i) KK was born in the UK. He has lived in the UK legally  his  whole
          life. He has had ILR since 2003.

      ii) KK's entire family are British citizens.

     iii) KK does not have family members on whom he can rely in  Tanzania.
          There is no one who would  help  him  to  integrate.  He  has  no
          relationship with his father. Any relationship which he may  have
          retained with his mother is compromised  by  the  feud  with  his
          father. He therefore has no connection with Tanzania.

      iv) KK is a foreign national within the meaning of section 32 of  the
          UKBA and ss117D of the NIAA.

       v) KK is a persistent  offender.  He  has  40  convictions  for  130
          offences. His first conviction was for theft on 11 January  2000.
          Since then he has amassed 14 convictions for  theft,  2  offences
          against the person , 1 robbery (as a  juvenile),  a  non-domestic
          burglary (as a juvenile), 2 offences of criminal damage, 5 public
          order offences (sections 4 and 5 of the  Public  Order  Act),  26
          offences relating to the police,  courts  and  prisons,  17  drug
          offences (all possession), 3 offences of possession of  a  bladed
          instrument,  numerous  offences  relating  to  driving  (from   1
          dangerous driving to aggravated vehicle taking, TDA, driving with
          no  insurance,  driving  while  disqualified,  driving   with   a
          defective tyre, exceeding the speed limit, driving whilst using a
          handheld mobile and failing to provide a  specimen)  and  5  non-
          recordable offences.

      vi) He has almost always pleaded guilty. The longest sentence he  has
          received was for the offences  which  triggered  the  deportation
          decision, which was 24 months imprisonment.  These  were  serious
          offences within the meaning of the Act. Since then  he  has  been
          sentenced to 18 months imprisonment  for  dangerous  driving  and
          other offences.

     vii) KK has never had a  driving  licence.  He  has  shown  a  blatant
          disregard for the law and for other road users and is lucky  that
          no one has been hurt whilst he has been behind  the  wheel  of  a
          car. His most recent driving offences are an indication of this.

    viii) There is a high risk of non-violent re-offending within two years
          and a medium risk of violent re-offending.

      ix) KK expressed remorse at the hearing and an  intention  to  desist
          from further criminality. He has some insight into his  offending
          behaviour but I nevertheless find that there is a real risk  that
          he will re-offend. I make this  finding  in  light  of  his  most
          recent conviction of 18 May 2018.

       x) KK worked whilst in custody and has completed a number of courses
          to better equip him to avoid re-offending. He is  usually  on  an
          enhanced regime as a result of good behaviour. I find that it  is
          his intention to stay out of trouble.

      xi) KK suffers from multiple debilitating conditions. He has mobility
          issues as a result of an injury to his spine, which  have  caused
          left leg paralysis, continence issues and  a  seeping  ulcer.  He
          requires regular monitoring and assistance  to  perform  everyday
          tasks. The nature of his physical condition is that he is  almost
          always in pain  and  needs  regular  monitoring  from  specialist
          services  and   a   hygienic   environment   to   avoid   further
          deterioration in his health. He is required  to  self-catheterise
          on occasions and has compromised bowel function.

     xii) KK is wheelchair dependent although he can use crutches  some  of
          the time. He needs help showering, dressing  and  with  mobility.
          The evidence is that he is not  able  to  care  for  himself  and
          requires the help and support of family and his carer.

    xiii) As a result of his physical  disabilities  KK  suffers  from  Low
          mood, suicidal ideation and symptoms of PTSD. He has required the
          intervention of his local community mental  health  team  in  the
          past.

     xiv) The treatment available to KK in the UK would not be available in
          Tanzania.

      xv) KK is in a subsisting relationship. His partner would not be able
          to care for him in Tanzania.

   3. At para 28 of Akinyemi Underhill LJ stated:

      "As regards section 117B(2) and (3), Judge Kekic noted  that  although
      of course the appellant spoke English the evidence of his  integration
      into society was, having regard to his history  of  offending,  mixed;
      and that he had never been financially independent. I am bound to  say
      that I am not sure whether sub-sections  (2)  and  (3)  are  in  truth
      directed to a situation of the  present  kind,  where  the  person  in
      question has lived in the UK since birth and is  in  one  sense  fully
      integrated into society, however anti-social their behaviour. But  the
      question is not of importance for the purpose  of  the  issues  before
      us."

      At para 79 of her decision the judge stated:

      "In short, I  have  balanced  KK's  convictions  against  the  complex
      picture of a man brought up in the UK with considerable  disabilities.
      The central fact for me was that he was born in the UK and I  rely  on
      the ratio in Akinyemi in this regard. KK has no connections  with  any
      other country and I have decided on this basis  that,  notwithstanding
      his appalling record, he falls within the exception."

   4. The Secretary of State submits in the first ground of appeal that  the
      judge's finding on this matter is inherently unsafe and requires to be
      set aside.  In  response  counsel  for  KK  submits  that,  while  the
      observations of Underhill LJ in Akinyemi were obiter since  the  court
      was not required to determine the issue,  the  judge's  conclusion  at
      para 79 is one that was properly open to her and disclosed no error of
      law. She had noted at paras 71 and 72 of her decision that KK was born
      in the UK and that since February 1995 he had been entitled  to  apply
      for registration as a  British  citizen  under  section  1(4)  of  the
      British Nationality Act 1981. At para 78 she had  noted  that  KK  had
      been brought up and educated in the UK and knew no other culture, that
      all of his relatives and friends were in the UK and that  he  received
      from  the  NHS  treatment  to  which  he  was  entitled.  Her  overall
      conclusion that he was socially  and  culturally  integrated  was  one
      properly open to her on the evidence, particularly where she  had  had
      full regard to the extent of his offending history.

   5. In our judgment the submission of counsel for KK on the  first  ground
      of  appeal  is  correct  and  must  be  sustained.   The   judge   was
      terminologically incorrect to refer "the ratio in Akinyemi" when  what
      she was referring to consisted of the obiter comments of Underhill  LJ
      at para 28. What he said there was not part of the reasoning  for  the
      decision  and  therefore  cannot  properly  be  termed  "the   ratio".
      Nevertheless, she was correct to pay heed to  those  comments  and  to
      take them into account when reaching her decision, which  is  what  we
      consider she did. It is plain from the structure of section 117C(4) of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") that
      what it has principally in mind is someone who has come to the  United
      Kingdom from another country. The  wording  is  sufficiently  wide  to
      cover someone who has lived all his life in the United Kingdom, but it
      is clearly a relevant factor to be taken into account that the  person
      has never known any social life or culture other than the one in which
      he has been brought  up  since  birth,  namely,  that  of  the  United
      Kingdom. We are satisfied that was all that  the  judge  did  in  this
      case. She did not treat what Underhill LJ said at para 28 of  Akinyemi
      as a rule of law that section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act did not apply to
      someone who had been born and lived  his  whole  life  in  the  United
      Kingdom. Accordingly, we reject the first ground of  appeal  taken  by
      the Secretary of State.

   6. So far as the second ground of appeal is concerned, this is  based  on
      what the judge said at para 78, which is as follows:

      "Essentially KK was brought up in the UK. He was educated in  the  UK.
      He knows no other culture or society. He receives treatment on the NHS
      to which he always been entitled. All of his friends and his relatives
      are in the UK. KK can be distinguished from the appellant  in  Binbuga
      in the sense that the appellant in Binbuga did not arrive  in  the  UK
      until he was 9 years old, was a gang member and had ties to Turkey."

      Hamblen LJ stated at para 58 in Binbuga:

      "Social and cultural integration in the UK connotes integration  as  a
      law-abiding citizen. That is why it connotes that breaking the law may
      involve discontinuity in integration."

       Tirabi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  UKUT  199
      (IAC) involved an appellant who had arrived in the UK at the age of 9.
      The Upper Tribunal held that committing crimes did not of itself  mean
      that a person was not socially and culturally integrated. It stated at
      para 15:

      "The second issue is whether he is 'socially and culturally integrated
      into the United Kingdom'. As we have  said,  the  judge  decided  this
      point against the  appellant  because  of  his  offence,  which,  when
      coupled with the assessment that he continued to pose a danger to  the
      community, she decided  demonstrated  his  lack  of  integration.  Mrs
      O'Brien conceded that the judge was wrong about  that,  and  we  think
      that she was right to do so. Bearing in mind again that these  factors
      are being taken into account always in the context of the  deportation
      of a person who has committed an offence, it is inconceivable that  it
      could have been intended that, in any general sense, the commission of
      an offence would demonstrate a lack of integration. The appellant  has
      been here since he was a child, he has  been  educated  here,  he  has
      friends and relatives here, he has lived on his own in  Glasgow  after
      his relatives moved to London. We have little hesitation in concluding
      that he  has  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the  United
      Kingdom."



   7. It was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State that, in light of
      KK's offending history, the judge was bound to find that  he  was  not
      socially and culturally integrated in the  UK  and  that  para  58  of
      Binbuga applied to him irrespective of the fact that he had  lived  in
      the UK since birth. In response it was submitted on behalf of KK  that
      the judge's conclusions at paras 73-79 of her  decision  disclosed  no
      material error of law, and, further, that it could not  reasonably  be
      said that the judge was bound to conclude that he was not socially and
      culturally integrated in the UK. It was clear that the judge had fully
      considered the extent of his offending history (paras  9,  509(v)-(ix)
      and 77) and described it as appalling  (para  77).  She  had  directed
      herself (at para 73) to the Secretary of State's  Modernised  Guidance
      on Criminality: Article 8 ECHR Cases dated 13 May 2019. At page 33  of
      that document it was stated that criminal  offending  alone  does  not
      necessarily mean a person is not socially  and  culturally  integrated
      into the UK and also that if the person has been resident  in  the  UK
      from a very early age it is unlikely that the  offending  alone  would
      mean a person is not socially and culturally integrated.  She  further
      directed herself in accordance with para 15 of Tirabi and paras 75 and
      76 of Bossade (s117A-D interrelationship with the Rules)  [2015]  UKUT
      415 (IAC). Her evaluation of  the  evidence  at  paras  77-79  of  her
      decision was made in accordance with  the  relevant  authorities.  Her
      overall conclusion that KK was socially and culturally  integrated  in
      the UK was one  that  was  properly  open  to  her  on  the  evidence,
      particularly where she had had full regard to his offending history.

   8. In our judgment there is no merit in the second ground of appeal.  The
      judge did not make any material error of law  in  following  what  was
      said in Binbuga. The submission on behalf of KK is correct and must be
      sustained. On no view can it  be  said  that  she  was  blind  to  his
      extensive offending history: she was well aware  of  it  and  took  it
      fully onto account in  reaching  her  decision.  It  does  not  follow
      automatically from the fact that someone has an offending history that
      he is not socially and culturally integrated in the UK. The issue was,
      as was pointed out at para 15  in  Tirabi,  being  considered  in  the
      context of deportation of someone with an offending history. The judge
      considered all the relevant evidence on the  point  and  came  to  the
      conclusion that KK was socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK.
      That was a conclusion which was open to her on the evidence.

   9. So far as the third ground of appeal is concerned, it was submitted on
      behalf of the Secretary of State that the  judge  failed  properly  to
      consider the medical evidence which made no mention of KK's need for a
      carer to carry out daily tasks and  that  she  erred  in  uncritically
      accepting the oral evidence on this point as  his  mobility  problems,
      which stemmed from 2012, had  not  prevented  him  committing  further
      offences, including driving offences. When First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Murray granted permission to appeal he stated  that  it  was  arguable
      that the judge's findings at para 50(xi) to  (xiv)  were  inadequately
      reasoned and not supported by the evidence. It was submitted on behalf
      of  KK  that  the  judge's  findings  on  this  point  are,  when  her
      determination is read as a whole, adequately reasoned and supported by
      the evidence. Reference was made to the findings  at  para  50(xi)  to
      (xiv). The judge at para 33 of her decision had  set  out  a  detailed
      analysis of the medical evidence provided in KK's bundle. At  para  30
      she stated as follows:

      "The  medical  evidence  included  the  hospital  records  from   KK's
      admission to hospital following the shooting in  September  2012.  The
      notes include references to multiple gunshot pellets within the lumbar
      spinal canal and presacral region [AB58]. There was a report from KK's
      GP outlining the current position and explaining that KK continues  to
      suffer from side effects of the injury, including chronic  back  pain,
      neurological and sexual symptoms, mobility and continence issues, with
      persistent foot ulcers for which  he  has  been  referred  to  plastic
      surgery [AB42-44]."


      Further, at para 33 she referred to the letter from his GP, Dr Chetty,
      dated 26 June 2019 in which he stated that KK's  medical  issues  were
      chronic in nature, that he expected an exacerbation of them  and  that
      there was a need to monitor pain and pain control.  When  the  judge's
      analysis at paras 30-33 were considered, her finding  at  para  50(xi)
      was supported by adequate reasoning. Her finding at para  50(xii)  was
      open to her on both the oral and documentary evidence. The documentary
      medical evidence from his  GP  and  other  sources,  which  adequately
      documented the nature of the medical concerns, was fully considered by
      the judge. Although that material did not make  express  reference  to
      the requirement for a carer, the judge recorded  at  para  35  of  her
      decision that KK had been provided with a carer only since his release
      from prison in 2019. This was therefore  a  recent  development  which
      post-dated his criminal offending. The evidence from the Department of
      Work and Pensions confirmed that he had been assessed as eligible  for
      personal independence payment both in respect of the daily living part
      (at the standard rate) and mobility part (at the  enhanced  rate).  In
      the assessment of his needs he scored 3 out of  8  for  assistance  in
      getting in and out of a bath or shower, 2 out of 8 for needing an  aid
      or appliance to manage his toilet needs or incontinence, 2  out  of  8
      for needing to use an aid or appliance to dress and undress and 12 out
      of 12 for moving around, being able to stand and move  more  than  one
      metre but no more  than  20  metres  either  aided  or  unaided.  This
      evidence,  when  considered  in  the  round  with  the  oral  evidence
      summarised by the judge at paras 34-46 of her decision supported  KK's
      claim that he required the assistance of a  carer  to  help  him  with
      certain daily tasks. Her decision disclosed that she  applied  anxious
      scrutiny to all of the documentary and oral evidence placed before her
      and that her finding at para 50(xii) was properly  open  to  her.  Her
      finding  at  para  50(xiii)  that,  as  a  result  of   his   physical
      disabilities,  KK  suffered  from  low  mood,  suicidal  ideation  and
      symptoms of PTSD and  has  required  the  intervention  of  the  local
      community mental health team  in  the  past  was  based  upon  medical
      evidence, in particular the letter from Dr Chetty  dated  16  November
      2018, in which he stated at para 5:


           "Mr KK was noted to mobilise with crutches in a recent  clinical
           letter and experiences  recurring  pain,  erectile  dysfunction,
           requires intermittent self catheterisation and  has  compromised
           bowel function. He has also shown some symptoms  of  depression,
           low mood, suicidal ideation and anxiety and was  noted  to  have
           some elements of PTSD on a psychiatric assessment."


      Her finding at para 50(xiii) was therefore based  upon  evidence  that
      was before her.


  10. In relation to the contention in the third ground of appeal  that  the
      judge erred in her finding that the treatment required by KK would not
      be available to  him  in  Tanzania,  she  noted  at  para  50  of  her
      determination that the evidence from the World Health organisation was
      that Tanzania was  a  country  faced  with  a  number  of  challenges,
      including significant shortages of medical personnel. She also  relied
      upon the evidence of KK's brother that there is a lack  of  wheelchair
      access in Tanzania and that all of KK's support network  were  in  the
      UK. At para 82 of  her  decision  she  provided  adequate  reasons  to
      demonstrate the very significant obstacles that KK would be likely  to
      encounter on his return  to  Tanzania.  Her  brief  reference  to  the
      availability of medical treatment in Tanzania did  not  amount  to  an
      error of law.

  11. In relation to the contention by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
      judge's findings  about  KK's  family  life  with  his  siblings  were
      inadequately reasoned and so could not stand, it was submitted for  KK
      that, when her decision was read as a  whole,  her  findings  in  that
      regard were properly open to her on  the  evidence.  At  para  70  she
      correctly referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Kugathas
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ  31  and
      concluded that his relationship with his adult  siblings  was  greater
      than the ordinary ties between adult siblings. That finding had to  be
      considered  in  the  broad  context  of  her  decision  as  a   whole,
      particularly in light of her summary of the oral evidence at para  44-
      46, detailing the close nature of his relationship with his siblings.


  12. In our judgment the third ground of  appeal  is  also  without  merit,
      essentially for the reasons set out in the submission for KK  narrated
      above. We are satisfied that the judge had a proper  evidential  basis
      for the findings challenged by the Secretary of State and that she was
      entitled to make those findings. It follows that there was no error of
      law in the making of those findings.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any material  error
of law.

The appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: Lord Uist          Date: 18 February 2020

Lord Uist sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.



