
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
HU/02117/2015

                                                    HU/02118/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 May 2017                            |On 6 June 2017                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                 buddha rana
                                 priya rana
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. E. Wilford, Counsel instructed by Makka
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nixon, promulgated on 19  October  2016,  in  which  she
    dismissed their appeals against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "The grounds, which were in time, complain that the judge erred in: (1)
    directing herself in line  with  Kugathas  without  reference  to  more
    recent case law; (2) incorrectly directing herself that only  facts  at
    date of decision could be taken  into  account;  (3)  irrationality  in
    finding  that  the  appellants  were  self  sufficient  despite   their
    dependency on their father; and (4) only considering  family  life  not
    private life.


    The grounds, which are concise and  well-drafted,  are  arguable.   The
    Court of Appeal in Gurung approved the UT guidance on  family  life  at
    paras 50-62 of Ghising (family life - adults -  Gurkha  policy)  [2012]
    UKUT 00160 (IAC).  This corrected a misunderstanding that had led to an
    overly narrow approach based on Kugathas.  Although the judge refers to
    Gurung it is arguable that  she  erred  in  law  in  not  applying  the
    relevant legal framework in assessing whether there  was  family  life.
    Without refusing on any ground it appears to  me  that  the  first  and
    third have most force and justify close examination."


 3. The Sponsor attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Wilford relied on the grounds of appeal, in  particular  grounds  1
    and 2.  He referred me to the case of Rai [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320  which
    post-dated the decision and the grant of permission  to  appeal.   This
    had clarified that what was necessary was to ascertain whether  or  not
    there was the existence of real, committed or  effective  support.   In
    summary, he submitted that the facts of this  appeal  were  similar  to
    those in Rai.  The judge had made clear  findings  that  financial  and
    emotional support was being provided by the Sponsor to the  Appellants.
    These findings were such that there was real, effective  and  committed
    support.  The judge had applied Kugathas too rigidly,  an  error  which
    had been identified in the case  of  Ghising.   In  the  light  of  the
    finding that there was dependence, Article 8(1) was  engaged,  and  the
    judge should have found that family life existed.


 5. In paragraph 10(7)  the  judge  introduced  an  elevated  threshold  by
    stating that, although the usual emotional bonds  between  parents  and
    child were present, the requisite degree of  emotional  dependence  was
    absent in this case.  I was referred to paragraph 36 of Rai.


 6. Mr. Armstrong relied on the Rule 24 response and  the  case  of  Gurung
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8, paragraph 26.  He submitted that the case of Rai did
    not differ drastically from Gurung.  Paragraph 36 of  Rai  stated  that
    there was a need for dependency beyond normal financial ties and normal
    emotional dependence.


 7. The judge had not found that family life existed.  At the date  of  the
    hearing the Appellants were 29 and 25 and had lived separately from the
    Sponsors  for  five  years.   There  was  nothing   unusual   to   show
    exceptionality on the facts.  There was no  medical  evidence  for  the
    second Appellant.  The question to be  asked  was  whether  exceptional
    circumstances had been demonstrated and they had not.  It was a  narrow
    issue of exceptional circumstances and was a well-reasoned decision  on
    that issue with no material error of law.
 8. In response, Mr. Wilford submitted that the Mr. Armstrong's submissions
    were an invitation to make the same  error  that  was  subject  to  the
    appeal in Rai.  The judge had not considered family life  at  the  date
    the parents had departed from Nepal and whether family life  had  ended
    when they had departed.  I was referred to paragraph 39  of  Rai  where
    the court found that the judge  had  not  engaged  with  the  issue  of
    whether family life had endured beyond separation.


 9. With reference to paragraph 36 of Rai, it was  not  necessary  to  find
    exceptionality.  Real, effective and committed support did not have  to
    equate to something exceptional and extraordinary.  Exceptionality  was
    a too exacting and inappropriate test, which was  not  compatible  with
    real, effective and committed support, as  accepted  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Rai [37].


10. In summary it was a very short decision and the  judge  had  failed  to
    apply the appropriate legal framework.  She had failed  to  recall  the
    Upper Tribunal in Ghising.  The fact that the Appellants lived together
    did not militate against family life existing between  them  and  their
    parents.  I was referred in this respect to [39] of Rai.


11. In relation to the finding that the Appellants were self-sufficient  he
    questioned how this finding made sense.  In paragraph 10(5)  the  judge
    states: "I find therefore that, but for their financial  dependence  on
    their father, they are self-sufficient".  It was unclear  how  somebody
    could be both financially dependent on somebody else  and  still  self-
    sufficient.


Error of law


12. I have carefully considered the cases of Rai and Ghising.   As  at  the
    date of the hearing and the grant of appeal, the case of  Rai  had  not
    been promulgated.  However, in the case of Ghising  the  need  for  the
    Tribunal not to be too restricted in its application  of  Kugathas  had
    already been discussed.  Paragraph 54 of Ghising refers to Kugathas and
    the question of whether there is real, committed or effective  support.
    In paragraph 56 of Ghising there  is  a  reference  to  the  fact  that
    Kugathas had been interpreted too restrictively in the past.   This  is
    clarified now in Rai, paragraph 36.


13. Paragraph 36 of Rai states:-


    "As Ms Patry submitted, it was clearly open to the Upper Tribunal judge
    to have regard  to  the  Appellant's  dependence,  both  financial  and
    emotional, on his parents. This was, plainly, a relevant and  necessary
    consideration  in  his  assessment  (see  the  judgment  of  the  court
    in Gurung, at paragraph 50). If, however, the  concept  to  which  the
    decision-maker will generally need to  pay  attention  is  "support"  -
    which means, as Sedley L.J. put it  in Kugathas,  "support"  which  is
    "real" or "committed" or "effective" - there was, it seems to me, ample
    and undisputed evidence on which the Upper Tribunal  judge  could  have
    based a finding that such "support"  was  present  in  the  Appellant's
    case. He found, however, that the Appellant had a  "reliance  upon  his
    parents for income that does not place him in  any  particular  unusual
    category either within this country or internationally"  (paragraph  23
    of the determination), and no "indication on balance  of  a  dependency
    beyond the normal family ties and the financial dependency"  (paragraph
    26). These findings, Mr Jesurum submitted, suggest that he was  looking
    not just for a sufficient degree of financial and emotional  dependence
    to  constitute  family  life,  but  also  for  some  extraordinary,  or
    exceptional, feature in the Appellant's dependence upon his parents  as
    a necessary determinant of the existence of his family life with  them.
    Mr  Jesurum  submitted  that  this  approach  was  too  exacting,   and
    inappropriate. It seems to reflect the earlier reference, in  paragraph
    18 of the determination, to the requirement  for  "some  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances inherent within [an applicant's]  own  case".
    In any event, Mr  Jesurum  submitted,  it  elevated  the  threshold  of
    "support" that is "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  too  high.  It
    cannot be reconciled with the jurisprudence - including  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Kugathas - as reviewed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) (in paragraphs 50 to
    62  of  its  determination),  with  the  endorsement  of   this   court
    in Gurung (in  paragraph  46  of  the  judgment  of  the  court).  It
    represents, Mr Jesurum contended, a  misdirection  which  vitiates  the
    Upper Tribunal judge's decision."


14. The judge found that the Appellants were financially dependent on their
    father, the Sponsor,  [10(5)].   I  find  that  the  finding  that  the
    Appellants  are  self-sufficient,   notwithstanding   their   financial
    dependence on their father, does not follow.  The judge has found  that
    the Appellants are financially dependent on their father [10(5)].   She
    has found that they live in the family home [10(5)].  I therefore  find
    that both their accommodation and their  financial  support  are  being
    provided by their father, so it is hard to see how they can be found to
    be self-sufficient.


15. The judge finds that the Appellants and Sponsor speak on the phone  and
    via Viber [10(5)].   She states that this is something that  she  would
    expect of family members living apart "and this contact does not in  my
    judgment point to anything over and above the  usual  emotional  ties".
    In [10(6)] she finds that the fact that their father  visits  them  "in
    itself is not suggestive of emotional dependence".  In [10(7)] she asks
    whether  they  have  shown  that  there  is  a  "sufficient   emotional
    dependence on their parents to justify the conclusion that they enjoyed
    family  life".   She  then  goes  on  to  state  that  while  they  are
    "financially dependant (sic) on their father, I find that, although the
    usual emotional  bonds  between  parent  and  child  are  present,  the
    requisite degree of emotional dependence is absent".


16. I find that  the  judge  has  applied  an  elevated  threshold  to  the
    requirement to show emotional and financial dependence and  has  failed
    to apply the case law, both that of Ghising and Rai.  I find  that  the
    judge took the same approach as had been taken by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge in Rai.  The judge found financial dependence, which  in  and  of
    itself would have been sufficient to make a finding of family life  for
    the purposes of Article 8(1), being a level of  dependence  between  an
    adult child and their parent which goes above  and  beyond  the  normal
    dependence to be found in such a relationship.  The judge  was  looking
    for  something  extraordinary  and  exceptional  with  regard  to   the
    emotional support provided by the Sponsor.  All that needs to be  shown
    is support that is real, committed or effective, with reference to  the
    case of Kugathas.   There  does  not  need  to  be  any  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstance inherent within  the  case  in  order  for  an
    appellant to show that there is real, effective or committed support.


17. This was clearly set out in the case of Ghising with reference  to  the
    case of Kugathas.  I find that  the  judge  has  looked  for  something
    exceptional, as is shown by the  fact  that  she  is  looking  for  the
    "requisite degree of emotional dependence" as opposed to real committed
    or effective emotional support.  I find  that  the  judge  has  applied
    Kugathas too restrictively, and while she has referred to the  case  of
    Gurung which applied the case of Ghising, she has not correctly applied
    the case of Ghising, in particular paragraphs 50 to 62.


18. Further, her finding that the Appellants are able to provide each other
    with companionship and emotional support is not relevant to the central
    focus of the case.  The important point is whether there is family life
    between the Appellants and  their  parents,  not  whether  family  life
    exists between the two siblings.  Paragraph 39 of Rai states:-


    "But that, in my view, was not to confront the real issue under Article
    8(1) in this case,  which  was  whether,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
    appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life with his  parents,
    which had existed at the time of  their  departure  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom and had endured beyond it, notwithstanding their  having
    left Nepal when they did."


19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has not given any  consideration  to  the
    existence of family life between the Appellants and  Sponsor  when  the
    Sponsor left Nepal, and what has happened  since  then  to  break  that
    family life, such that family life no longer endures.  Given  that  she
    has found  that  the  Appellants  live  in  the  family  home  and  are
    financially dependent on their father, and has also found that they are
    in contact, and that the Sponsor has made visits, she has  not  pointed
    to anything that has occurred to break the  family  life  in  existence
    when the Sponsor came to the United Kingdom.


20. I find that the decision involves a making of a material error  of  law
    in the judge's failure to apply the legal framework  set  down  in  the
    case of Ghising, now further clarified by Rai.


Remaking


21. It had been conceded by the Respondent's representative at the  hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal that, were Article 8(1) engaged, it would be
    a disproportionate interference under Article 8(2)  with  reference  to
    the case of Gurung.  At 10(3) the judge quotes from Gurung:


    "I accept that it is now well-established  that,  where  Article  8  is
    engaged and, but for the  historic  wrong,  the  appellant  would  have
    settled in the UK some time ago, that this will usually  determine  the
    issue of proportionality in the appellant's favour, although it is  not
    determinative.  This point has in fact been  sensibly  conceded  by  Mr
    Swaby."
22. Following this concession, it was accepted before  me  that  there  was
    only one issue, whether or not Article 8(1) was engaged.


23. There is no dispute over the factual circumstances  of  this  case.   I
    find that the Appellants are financially dependent on the  Sponsor.   I
    find that they live in the family  home.   I  find  that  they  are  in
    frequent contact with the Sponsor over the phone  and  Viber.   I  find
    that the Sponsor has visited the Appellants on an annual basis.


24. I have taken into account the case of Rai, in particular paragraphs  36
    and 39, as well as paragraphs 50 to 62 of Ghising.   I  find  that  the
    support  which  the  Appellants  receive  from  the  Sponsor  is  real,
    committed and effective.   I  find  that  the  Appellants  are  totally
    financially dependent on the  Sponsor.   I  find  that  this  level  of
    dependence goes above and beyond the normal dependence to be  found  in
    such  a  relationship.   Further,  I  find  that  the  Appellants   are
    emotionally dependent on the  Sponsor.   I  find  that  this  emotional
    support is real, effective and committed.


25. I therefore find, following the case of Rai, that the  Appellants  have
    shown that they have family life with the Sponsor sufficient to  engage
    the operation of Article 8(1).


26. As it has been conceded that any interference in this family life would
    be disproportionate under Article 8(2), I find that the Appellants have
    shown on the balance of probabilities that the decisions are  a  breach
    of their rights, and those of the  Sponsor,  to  a  family  life  under
    Article 8 ECHR.


Decision


27. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law, and I set the decision aside.


28. I remake the decision allowing the Appellants' appeals on human  rights
    grounds, Article 8 ECHR.


29. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 5 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.   The  Appellants  did  not  meet  the
requirements of the immigration rules or the policy  in  relation  to  adult
children of former Gurkha soldiers.  The Respondent noted  in  the  decision
that  evidence  of  emotional  reliance  had  not  been  provided.   In  the
circumstances where further evidence was provided for  the  appeal,  I  have
decided to make no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 5 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

