
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02281/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (via Skype)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2021                     |On 7 April 2021                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           SHANICE MELISSA NESBETH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe instructed by Rogols Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, was born  on  the  18  January
        1996. Her immigration history which shows she  entered  the  United
        Kingdom on 8 February 2014, applied for leave to remain on 10  July
        2014, which was refused on 18 September  2014,  against  which  the
        appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 2  February  2017,  are
        preserved findings.
     2. This appeal arises out of  an  application  for  further  leave  to
        remain made on 15 October 2019 on the basis  the  appellant  has  a
        genuine and subsisting parental relationship with her  two  younger
        half-sisters, with whom she lives together  with  her  mother.  The
        appellant claims her mother works very long hours and that  she  is
        the carer of her half sisters  in  her  mother's  absence  who  has
        'stepped into the shoes of a parent'. It was also  argued,  in  the
        alternative, that her removal will be disproportionate pursuant  to
        article 8 ECHR.
     3. The application was refused by the Secretary of State on 24 January
        2020, on the basis the respondent was not satisfied  the  appellant
        had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her  half
        sisters. The appellant's appeal against the refusal was allowed  by
        a Judge of the First-team Tribunal in a decision  dated  11  August
        2020, against which permission to appeal was granted by a  Resident
        Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 1 September 2020, and the First-
        tier Tribunal decision set aside  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
        papers on 24 November  2020,  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        findings in relation to the appellant's  immigration  history,  the
        assistance she provides for her  half  sisters  whilst  her  mother
        works, and her  mother's  employment  details  are  also  preserved
        findings.


Background

     4. Mr Pipe in his  skeleton  argument  specifically  referred  to  the
        following paragraphs of the First-tier  Tribunal  which  he  stated
        were preserved:

[15] HOPO not relying on credibility findings of Judge Raikes;
[28] HOPO did not dispute the care provided by the Appellant  to  her  half-
siblings, nor the hours worked by her mother;
[29] HOPO accepted that the Appellant did not come to deliberately  overstay
and accepted that she has lived together with her mother and half siblings;
[35] Finding on undisputed evidence in relation to the care provided by  the
Appellant and her mother's work;
[36-39] Findings in respect of the evidence of caring role performed by  the
Appellant.

     5. The reference to a decision of Judge Raikes, is a reference  to  an
        earlier determination of another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,
        which dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
        decision to refuse her application for leave to remain on article 8
        private life grounds with  appeal  number  IA/38988/2014.  Although
        permission to appeal was granted to challenge Judge Raikes decision
        to the Upper Tribunal the decision was upheld by the Upper Tribunal
        in a decision promulgated on 2 February 2017.
     6. At [15] of the First-tier Tribunal decision being  reconsidered  in
        this appeal it is written:

        15.  As regards the credibility findings of Judge Raikes, Mr  Swaby
             did not rely on them. He did not invite me to  find  that  the
             appellant or her mother were  not  credible,  whether  on  the
             basis of the evidence given to me  or  on  the  basis  of  the
             findings of the previous Judge. In any event,  those  findings
             are of marginal relevance to the matters I have to decide: the
             judge had concerns about the evidence as to the  circumstances
             of the appellant's arrival and staying in the United  Kingdom,
             as opposed to the  family  situation  of  the  appellant,  her
             mother and half sisters. The case has moved  on  significantly
             since 2014 (with the  appellant  now  having  lived  with  her
             mother and half sisters for some 5 � years), which facts  were
             accepted by Mr Swaby. The focus now is squarely on the  nature
             of the relationship as between  the  appellant  and  her  half
             sisters. Further, to the extent that the circumstances  as  to
             the appellant's coming to and remaining in the United  Kingdom
             (and her intentions) are relevant, they are  relevant  to  the
             second  issue  (balancing  immigration  control  against   the
             article 8 rights and those of her family here). In closing, Mr
             Swaby  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  not   deliberately
             overstayed in 2014.

     7. Despite it appearing  to  have  been  accepted  by  the  Presenting
        Officer below that no reliance was being placed  upon  the  adverse
        credibility findings of Judge Raikes, submissions were made  by  Mr
        Tan in relation to those same issues. Mr Pipe in his submissions in
        reply expressed surprise that such matters had been raised in light
        of the earlier position.
     8. Whilst not expressed as a concession by the  Secretary  of  State's
        representative Mr Swaby, the Presenting Officer before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal, in an  appeal  in  which  the  appellant  had  filed
        witness statements and had been cross-examined, but in which  there
        was no challenge or exploration of any credibility  issues  in  the
        questions put to the appellant, whilst Mr Tan may have been able to
        refer to the previous determination which had been  upheld  by  the
        Upper Tribunal, the relevance of such submissions  is  questionable
        when the facts of the circumstances of  the  appellant  and  family
        members are not in dispute and the adverse issues arose in relation
        to other matters. The submission relating to Judge  Raikes  earlier
        findings is noted but I find is one  that  warrants  little  weight
        being attached to it in all the circumstances.
     9. Mr Pipe also refers  to  [28  -  29]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        decision, which appear in the  section  of  that  judgement  headed
        'Submissions' and are in the following terms:

        28.  In his closing address, Mr Swaby relied on the refusal. He did
             not dispute the care provided by the  appellant  to  her  half
             sisters, nor the hours worked  by  her  mother.  He  submitted
             though that, taken at its highest, the evidence did  not  bear
             out that the appellant had a parental  relationship  with  her
             half sisters. He relied on an assertion that it is her  mother
             who makes all the decisions, at least the  important  ones.  I
             put to him that he could not  fairly  rely  on  that  argument
             given that he had not put it to the witnesses to allow them to
             deal with it. He said he was entitled  to  do  so,  given  the
             burden of proof: it was for the appellant to make out that she
             had the parental relationship. I  referred  him  to  different
             parts of the evidence which might be interpreted as indicating
             that the appellant does  have  a  decision  making  role:  for
             example, paragraph 17 of the appellant's witness statement  as
             well as the letter from Forward Thinking Birmingham,  as  well
             as the inference,  which  might  be  drawn  from  the  overall
             circumstances (the appellant's  mother  was  absent  for  long
             periods of time and it was inevitable that the appellant would
             have to make decisions). He said  that  it  was  inconceivable
             that her mother would not be called if necessary at work.

        29.  He drew an analogy with the sole responsibility rule in  entry
             clearance cases. As to compelling circumstances and Article  8
             otherwise, he contended that there were no such circumstances.
             The appellant only had precarious residence. He accepted  that
             the appellant  did  not  come  deliberately  to  overstay.  He
             accepted that the appellant has lived  together  at  the  same
             address as her mother and half sisters.  There  had  not  been
             protracted delay in seeking to remove  the  appellant.  As  to
             Devaseelan, there was new evidence, the medical evidence,  the
             ISW report and the father now less involved  than  previously.
             With  regard  to  R  (RK)   v   SSHD   (s.117B(6);   "parental
             relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC),  the  facts  in  that
             case were stark as compared to this case.  He  said  I  should
             dismiss the appeal.

    10. The issue of responsibility for decision-making for the  appellants
        half sisters was explored by Mr Tan before the Upper  Tribunal  and
        shall be discussed further below.
    11. Actual findings of the First-tier Tribunal specifically referred to
        by Mr Pipe are those at [35 - 39] which are in the following terms:

        35.  The  context  is  important.  Only  undisputed  evidence,  the
             appellant's mother is often absent between Monday  to  Friday:
             she works at the residential care home  on  Monday,  Wednesday
             and Thursday between 8 PM and 8 AM and has to  leave  home  at
             around 7 PM. On Monday to Friday. She works as a cleaner  from
             9 AM to 4 PM and go straight to that job when she finishes her
             night shift. On Tuesday, Friday and Saturday  she  is  on-call
             for the care home. She works in her cleaning job  on  Saturday
             between 9 AM and 1 PM. The net effect of this is that there is
             much of the week when the appellant  has  sole  responsibility
             for her sisters. The amount  of  time  that  it  is  only  the
             appellant with her sisters is summarised in paragraphs 11  and
             12 of her witness statement. In  these  circumstances,  it  is
             likely that the appellant has  to  (or  would  have  to)  take
             reasonably important decisions in respect of her half sisters.
             To test this, I pose the scenario of an emergency,  while  the
             appellant's mother is working a night shift. Necessarily,  the
             appellant would have to take decisions in such a situation. Mr
             Swaby argued that that her mother could be contacted  at  work
             and if necessary leave. Of course, that will be possible,  but
             it is stretching matters to the point of being unrealistic  to
             suggest that the appellant's responsibility does not encompass
             decision-making given the weekly routine  and  her  mother  is
             very long hours.

        36.  The appellant refers to her responsibility for her sisters  at
             various places in her witness statement: paragraphs 11, 12, 13
             and 17.

        37.  Even just to take the example of shopping which the  appellant
             regularly does with her sisters, that will necessarily involve
             decisions  and  choices  which  directly  impinge   upon   the
             children's diet and nutrition and  are,  therefore,  by  their
             nature, important.

        38.  I note that the terms  of  the  letter  of  'Forward  Thinking
             Birmingham' of 22 July 2020. The  appellant  is  described  as
             'main carer' for Shantae (the older sister) together with  her
             mother. She is the main carer when her mother is at work.  The
             authors view is that the appellant's role '... Not only allows
             the family to function, but most importantly, provides Shantae
             with the emotional and practical support she needs  to  remain
             safe in the community.' In other words, the  appellant's  role
             is indispensable not only for the family as a whole  (to  work
             as a family) but also for the well-being of Shantae.

        39.  The author then goes on to  say  this:  'For  this  reason,  I
             believe that Shanice serves as a very effective and  important
             gatekeeper  and  a  solid  preventative  measure  for   future
             hospital admissions'. (My underlining). This is  an  important
             insight. The Oxford Dictionary  defines  'gatekeeper',  inter-
             alia, as:

             'A personal thing that controls access to something.
             'GPs can act as gatekeepers, filtering demands made on hospital
            services"

    12. In addition to the appellant, those of significance in the case are
        the appellant's mother Mrs Pamela White, a national of Jamaica born
        on the 21 December 1969, who has leave  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom with a condition preventing recourse to public funds.   The
        appellant's half sisters are  Shantae  born  on  24  May  2006  and
        therefore now aged nearly 15, and Shannoi born on the 21 April 2009
        and therefore aged nearly 12, both British citizens.
    13. It was confirmed in evidence before the Upper  Tribunal  that  both
        children now attend the same secondary school and no longer require
        the appellant's assistance in getting to and from school.
    14. It also emerged in evidence that during the time the appellant  was
        undertaking studies at a local college, when the children were much
        younger, they would go to a breakfast club  before  school  started
        and an after-school club afterwards until the  appellant  collected
        them and took them home.
    15. Although the issue of  Mrs  White's  leave  restricting  access  to
        public funds was specifically raised with Mr  Tan  at  the  hearing
        there was no suggestion by him of any intention by the Secretary of
        State to remove the restriction on access to  public  funds,  which
        would have enabled a submission to be  made  that  the  appellant's
        presence in the United  Kingdom  was  no  longer  required  as  the
        children's mother will be able to give up her employment  and  care
        for them on a full-time basis.
    16. The significance of the restriction  upon  Mrs  White's  access  to
        public funds is not only does it mean that she has to undertake the
        employment she does to earn sufficient to pay the bills  to  enable
        the economic requirements of the  family  to  be  met,  unless  the
        appellant  herself  was  able  to  work  and   make   a   financial
        contribution, but that if Mrs White was forced to have to  give  up
        work to care for the children she could not claim public funds.  In
        such circumstances it is not clear how the family will be  able  to
        support themselves, leading to an inability to pay  rent  and  face
        eviction, an  inability  to  provide  adequate  food,  heating  and
        lighting leading to destitution, and possibly intervention  of  the
        statutory authorities to protect the welfare of the children.
    17. Mrs White confirmed in her oral evidence that before the  appellant
        came to the United Kingdom childcare was provided by a  woman  whom
        she paid to enable her to work but claimed that that person was  no
        longer available.  Mrs White stated that without being able to work
        she would not have the  financial  means  to  pay  for  replacement
        childcare although it was not made out the  current  level  of  Mrs
        Whites income will enable her to  pay  for  suitable  childcare  to
        cover her working hours.
    18. Two further pieces of relevant evidence  have  been  provided.  The
        first of these is a  report  from  Immigration  Quick  Social  Work
        Services dated 15 March 2020, which concludes that it would not  be
        in the best interests of either  Shantae  of  Shannoi,  physically,
        emotionally, practical or educationally, to be separated  from  the
        appellant at this time. The reasoning for such a conclusion is  set
        out in the report and includes a statement that in the  opinion  of
        the author as Shannoi has a diagnosis of Mild Learning Difficulties
        she will require long-term support with her presenting  needs  and,
        as she reaches key  stages  of  her  life,  that  these  needs  may
        increase over time
    19. The second piece of evidence is a  letter  from  'Forward  Thinking
        Birmingham' dated 22 July 2020, written by a senior  mental  health
        practitioner as part of the Forward Thinking Birmingham,  Community
        Mental Health Team, in the following terms:

Re Shantae

Background

Shantae was referred to Crisis Resolution Urgent  Care  following  an  acute
psychotic episode which happened about three months ago.  She  has  been  on
prescribed medication since then, and seemed to  have  been  fine  up  until
this incident whilst out shopping with her mother. Shantae reported to  have
become  very  afraid  (due  to  hallucinations  and  delusions)  and   which
warranted her mother to take her home and tried to offer reassurance.

Current presentation

Shantae explained that she had become scared for  no  reason  and  she  felt
that something bad was going to happen. She said mum however  reassured  her
and she was able to continue shopping.

She said she had not been scared like that in the past but  suddenly  became
overwhelmed with the belief that something bad was going to happen  to  her.
She has not been feeling paranoid over the past few  weeks  following  onset
of medication.

She has reported that she is not experiencing as many  hallucinations  since
medication commenced. However, given the recent incident where she  believed
something bad was going to happen to her is has  now  become  necessary  for
her to be monitored on a weekly basis by Forward Thinking  Birmingham  (FTB)
Community Mental Health Team.

Shantae will be monitored and  reviewed  to  manage  symptoms  of  Psychotic
disorder, monitor  for  side  effects  from  prescribed  medication  and  to
prevent a deterioration of her mental state to avoid hospital admission.

Mental state: Shantae  is  preoccupied,  overwhelmed  and  quite  distressed
about  the  pending  court  case  to  deport  her  older   sister.   As   an
illustration, her sleep has recently deteriorated affected, in addition  to,
her, appetite and overall ability  to  recover  from  her  recent  psychotic
episode.

Unfortunately, this is having a detrimental  effect  upon  Shantae's  mental
state. Shantae's psychosis is a long-term diagnosis and at  present  she  is
still vulnerable to having repeated  episodes.  Hopefully,  with  treatment,
this may be managed adequately.

...

At the present time, Shantae continues to experience  symptoms  of  anxiety,
hallucinations or delusions; however, this appears to be less  frequent,  in
comparison to 3-4 months ago. On the positive side, Shantae has  not  voiced
any thoughts of self-harm, suicidal ideation or plans and thoughts or  plans
to harm others.

Pamela and I discussed the contributing social and environmental factors  to
Shantae's mental health and she identifies that the ongoing stress that  the
families experiencing will delay her recovery.

Social: Shantae's main carers are both her mother and older sister  Shanice.
Shanice serves as the main carer whilst  their  mother  is  at  work.  Under
those circumstances, Pamela currently has to undertake two  jobs  a  day  to
supplement the family's income, she cannot  claim  benefits  for  her  three
daughters.

Equally important, without the  practical  help  and  support  that  Shanice
provides Pamela recognises that she would not be able  to  provide  for  her
family.

Given these points, it is clear that Shanice's role in the family  not  only
allows the family to function, but most importantly, provides  Shantae  with
the emotional and practical support that she needs to  remain  safe  in  the
community.

For this reason, I believe that Shanice  serves  as  a  very  effective  and
important gatekeeper and a solid preventative measure  for  future  hospital
admissions. I recently spoke to Shantae and it is clear that the family  has
a close bond and the pending separation is having  a  negative  effect  upon
Shantae and the rest of the family.

Mood: Shantae's mood is gradually improving,  with  the  aid  of  medication
(prescribed Aripiprazole) , which has been increased to 10mg. She no  longer
has periods where she is. Completely vacant and is  able  to  interact  with
the family.

...

    20. There was discussion before the Upper Tribunal regarding  the  role
        of the children's father who lives in Birmingham, but whom  it  was
        claimed  by  Pamela  White  is  unreliable  and  who  provides   no
        maintenance for the children.  It was also said by Mrs White in her
        evidence that if any issues arise concerning the children his  view
        appears to be that as she is the mother, she should  sort  it  out.
        Contact occurs between Shantae and Shannoi and their father at  the
        house, but it is said to be infrequently  and  occurs  whenever  he
        decides to turn up.  There is occasional telephone  contact,  which
        has to be through Mrs White as  she  is  the  only  person  in  the
        household with a mobile telephone.
    21. There is also within the bundle two letters written by the children
        themselves, expressing the feelings  they  have  for  their  sister
        Shanice and expressing their wish that she be allowed to remain  in
        the United Kingdom.
    22. It is also accepted that there is an uncle and  cousins  living  in
        Redditch, a small town about 15 miles to the south of Birmingham.
    23. All the documentary evidence has been taken into  account  even  if
        not specifically referred to in this decision.


Discussion

    24.  There  remain  two  aspects  of  this  appeal  requiring  detailed
        consideration, the first being whether the  appellant  is  able  to
        succeed by satisfying the freestanding provision of section 117B(6)
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which  is  applicable
        in non-deportation cases, where a person liable to  removal  has  a
        genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a  'qualifying
        child' ('qualifying child' means a child under the age  of  18  and
        who is a British citizen, or has lived in the United Kingdom for  a
        continuous period of seven years or more),  and  it  would  not  be
        reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK.
    25. It is not disputed that Shante and Shannoi are qualifying  children
        as they are both under the age of 18 years and British citizens. It
        is not disputed that it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
        children to leave the United Kingdom to live in Jamaica.
    26. It is not disputed this is not  a  deportation  case  or  that  the
        appellant has a genuine subsisting relationship with the children.
    27. The  issue  in  relation  to  section  117B  (6)  is  whether  that
        relationship is a 'parental relationship'.
    28. It is accepted a person can satisfy  this  definition  even  though
        they do not have "Parental Responsibility" as that term is  defined
        in the Children Act 1989.
    29. In the immigration context, this question  was  considered  by  the
        Upper Tribunal in a judicial review case  reported  as  R  (on  the
        application of RK) (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR  [2016]
        UKUT  00031,  upon  which  the  parties  place  reliance.  In  that
        judgement it was held that:

           i) It is not necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
              responsibility"  in  law  for  there  to  exist  a   parental
              relationship;
          ii) Whether  a  person  who  is  not  a biological parent is in a
              "parental relationship" with a  child  for  the  purposes  of
              s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
              depends on the individual circumstances and whether the  role
              that individual plays establishes  he  or  she  has  "stepped
               into  the  shoes"  of  a  parent;
         iii) Applying  that  approach,  apart  from   the   situation   of
              split  families  where relationships  between  parents   have
              broken  down   and   an   actual   or  de  facto  step-parent
              exists,  it  will  be  unusual,  but  not   impossible,   for
              more  than  two  individuals     to     have   a    "parental
              relationship"  with   a  child.  However,  the  relationships
              between a child  and  professional  or  voluntary  carers  or
              family friends are not "parental relationships".


    30. The  Upper  Tribunal   reiterated   in  Ortega   (remittal;   bias;
        parental  relationship) [2018] UKUT  298  that  if  a  third  party
        caring for a child claims to be a step-parent,  the  existence   of
        such  a  relationship  will  depend   on   all   the  circumstances
        including  whether  or  not   there   are   others   (usually   the
        biological  parents)  who  have  such a   relationship   with   the
        child  also.    It  is unlikely that  a  person  will  be  able  to
        establish they have taken on the role  of   a   parent   when   the
        biological  parents  continue  to  be  involved   in   the  child's
        life as the child's parents.
    31. In this case the appellant claims to have "stepped into the  shoes"
        of a parent. Although the children's father appears  to  have  very
        little active involvement in the children's lives, he does see them
        for occasional contact, communicates with them  on  the  telephone,
        and has an established relationship with them as  their  biological
        father, which satisfies the definition  of  a  subsisting  parental
        relationship in law.
    32. I find of more significance is the fact that the primary  carer  of
        the children is their mother, with whom they have always lived  and
        with whom they continue to live.  The  evidence  given  before  the
        Upper Tribunal relating to an incident where one  of  the  children
        had to be taken to hospital as  a  matter  of  emergency  was  that
        contact was made  with  the  appellant's  mother  at  work  by  the
        appellant, and that it was Mrs White who was the responsible person
        who attended the  hospital  and  made  all  relevant  decisions  in
        relation to this issue.
    33. It is also clear from reading the  evidence  that  the  appellant's
        mother has involvement with the children, including  shopping  with
        them and doing all that she can  for  them  in  the  time  that  is
        available to her as a result of her work commitments. It  is  clear
        that Mrs White has and exercises parental responsibility  over  the
        children.
    34. In SSHD v VC (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 1967 it  was   said   that
        to  have  a "genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship"  the
         parent  must  have  a "subsisting" role in  personally   providing
        at  least  some  element  of  direct parental care  to  the  child.
        The Court of Appeal also held that each  of  the  words  "genuine",
        "subsisting" and "parental" referred to a  separate  and  essential
        quality of the relationship.
    35. The question of fact in this case is whether it is  established  on
        the evidence that the nature of the relationship the appellant  has
        with her stepsisters is one of the right quality,  in  that  rather
        than being  a  normal  sibling  relationship  where  the  appellant
        provides additional support within the family unit  to  assist  her
        mother and siblings as any older child would do a result of parents
        working commitments, the appellants role is more substantial.
    36. Whilst the appellant may cook for  the  children,  help  them  with
        their homework if required, and also cook for her  mother,  I  find
        these tasks are clearly done under the guidance  and  authority  of
        Mrs White. It was not made out the appellant has 'stepped into  the
        shoes of a parent'. I find Mrs White is the  person  with  parental
        care responsibilities, with whom the children live, who has neither
        abdicated nor  given  over  responsibility  for  making  the  major
        decisions in in the  children's  lives  or  for  the  care  of  the
        children at the required level to the appellant. The primary  carer
        of the children is their mother  who  looks  after  them  with  the
        appellants help.
    37. Whilst there is evidence from the school that  both  the  appellant
        and Mrs  White  appear  as  named  contacts  in  the  event  of  an
        emergency,  this  does  not  establish  the  required   degree   of
        relationship as often neighbours or friends may be given as contact
        details if the parent cannot be  contacted.  This  material  is  in
        accordance with the claim of the appellant that when  the  children
        were younger she assisted in getting them to school  and  back  but
        that is not a situation that exists at this point in time  now  the
        children are much older.
    38. I do not doubt the appellant's role  in  assisting  her  mother  is
        invaluable, but I do not find the appellant has established on  the
        evidence the existence of a 'subsisting parental relationship'  and
        cannot therefore satisfy the requirements  of  section  117B(6)  is
        2002 Act.
    39. It was not made out there are any insurmountable obstacles  to  the
        appellant returning to Jamaica and re-establishing herself or  that
        the appellant can succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  or  any  other
        provision of the Immigration Rules.
    40. The key issue in this appeal is that highlighted by Mr Pipe in  his
        submissions, in that even if section 117B(6) is not  satisfied  the
        Tribunal still has to consider the proportionality of the decision,
        see Runa v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2020]  EWCA
        Civ 514.
    41. It is not disputed that the appellant has family life recognised by
        Article 8 ECHR as Mrs White is her natural biological  mother,  she
        lives in her mother's household and is dependent  upon  the  family
        and financial support of her mother and  has  as  yet  to  form  an
        independent unit of her own.  I  also  find  the  relationship  the
        appellant has with her siblings will engage Article 8 ECHR.
    42. The primary consideration and a starting point  for  assessing  the
        proportionality of the  decision  is  the  best  interests  of  the
        children. The appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  for  seven
        years,  her  British  half-sisters  are  14  and   11   years   old
        respectively, and the appellant has been part of  the  family  unit
        for most of their lives.
    43. As noted above, Shantae suffers from mental health problems and  is
        on medication and in the opinion of the author of the  letter  from
        Forward Thinking Birmingham and the Independent Social Worker,  the
        appellant's support is vital for Shantae to cope and move forward.
    44.  The  appellant's   half-sister,   Shannoi,   has   Mild   Learning
        Difficulties  and  Special  Educational  Needs  and  there  is   an
        identified need for the child to continue to receive support.
    45. The appellant fulfils a very practical role  in  the  care  of  her
        sisters under the direction of her mother which the evidence  shows
        allows the family to function.
    46. There is also further evidence by way of a letter from Dr  Mohammed
        Hakim, Locum Consultant Psychiatrist, which stresses the importance
        of the appellant being present to support Shantae.
    47. The appellant's mother works very long unsociable  hours  as  noted
        above in order to support the family and  the  prohibition  on  her
        making any claim upon public funds  means  without  such  financial
        resources  the  family  will  not  be  able  to  cope,  leading  to
        destitution and a situation contrary to the child's best  interests
        at every level. Although Mr Tan in his submissions argued that  the
        prohibition did not prevent  Mrs  White  from  seeking  alternative
        employment, which is correct, there was  insufficient  evidence  or
        detailed  cross-examination   to   establish   that   Mrs   White's
        qualifications or personal abilities mean she is able to  secure  a
        position at a level other than  that  of  the  jobs  she  currently
        undertakes.
    48. At this stage, although the children are getting older and may  not
        be far away from being independent and able to care for  themselves
        as  'latchkey kids' if their mother worked a normal 9-to-5  job  as
        many do, this is not Mrs  White's  work  pattern  and  I  find  the
        children having to be without proper support in such an environment
        at this time would have a significant detrimental impact upon them.
    49. I accept the submission of Mr Pipe that on the facts this is a case
        where the compelling circumstances of the  appellant's  case  means
        that weight can be given to her private and family  life  following
        Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  UKSC
        58.
    50. In Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC
        74 Lord Hodge stated at [10-11]:

        10.  In their written case counsel for Mr  Zoumbas  set  out  legal
             principles which were relevant in this  case  and  which  they
             derived  from  three  decisions  of  this  court,  namely ZH
             (Tanzania) (above), H  v  Lord  Advocate 2012  SC  (UKSC)
             308 and H(H)  v   Deputy   Prosecutor   of   the   Italian
             Republic [2013] 1 AC 338. Those principles are not  in  doubt
             and Ms Drummond on behalf of the Secretary of  State  did  not
             challenge them. We paraphrase them as follows:

             (1)  The best interests of a child are an integral part of the
                  proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
             (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a  child
                  must be a primary consideration, although not  always  the
                  only primary consideration; and the child's best interests
                  do not of themselves have  the  status  of  the  paramount
                  consideration;
             (3)  Although the best interests of a child can be  outweighed
                  by the cumulative effect of other considerations, no other
                  consideration  can   be   treated   as   inherently   more
                  significant;
             (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the
                  best interests  of  a  child  in  different  ways,  it  is
                  important to ask oneself the right questions in an orderly
                  manner in order to avoid the risk that the best  interests
                  of a child  might  be  undervalued  when  other  important
                  considerations were in play;
             (5)  It is important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
                  circumstances and of what is in a child's  best  interests
                  before  one  asks  oneself  whether  those  interests  are
                  outweighed by the force of other considerations;
             (6)  To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
                  examination of all relevant factors when the interests  of
                  a child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and
             (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for  which  he  or
                  she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

       11. These principles arise from the United  Kingdom's  international
           obligations under the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
           the Child, and in particular article 3.1 which provides:

           "In all  actions  concerning  children,  whether  undertaken  by
           public or private social welfare institutions,  courts  of  law,
           administrative  authorities  or  legislative  bodies,  the  best
           interests of the child shall be a primary consideration."


           That general principle of international law has influenced the
           way in which the
           Strasbourg court has interpreted the ECHR: Neulinger v
           Switzerland (2010) 28
           BHRC 706, para 131.

    51. I accept that the weight of evidence supports a finding that it  is
        in the best interests of the two  minor  British  citizen  children
        that the care and support provided to them by the appellant at this
        time should be  allowed  to  continue  in  the  absence  of  viable
        alternatives.
    52.  The  best  interests  of  the  children  are  not,  however,   the
        determinative factor. It is a very important matter and,  as  noted
        above, a primary consideration.  The  appellant  can  only  have  a
        limited expectation of being able to remain in the  United  Kingdom
        and the mitigating factors relied upon by Mr Tan against the weight
        that could be given to the children's best interests  included  the
        children's father's presence in the  United  Kingdom,  the  support
        they could receive from the school,  mental  health  professionals,
        possible  family  cover  including  from  the  family  in  Redditch
        (although there is no evidence this is the case in reality or  that
        such care would be sufficient), and the theoretical ability of  Mrs
        White to change her work pattern.
    53. When weighing these competing arguments together, including  giving
        appropriate  weight  to  the  public  interest,  I  find  the  best
        interests of the children do carry  greater  weight  especially  in
        light of the substantial negative impact upon them of the appellant
        being removed in combination with Mrs White's working pattern which
        it has not been established she is able  to  realistically  change.
        Accordingly, I allow the appeal.
    54. It is for the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the  nature  and
        duration of any leave granted to  the  appellant.  This  appeal  is
        allowed on the basis of current needs at the date of  the  hearing.
        As the children get older they will become far more independent and
        able to meet their own needs and exist  safely  within  the  family
        unit. The eldest child is already a 'young person' (age  group  14-
        17) and the youngest is already 11 years of age. That is,  however,
        not a matter for this Tribunal.


Decision

    55. I allow the appeal.

Anonymity.

    56. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    57. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated: 30 March 2021














