
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02392/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 July 2021                            |On 23 July 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             MAH JABEEN ABDULLAH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood instructed by Zenith Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Mensah (the Judge) promulgated on  19  November  2020,  in
        which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 5 November 1987.
     3. The Judge records the hearing  being  conducted  remotely  with  no
        appearance by a representative for the  respondent  and  the  Judge
        only receiving submissions from counsel for the appellant.
     4. Those  submissions  are  noted  by  the  Judge  in  her  Record  of
        Proceeding as being:

           'This was a float. It was listed for a CVP. It was converted to
           a telephone hearing as no live evidence being given and
           submissions only by Counsel, at counsel's request. The Home
           office have confirmed through my clerk Abdullah, they are
           content for the appeal to be dealt with in their absence.


           Checked who was present? Only Counsel


           [No interpreter needed as confirmed in the Directions of Judge
           Monaghan dated 29.07.2020]


           Criminal offence to record and publish in public or in private
           these proceedings or any court communication explained.


           Counsel submission:


           Appellant's statement 4th paragraph dated 14.10.2019 confirms
           this was her 3rd application for visa extension. She had not
           passed the English language test. She made it clear in the
           online application she was applying for the extension because
           couldn't pass English language. In the Rules allows for
           extension on that basis but Mr Mahmoud couldn't say which rule.
           If didn't meet rule he argued the Respondent could have granted
           discretionary leave as they had a British child and now have two
           British children. He asked me to allow the appeal.'

     5. The Judge in the determination at [7] considers  paragraph  284  of
        the Immigration Rules to see whether  there  is  provision  for  an
        extension of stay as a spouse in the United Kingdom in which it was
        noted that to benefit from such an extension an applicant  will  be
        required to provide the relevant  English-language  certificate  or
        fall within one of the available exceptions. The Judge  notes  that
        the rule permits an extension  for  up  to  2  years  provided  the
        criteria in paragraph 284 are met.  The  Judge  considers  guidance
        provided by the Secretary of State before concluding at [10 - 13]:


           "10.   The Appellant has been granted two periods of  30  months
              so far and has still been unable to pass the English language
              test. In the Appellant's witness statement, she says  she  is
              working hard to pass but gives no further details.  There  is
              no evidence before me and there was no  evidence  before  the
              Respondent upon which it could be said there were exceptional
              compassionate  circumstances  that  prevent   the   Appellant
              passing the test or any physical  or  mental  condition  that
              would also prevent the same.
           11.    The Appellant and her husband have two  British  children
              aged two years and one born in June 2020.  They  all  say  in
              their witness statements is that they are all living  happily
              in the United Kingdom. They failed to file any evidence  upon
              which  I  can  properly  assess  whether  it  would  not   be
              reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the  United
              Kingdom. Mr Mahmood had no submission on the point. I am  not
              able  to  simply  assume  what  is  or  is  not   reasonable.
              Therefore, the Appellant has failed to show she falls  within
              EX.1 in relation to  her  position  as  a  parent.  The  same
              situation applies to her position as a partner. No  obstacles
              have been raised,  never  mind  insurmountable  obstacles  as
              required.
           12.    Given they have completely failed to address the relevant
              issues with evidence. I also find there  are  no  exceptional
              circumstances which warrant departure outside the Rules.  The
              Respondent's  decision  is  entirely  proportionate  on  that
              basis. The Appellant has not filed a  shred  of  evidence  to
              show she faces very significant obstacles to  integration  in
              Pakistan under 276 ADE and does not meet  any  of  the  other
              criteria and again no exceptional circumstances are raised. I
              find the appeal fails under  both  family  and  private  life
              considerations."


     6. The appellant sought permission to appeal, asserting the  reasoning
        of the Judge for not accepting the appellant's case  is  inadequate
        and insufficient when all documents in support of  the  application
        had been submitted. It is asserted the appellant did not apply  for
        ILR only an extension for extra time to pass English language  test
        which the appellant had had difficulty  doing  as  a  result  of  a
        difficult  pregnancy.  The   Grounds   assert   removal   will   be
        disproportionate  and  that  the  respondent  could  have  put  the
        appellant on a 10-year route which it is  suggested  was  a  normal
        response to those who have British children. The Grounds assert the
        Judge did not consider  exceptional  and  compelling  circumstances
        properly and failed to  undertake  a  structured  approach  to  the
        proportionality assessment.
     7. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on 29 December 2020  on  the  basis  it  is  arguable  the
        Tribunal  erred  in  failing   to   carry   out   the   article   8
        proportionality   assessment,   taking   into   consideration   the
        appellant's young children and the  difficult  pregnancy  with  her
        second child. The grant states that that was the only  ground  that
        was arguable.

Error of law

     8. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Mehmood repeated the  claim  that  the
        appellant had not applied for ILR but only for an extension of  her
        leave to enable her to pass the English language test, after  which
        a settlement claim would be made.
     9. Whilst that is not disputed, there is  no  appeal  against  refusal
        under the Immigration  Rules  and  the  only  basis  on  which  the
        appellant could challenge the refusal was on human rights grounds.
    10. The grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  specifically
        assert that article  8  had  not  been  "applied  in  its  intended
        spirit". This was clearly a human rights appeal before the Judge.
    11. The Judge notes the fact the appellant applied for an extension but
        the fact the appellant had indicated in the  application  that  she
        required an extension to enable her to pass English  language  test
        does not mean that the Secretary of State was bound to  grant  such
        an  extension,  especially  in  circumstances  where  two  previous
        extensions had been granted.
    12. The refusal letter dated 6 February 2020 sets out reasons  why  the
        appellant's  application  failed,  noting  the  application  of  14
        October 2019 was a human rights claim applying for leave to  remain
        under Appendix FM on the basis of family life with the  appellant's
        partner. The refusal gives clear reasons as to  why  the  appellant
        was not entitled to a grant of leave under either the 5-year or 10-
        year route. The Judge clearly reviewed all the available  evidence,
        applicable law, and sets out her findings, which are  supported  by
        adequate reasons. The Judge was not entitled to speculate,  and  on
        the basis of the limited evidence made  available  no  legal  error
        material to the decision has been  made  out  in  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal.
    13. If the appellant wishes to seek leave to remain on any other basis,
        i.e. as  a  parent,  it  will  be  necessary  for  her  to  provide
        sufficient evidence with the  application  to  enable  an  informed
        decision to be made or, if an appeal against a decision arises,  to
        provide sufficient evidence to enable a judge to assess the  merits
        of a claim as a whole. The difficulty for the Judge in this  appeal
        is that the evidence was very limited  as  noted  in  the  decision
        under challenge.

Decision

    14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    15. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 7 July 2021












