
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02724/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 May 2017                        |On 13 June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     ZU
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Abebrese, promulgated on 14 October 2016,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


  2. Given the issue raised by the Appellant in  relation  to  his  fear  of
     return to Pakistan, I have made an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "It is an arguable  error  of  law  that  the  Appellant's  adjournment
     application made by email before  the  hearing  as  instructed  by  the
     Tribunal administration (a copy of an email which was  sent  is  lodged
     with these grounds) was not considered  timeously  before  the  hearing
     took place to allow time for the Appellant to  retrieve  his  documents
     from his previous agents.  The documentary evidence and the Appellant's
     oral evidence may have made a material difference to the outcome or  to
     the fairness of the proceedings."


  4. The Appellant was not legally represented.  I explained  the  remit  of
     the Tribunal's jurisdiction, that I  was  considering  whether  or  not
     there was an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
     The Appellant stated that he had not seen the decision  of  the  First-
     tier Tribunal.  I provided  him  with  a  copy,  and  referred  to  the
     relevant paragraphs.  I went through the issues which were  before  me.
     The Appellant confirmed that he understood.  I heard brief  submissions
     from Mr. Nath and from the Appellant.  I reserved my decision.


Error of Law


  5. I find that on 17 August 2016 the Appellant sent an urgent request  for
     an adjournment to the  Tribunal.   I  have  carefully  considered  this
     document.  It states that the Appellant telephoned the Tribunal  on  16
     August 2016 at 16:30.  He was told by the advisor to whom he  spoke  to
     write to the judge who could decide  the  adjournment  request  of  the
     Appellant's hearing.  It is not clear how this  first  request  for  an
     adjournment was communicated to the Tribunal.  It appears that  it  was
     sent by fax, but there is no return fax number.  The  Appellant  stated
     that he could not afford any longer to pay his solicitor  who  had  not
     given him any update relating to his case.   He  therefore  decided  to
     contact the court directly.  When he called the court he  was  informed
     that the hearing would be held on 19 August 2016  at  Taylor  House  at
     10:00am.  He stated that he was advised to send an adjournment  request
     to the court as soon as possible and to start gathering his  documents.
     He asked for some time to rearrange his  documents  so  that  he  could
     represent his case himself.


  6. There is no indication in the record of the telephone conversation that
     the Appellant was told that he should not attend on 19 August 2016, the
     date  of  the  hearing.   It  is  clear  from  the  Appellant's  letter
     requesting an adjournment that he was  aware  of  the  date,  time  and
     location of the hearing.  This letter was sent on 17 August  2016,  two
     days prior to the hearing date.


  7. The file then indicates that this adjournment request was refused.   It
     states that the Appellant should attend  to  explain  why  the  hearing
     should be adjourned.  A note made on the file states that the  Tribunal
     tried to contact the Appellant at 16:38  on  18  August  2016  but  the
     number given to the Tribunal  was  not  recognised.   Therefore  on  19
     August  2016  notice  was  sent  to  the  Appellant  stating  that  his
     adjournment request had been refused.


  8. An email which contains exactly the same text as the fax referred to in
     [5] above was emailed to the Tribunal on 18 August 2016.  It  indicates
     that it was sent at 17:35, by which time the Tribunal had already tried
     to contact the Appellant by phone as set  out  above.   Had  the  first
     document been sent via email it is likely that the Appellant could have
     been contacted, but it appears that he did not email the Tribunal until
     17:35 on 18 August 2016, a day prior to the hearing.


  9. While I accept that the notice of the refusal of  the  adjournment  was
     sent on the date of the hearing, it is clear from  the  file  that  the
     Tribunal attempted to contact the Appellant on 18 August 2016, the  day
     prior to the hearing, and it is also  clear  from  the  file  that  the
     Appellant was aware of the date, time and location of the hearing.


 10. Therefore I find that in the circumstances where the Appellant knew  of
     the time and date and location of his  hearing,  and  in  circumstances
     where  he  had  not  received  any  response  to  his  request  for  an
     adjournment, he should have attended the hearing.  The fax setting  out
     his application for an adjournment was not placed before the judge  who
     decided his appeal, but it had been placed before a judge on 18  August
     2016 and the application  had  been  refused  on  the  basis  that  the
     Appellant should attend  the  hearing  to  explain  why  he  needed  an
     adjournment.


 11. I therefore find that although this application for an adjournment  was
     not placed before the judge who decided the appeal, the file which  was
     before the judge  indicated  that  the  adjournment  request  had  been
     refused and that an attempt had been made to contact the Appellant.   I
     find that, given the timing of the application for an adjournment,  the
     Tribunal  dealt  with  it  expeditiously.   In  the  absence   of   any
     confirmation that his hearing had been adjourned, the Appellant  should
     have attended the hearing.  He has not explained why he did not  attend
     the hearing.


 12. I have considered whether any error, if  there  was  an  error  in  the
     judge's continuing to proceed in the absence of  the  Appellant,  would
     have made a material difference to the outcome of the appeal.


 13. The Appellant had a right of appeal  against  the  decision  under  the
     immigration rules.  The application was refused because the Appellant's
     Tier 4 Sponsor was not on the Sponsor register on 30 June 2015.  I have
     carefully considered the  grounds  of  appeal,  the  decision  and  the
     evidence of the Appellant at the hearing before me.


 14. In the grounds of appeal it states:


         "Although in the notice of refusal it is  mentioned  the  appellant
         was informed at (sic) the college being suspended  and  allowed  60
         days to obtain a new CAS, it was never  served  to  the  appellant.
         The appellant called several times to the Home  Office  to  explain
         the situation but the appellant never  got  any  letter  from  Home
         Office."


 15. At paragraph 12 of the decision the evidence which was before the judge
     is set out.  This includes a letter sent  to  the  Appellant  dated  23
     April 2015, and a "track and trace" receipt dated 25  April  2015.   In
     paragraph 13 the judge states:


         "On 23 April 2015 the appellant was informed of this  and  that  he
         was allowed 60 days to obtain a new  sponsor  and  Confirmation  of
         Acceptance for Studies, however he failed to respond accordingly".


 16. The judge states in paragraph 14:  "I do make a finding therefore  that
     the respondents having made a decision to suspend the appellant's  Tier
     4 sponsor that the appellant had not taken the appropriate steps having
     been given notice to remedy the situation."


 17. At the hearing before me I explained to the Appellant that, even  if  I
     were to find that there was an error of law in the judge proceeding  to
     hear the appeal, in respect  of  the  decision  under  the  immigration
     rules, the Appellant could not have been successful given the  evidence
     before the judge that a 60 day letter had been sent  to  the  Appellant
     and also that it had been signed for by the Appellant.   The  Appellant
     then said, contrary to what is stated in the grounds of appeal, that he
     had received the 60 day letter dated 23 April 2015 from the Respondent.




 18. I find that the grounds of appeal are incorrect when  they  state  that
     the 60 day letter was not served on the  Appellant.   It  is  therefore
     also incorrect that the Appellant called the Home Office to explain.  I
     will deal later with the reasons given by the Appellant for why he  did
     not respond to the 60 day letter.  I find that the Respondent acted  in
     accordance with her policy.  As it was the actions of the Respondent in
     removing the Tier 4 Sponsor licence which caused the Appellant's CAS to
     be invalid, in accordance with her policy, she gave  the  Appellant  60
     days in which to find a new Tier 4 Sponsor.   The Appellant received  a
     60 day letter from the Sponsor, but he did not obtain a new  CAS  prior
     to the expiry of that 60 days.  I therefore find that  the  Appellant's
     appeal under the immigration rules could not have  succeeded  even  had
     the Appellant had a hearing.


 19. The judge did not consider Article 8, and  I  have  considered  whether
     this failure amounts to a material error.  I have  already  found  that
     the grounds of appeal are inaccurate and misleading given the  evidence
     of the Appellant before me that he had  received  the  60  day  letter.
     Further I note that the grounds of appeal state that the  Appellant  is
     from Bangladesh when he is from Pakistan.


 20. In the very general grounds set out at the  start  of  the  grounds  of
     appeal document, (4), it states that the decision is "unlawful  because
     it is incompatible with the right (sic) under the ECHR" and at  (6)  it
     states that "the decision to remove the appellants (sic)  from  the  UK
     which is breach of  his  human  right  (sic)  and  against  immigration
     rules".  In the more particular grounds of appeal set out at paragraphs
     1 to 4 there is no reference to the ECHR,  let  alone  reference  to  a
     specific Article of the ECHR.  There is no  reference  at  all  in  the
     grounds of appeal to Article 8.


 21. In relation to anything set out in the grounds of  appeal  which  could
     point to an Article 8 claim, it states that "the appellant is in the UK
     for 8 years and is manage (sic) to show an established presence in  the
     country".  However it then states "the appellant  has  a  progress  and
     residency over 12 months".  The grounds are inconsistent and vague, and
     I find that there is no clear Article 8 claim made in  the  grounds  of
     appeal.


 22. In relation to Article 8, Mr. Nath submitted that  it  would  not  have
     made a material difference as the requirements of Article 8  under  the
     immigration rules could not have been met by the Appellant.  Therefore,
     given the  evidence  before  the  judge,  it  would  not  have  made  a
     difference had the Appellant had an oral hearing as the Appellant would
     not have met the requirements of the immigration rules.


 23. At the hearing the Appellant said that there was a  "critical  problem"
     to him staying in the United Kingdom, which was a  problem  back  home.
     His family had stopped supporting him owing to his  homosexuality.   He
     said that he had received threats from home.  He could not study in the
     UK because he had no financial support, but neither could he return  to
     Pakistan because his life would be in danger.  He said  that  this  was
     the first time that he had raised the issue of his homosexuality before
     the Tribunal or before the Home Office.  He said he had never raised it
     with his solicitor.


 24. I find that this is an entirely new issue which  the  Appellant  raised
     for the first time at the  hearing  before  me.   I  explained  to  the
     Appellant again that the remit  of  my  jurisdiction  was  to  consider
     whether there was an error of law in the decision, not to  decide  what
     is essentially a fresh asylum claim.   The  issue  of  the  Appellant's
     sexuality is a new issue which has not been raised either with the Home
     Office or with the Tribunal.


 25. Given that it was an entirely new matter, even had the Appellant raised
     it at an oral hearing, it would not have been  open  to  the  judge  to
     consider it in accordance with  section  85(5)  of  the  2002  Act,  as
     amended by section 15 of the 2014 Act.   There  is  nothing  about  the
     Appellant's sexuality in the grounds of appeal, which is not surprising
     given that the Appellant accepted that he had  not  raised  this  issue
     before.  The judge would not have been able to take his sexuality  into
     account.


 26. Neither is there any reference in the grounds of appeal to any  private
     life which the Appellant has built up in the UK.  There is no reference
     to the Appellant not being able to continue his studies due to  a  lack
     of support from his parents in Pakistan.  The Appellant has stated that
     this is the reason that he was not able to  find  a  new  college,  but
     there is no reference to this in the grounds of appeal.   There  is  no
     reference to there being any kind of claim  under  the  ECHR,  be  that
     Articles 2, 3 or 8.


 27. I therefore find that there is no material error of law in the  judge's
     failure to consider Article 8 given the  documents  before  him,  which
     include grounds of appeal which are at the best vague, and at the worst
     actively misleading, and given that the judge would not have been  able
     to consider the new matter of the Appellant's sexuality.


 28. I explained to the Appellant at the hearing that I could  not  consider
     his claim now and that, if he had a  genuine  fear  of  persecution  on
     return to Pakistan, the appropriate thing to do was  to  claim  asylum.
     It was explained that he could seek  advice  from  lawyers,  or  advice
     centres such as the CAB, but that he could also claim asylum in person.
      In order to make an appointment for a  screening  interview  to  claim
     asylum, the Appellant should call 0208 819 4524.   Further  information
     can be found at https://www.gov.uk/claim-asylum.


 29. I find that the Tribunal dealt appropriately with the Appellant's  very
     late application for an adjournment.  The Appellant was  never  advised
     not to attend the hearing.  He failed to attend although he  was  aware
     of the date, time and location of the hearing.  I have  set  out  above
     that  the  Appellant's  appeal  could  not  have  succeeded  under  the
     immigration rules.  I find that on the basis of the submissions  before
     him, the judge could not have allowed the appeal under Article  8.   He
     would not have been able to  consider  the  issue  of  the  Appellant's
     homosexuality as this is a new matter.  I  therefore  find  that,  even
     though the Appellant did not have a hearing, there is no material error
     of law in the decision.


Notice of Decision


 30. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and
     I do not set the  decision  aside.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
     Tribunal stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 13 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

