
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02109/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                            |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   J  F C
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer For
the Respondent:   Mr Holmes, Counsel, instructed by Adriana Immigration
Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home  Department.   JFC
    is the Respondent.  I shall retain the designations of the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier.

2.   The Respondent appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Henderson dated  26  October  2017  allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 23  January  2017  refusing
    him leave to remain and refusing his human rights application.

3.   The Appellant has previously had leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as a student, although that leave was at one time  curtailed.   He  was
    later granted a period of leave to remain  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules (ten year route) on the basis of his marriage  to  Ms
    S, and being a parent to their two children,  born  December  2013  and
    June 2015 respectively, both British citizens.  That grant of leave  to
    remain was from 18 August 2014 until  18  February  2017.   Before  the
    judge there was produced a  minute  of  the  Respondent's  reasons  for
    granting  that  leave  to  remain,  being  found  at  page  94  of  the
    Appellant's bundle as follows:

         "EX.1(a)


         DNA evidence proves that applicant is father for  (MZFC).   Child's
         passport provided to prove he is  a  Brit  cit.   Applicant  has  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a Brit cit. child
         who is under the age of 18,  living  in  the  UK  and  it  will  be
         unreasonable to expect this child to leave".


4.   The Appellant made a further application for  leave  to  remain  on  23
    January 2017 on the same basis.

5.   In the Respondent's decision of 23 January 2017 the Respondent  refused
    the application on the grounds that the Appellant did not  satisfy  the
    suitability requirements of  Section  S-LTR.1.6  of  Appendix  FM.  The
    Respondent alleged that the Appellant had used a proxy test  taker  for
    an English language test taken  on  15  November  2011,  and  that  the
    Appellant  had  used  this  fraudulently  obtained  certificate  in  an
    application for entry clearance from Islamabad dated  9  January  2012.
    The Respondent formed the following view:

         "In fraudulently  obtaining  a  TOEIC  certificate  in  the  manner
         outlined above, you willingly participated in what was  clearly  an
         organised and serious attempt, given the  complexity  of  the  test
         centre itself, to defraud the SSHD and others.  In  doing  so,  you
         displayed a flagrant disregard for the public  interest,  according
         to which migrants are required to have a certain level  of  English
         language ability in order  to  facilitate  social  integration  and
         cohesion, as well as to reduce  the  likelihood  of  them  being  a
         burden on the taxpayer.


         Accordingly I am satisfied that your presence in the United Kingdom
         is not conducive to the public good because your conduct  makes  it
         undesirable to allow you to remain in the UK.  Your application  is
         therefore refused under S-LTR.1.6 of the Immigration Rules".


6.   The Respondent considered  the  Appellant's  potential  entitlement  to
    leave to remain as a partner but held that he was not entitled to leave
    to remain under that  route  because  of  the  finding  on  grounds  of
    suitability already set out.  Further, the Appellant was  not  entitled
    to leave to remain on private life grounds under  paragraph  276ADE(1),
    again on the basis that he did not meet  the  suitability  requirements
    under S-LTR.1.6.  Additionally, it was held that  there  would  not  be
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Pakistan.

7.    The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the matter coming before the judge on 5 October 2017.

8.   The Appellant gave evidence.  The judge set  out  in  some  detail  the
    nature of the evidence which was  relied  upon  by  the  Respondent  to
    support the proposition that the Appellant had used a proxy test taker.
     At paragraphs [30]-[40] of the decision the judge noted  a  number  of
    shortcomings in that evidence.  However, at the end of  paragraph  [40]
    the judge held as follows:

         "40. On balance bearing in mind the standard of proof my conclusion
             is that the Appellant has not been straightforward and that he
             relied upon an additional test taken by a  proxy  in  November
             2011".


9.   The judge then considered what the consequences of that  finding  would
    be, as follows:

         "41. The further issue is whether the dishonesty is such  that  the
             Appellant should  have  been  refused  under  the  suitability
             requirements  in  paragraph   S-LTR.1.6.    The   Respondent's
             analysis of the Appellant's conduct was that he had  willingly
             participated in an organised and serious  attempt  to  defraud
             the SSHD and others.  The reasoning refers to migrants needing
             to have a  certain  level  of  English  to  facilitate  social
             integration and cohesion and to reduce the likelihood of  them
             being a burden on the taxpayer.  The current position is  that
             the Appellant speaks excellent English.  He has also  provided
             a certificate from Trinity College London showing that he  has
             been awarded a grade 5 distinction in an examination in spoken
             English which is at CEFR level  B1.1.   This  result  was  not
             questioned by the Respondent.  It is also  the  position  that
             the Appellant has now been resident for five  years  after  he
             entered in June  2012  and  has  been  working.   His  English
             knowledge is not a basis for refusal  with  reference  to  his
             suitability or on public interest grounds.


         42.  The reference to the attempt to 'defraud' the  SSHD  indicates
             an assumption by the  Respondent  of  criminal  activity.   My
             conclusion is that the Appellant has deceived or attempted  to
             deceive  the  authorities.   The  IDIs  for  considering   the
             eligibility  criteria  SLTR.1.6  note  that  the   criminality
             provisions  must  be  considered.   I  am  not  aware  of  the
             Appellant facing  any  criminal  proceedings  or  having  been
             convicted of any offence.  I have  indicated  that  there  are
             difficulties with the  evidence  provided  by  the  Respondent
             which mean that whilst there is sufficient evidence for me  to
             find that the civil standard of proof is met,  the  evidential
             requirements for a criminal conviction would appear to be much
             more difficult to meet given the obvious difficulties  of  the
             Respondent in  their  recordkeeping.   S-LTR.1.6  requires  an
             assessment  of  the   Appellant's   conduct,   character   and
             associations.  The evidence points to one serious incident  of
             dishonesty which the Appellant has sought to distance  himself
             from.  I have no evidence to suggest that he has been involved
             in any other dishonest activities or  that  his  character  or
             associations are such that his presence is  not  conducive  to
             the public good.  The weight of the evidence  provided  points
             to a conduct which is governed primarily  by  his  efforts  to
             provide for his wife and  two  young  children  and  that  his
             primary associations are with his family and his wife's family
             in the United Kingdom.  My conclusion is that the  use  of  S-
             LTR.1.6 was not an appropriate reason  for  refusal.   A  more
             appropriate provision may have been S-LTR.2.2 but this was not
             considered".


10.  The judge then considered the position of the Appellant and his  family
    in the United Kingdom, reminded  herself  at  [51]  that  she  had  not
    considered that the  Respondent  had  given  sufficient  reasoning  for
    refusing the Appellant leave to remain on the  grounds  of  suitability
    criteria; noted at [52] that  both  children  are  to  be  regarded  as
    "qualifying children" for the purposes of both Section EX  of  Appendix
    FM and under Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002, and directed herself, correctly, that the "remaining question
    is whether it  would  be  reasonable  for  them  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom"; the judge directed herself at [53] that a relevant  authority
    was MA (Pakistan) and Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and  MM  (Uganda)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 450; she noted that the question of reasonableness could  take
    account the position of the child and the conduct and  the  immigration
    history of the parents facing removal; and that in accordance  with  MA
    (Pakistan) there needed to be "strong reasons" for proceeding with  the
    removal once the qualifying requirement is satisfied; at [55] the judge
    again directed herself that the question before her was whether it  was
    reasonable for the children to leave the United Kingdom  to  travel  to
    Pakistan; she noted that the older child was now in nursery; she  noted
    at [56] that the Appellant's wife had spent a portion of her  life  and
    education in the United Kingdom, and that  her  two  brothers  and  one
    sister lived in the United Kingdom, that at [57] the Appellant's wife's
    mother was ill with cancer and that the Appellant's wife considered  it
    vital to live in close proximity to her mother; at [58] the judge  held
    that it was not reasonable for the children to remain here  with  their
    mother whilst the  Appellant  returned  to  Pakistan;  they  had  close
    emotional ties to their father and the judge did not  accept  that  the
    full benefits of that relationship and the development of their  family
    life  in  future  could  be  sustained  simply  by  modern   means   of
    communication and visits; the judge ultimately found at [60]  that  the
    decision to refuse the Appellant leave to remain  and  to  require  his
    removal would not strike a fair balance between the private rights  and
    the interests of the Appellant, his wife and their two children on  the
    one hand and the public interest on the other.  The judge  allowed  the
    appeal.

11.  The Respondent applied for permission to appeal against  that  decision
    in grounds dated 26 April 2018 which argue, in summary, as follows:

         "(i) the judge misdirected herself in law in failing to  adequately
             consider that the Appellant has  a  poor  immigration  history
             given her finding that  deception  had  been  used;  obtaining
             leave to remain by deception is  a  criminal  offence  and  is
             evidence of criminality, even if there  is  no  conviction  as
             yet; accordingly there are powerful reasons in  this  case  to
             render it reasonable for family life to continue abroad;


          (ii)    the judge failed to identify compelling  circumstances  to
             justify consideration of whether the decision  amounted  to  a
             breach of Article 8".


12.  The Respondent initially applied for permission to appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal resulting in a refusal of permission dated 6 April  2018,
    but renewed his application on 26 April 2018. Permission to appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen in a decision dated 12 June 2018.



13.      Mr Holmes for the Appellant had provided  a  Rule  24  reply  which
    although Mr Tan did not have, a copy was made available to him.

14.  I heard submissions from Mr Tan who  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    His essential argument was that the judge had failed to  have  adequate
    regard to the dishonest behaviour of  the  Appellant  when  determining
    that the requirements of paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of the  Immigration  Rules
    were not met.  Mr  Tan  argued  that  the  positive  finding  that  the
    Appellant had used deception in obtaining the ETS certificate was to be
    treated seriously, representing as it did part of a co-ordinated effort
    at the time to subvert immigration control by the  use  of  proxy  test
    takers for English language tests.

15.  Questioned by me, Mr Tan agreed that paragraph  S-LTR.1.6  fell  within
    the category of suitability criteria which are said within Appendix  FM
    to be  mandatory,  but  also  accepted  that  S-LTR.1.6  also  included
    conditions which involved value judgments.  I opined, for example, that
    some requirements for the invocation of some of the paragraphs in S-LTR
    involved the consideration of simple precedent facts, e.g. at S-LTR.1.2
    the condition is that the applicant  is  currently  the  subject  of  a
    deportation order; that condition is either met, or not  met,  and  can
    clearly be established one way or  the  other.   However,  and  Mr  Tan
    agreed with me, the assessment as to whether or not a person's presence
    in the UK is not conducive to the public good because of their conduct,
    character, associations or other reasons making it undesirable to allow
    them to remain in the UK, involves  an  evaluative  exercise.   Mr  Tan
    agreed that the Tribunal, whether First-tier or Upper Tribunal,  has  a
    role in determining for itself whether the conditions of S-LTR.1.6  are
    met.  It was not simply a matter to review on public  law  grounds  the
    opinion of the Secretary of State.

16.  However, Mr  Tan  argued  that  even  though  the  judge  was  able  to
    substitute her own view as to whether or not S-LTR.1.6 should have been
    invoked, and whether its conditions were satisfied, he argued that  the
    judge had nonetheless failed to have adequate regard to the seriousness
    of the Appellant's deceptive behaviour.

17.  For his part, Mr Holmes defended the judge's decision.  I did not  need
    to hear very much from him in relation to the judge's decision as to S-
    LTR.1.6.

18.  However, I required some assistance from Mr Holmes in explaining to  me
    on exactly what basis the judge had purported to allow the  appeal,  as
    there did not appear to be a statement in explicit  terms  whether  the
    Appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules, for example,  whether  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to family life as between  the  Appellant
    and his partner continuing  outside  of  the  UK,  or  whether  Section
    EX.1(b) of Appendix FM was satisfied, i.e. that it was  not  reasonable
    to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

     Discussion

19.  I am persuaded  by  Mr  Holmes'  submission  that  the  Respondent  had
    accepted that it would not be reasonable to expect the older  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom when making the decision  to  grant  leave  to
    remain in 2014.  Further, it  was  clear  from  the  structure  of  the
    judge's decision, and the manner in which she directed herself in  law,
    that the judge was considering whether it would be reasonable to expect
    the Appellant's children to leave the  United  Kingdom,  and  that  her
    ultimate conclusion that the decision did not  strike  a  fair  balance
    between the private rights and interests of the Appellant  and  family,
    versus the public interest, did ultimately represent a finding that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's children to leave the
    United Kingdom.

20.  Although it would have  been  preferable  to  see  within  the  judge's
    decision a finding in terms that it was not reasonable for one or  both
    his children to be expected to leave the United Kingdom,  I  find  that
    such a finding has been made by the judge, reading the  decision  as  a
    whole, and in light of the history of the proceedings.

21.  I find that S-LTR.1.6 does involve an evaluative exercise on  the  part
    of the judge as to whether or not in their own opinion the requirements
    of that paragraph are met such as to  prevent  leave  to  remain  being
    granted to an applicant within the Rules.  I find in  relation  to  the
    present decision, the judge was entitled to make the decision  she  did
    on this issue.  The judge rightly observed that the Appellant  had  not
    been convicted of any criminal offence.  The judge clearly had in  mind
    the fact that the Appellant had exercised deception, describing  it  as
    one serious incident of dishonesty.  The judge did not  leave  anything
    material out of account in her assessment.  I find that the only  basis
    on which the Secretary of State can challenge the judge's  decision  is
    on grounds of perversity. Such a challenge is simply not made out.

22.  I find that the judge was entitled to come to the decision she  did  on
    the basis of the evidence before her, and in the light of the  findings
    of fact that she had made.

23.  I find that there was no error in law in the  judge  finding  that  the
    requirements of S-LTR.1.6 were not met, and that provision  should  not
    have been invoked by the Respondent.  Therefore, in the absence of  any
    other  relevant  challenge  by  the  Respondent  against  the   judge's
    decision, I find that the judge did not materially err in law in making
    her decision.

    Notice of Decision

24.  The making of the decision did not involve the making of  any  material
    error of law.

25.  The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.

26.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.


Signed                     Date 25.10.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The appeal concerns  a  human  rights  claim  and  the  interests  of  minor
children. Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                     Date 25.10.18
