
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02196/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th July 2017                        |On 3rd August 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                            Muhammad Adeel Ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel instructed by City Law Practice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on 3rd  January  1988.
    The Appellant first arrived in the UK on 17th July  2010  when  he  was
    given leave to enter as a Tier 4 (Student) Migrant until  6th  November
    2012 subsequently extended until 10th October  2015.   On  9th  October
    2015 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  as  a  family  member.
    That application was refused on 12th January 2016 for the reasons given
    in the Respondent's letter of that date.  The Appellant  appealed,  and
    his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nixon  (the
    Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 3rd  November  2016.   She  decided  to
    dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds for the reasons given in her
    Decision dated 13th November  2016.   The  Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and  on  19th  April  2017  such  permission  was
    granted but only on the first and third grounds set out in the  grounds
    of application.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal because  although  she  found  that  the
    Appellant had a family life with his wife and child resident in the UK,
    she also found that the decision of the Respondent would not amount  to
    a  breach  of  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR  rights  within   the
    Immigration Rules.  That decision  has  not  been  challenged  in  this
    appeal.  The Judge also found that the Respondent's  decision  did  not
    amount to a disproportionate breach of the Appellant's Article  8  ECHR
    rights outside the Immigration Rules as it was proportionate.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Ahmed submitted that the Judge had materially  erred
    in law in coming to the latter conclusion.  She had failed to give  any
    or sufficient weight to the best interests  of  the  Appellant's  child
    born on 30th July 2015.  That child was a British citizen, and  it  was
    not reasonable to expect her to leave the UK to live with  her  parents
    in Pakistan.  The Judge had failed to give sufficient analysis to  this
    aspect of the case.  The Judge had erred in her  consideration  of  the
    factors set out at Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 5. In response, Mrs Aboni argued that there was no such material error  of
    law.  She referred to her Rule 24 response and said that the grounds of
    application amounted to no more than a disagreement with  the  decision
    of the Judge.  The Judge had made clear findings  of  fact  which  were
    open to her on  the  evidence  before  her  and  had  carried  out  the
    necessary balancing exercise.

 6. I find no material error of law in the  decision  of  the  Judge.   The
    challenge is to the Judge's assessment of proportionality.   The  Judge
    carried out that assessment in accordance with the guidance provided in
    R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and I agree with the submission of Mrs
    Aboni that the Judge came to a conclusion which was open to her on  the
    evidence before her.  The Judge took  into  account  all  the  relevant
    evidence and demonstrated  that  she  had  carried  out  the  necessary
    balancing exercise.  It is not right that the Judge failed to treat the
    best interests of the Appellant's child  as  a  primary  consideration.
    The Judge took  those  best  interests  as  a  starting  point  but  in
    accordance with the decision in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC  4,  did  not
    treat those best interests as the sole determinative factor.  The Judge
    found that it would be reasonable for the Appellant's wife and child to
    relocate with him to Pakistan.  The Judge gave due weight to the public
    interest as  required  by  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  and  she
    comprehensively explained why that  interest  outweighed  the  personal
    circumstances attributable to the Appellant.  For these reasons I  find
    no material error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Dated   3rd August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

