
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02904/2019
                                                               HU/04081/2019
                                                               HU/04088/2019
                                                               HU/04086/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 2 August 2019                     |On 15th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SYEDA [F] + 3
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellants are wife, husband and  two  children,  all  citizens  of
    Pakistan.

 3. The respondent refused their application for leave to remain  on  human
    rights grounds by letter dated 29 January 2019, for these reasons:

       . not eligible for consideration in terms of family life;

       . requirements of the immigration rules, paragraph 276ADE, in respect
         of private life, not met;

       .  no  exceptional  circumstances,   and   no   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences, taking account of the best interests of the  children
         as a primary consideration;

       . nothing to substantiate alleged risk on return as Shia Muslims;

       . in so far as claim based on care given to Anisa Kazmi, aunt of  the
         second appellant, no evidence of medical need  for  care,  or  non-
         availability of care from NHS, social services, other relatives, or
         friends.

 4.  FtT  Judge  Agnew  allowed  the  appellants'  appeal  by  a   decision
    promulgated on 9 April 2019.  The decision has gone astray by repeating
    some of the numbering of its paragraphs, which has to be borne in  mind
    when referring to it.  The essential points of the decision are these:

         [11]     protection claim of no substance,  and  not  significantly
         pursued;

         [13]     case for appellants based on relationships with  aunt  and
         her family involving dependency going beyond normal emotional ties,
         and on exceptional circumstances;

         [14]     aunt feels vulnerable to and harassed  by  ex-husband  and
         his family,  immense  reassurance  from  presence  and  support  of
         nephew, closeness among their respective children;

         [22]     aunt a victim of domestic abuse and in fear  of  estranged
         husband, some security given by presence of her nephew;

         [23]     reasons for aunt  not  returning  to  England  not  clear,
         difficult to see why it would not  be  in  best  interests  of  her
         children to do so, and to be with extended family there;

         [24]     evidence not entirely reliable, and lacking, but first and
         second appellants provide "a  significant  amount  of  support  ...
         above the normal emotional ties of relatives  living  in  the  same
         vicinity ... exceptional circumstances ... which  involve  elements
         of dependency on" the first two appellants by aunt;

         [25]     "... a close family unit and all  will  be  affected,  not
         just the [appellants] but also Ms K and her children, if they  have
         to leave ...".

         [28]     third and fourth  appellants  young  enough  to  adapt  to
         Pakistan; interests of aunt's children also to be considered;

         [29]     "... in the best interests of all  the  children  of  this
         family that the children of the [first] appellant remain in the  UK
         albeit it would not be unreasonable for  them  to  accompany  their
         parents to Pakistan because with support they could  easily  adjust
         ...";

         [30]     no insurmountable obstacles to appellant and family  going
         to live in Pakistan; reasonable to expect them to do so.   "I  find
         there are exceptional circumstances ... which justify  an  argument
         for the appellant and her family remaining in the UK.  It  concerns
         me that they have changed the arguments over  time  ...  but  I  am
         looking at the evidence today and find it, just, sufficient to meet
         the  standard  of  proof  required  that  there   are   exceptional
         circumstances and that there are more than  normal  emotional  ties
         between these families as well as a degree of dependency";

         [31 - 33]     section 117B of the 2002 Act, no positive  right  can
         be obtained from  fluency  in  English  or  strength  of  financial
         resources; not financially independent; sources  of  income  "vague
         and somewhat questionable ... all accessing  free  public  services
         since  their  arrival.   I  decline  to  find  that  it  would   be
         unreasonable to expect the children to accompany their  parents  to
         Pakistan albeit on balance it is in their best interests to  remain
         in the UK ... ";

         [34]     "In the balancing exercise, it is clearly  in  the  public
         interest that the appellants be removed ...";

         [35]     "On the other side of the  scales  I  have  the  families'
         interests to consider.  The  appellant  and  her  husband  want  to
         remain.  Ms Kazmi wants them to  do  so.   They  provide  care  and
         support to a vulnerable woman  and  her  children  ....  There  are
         exceptional  circumstances  which  outweigh  the  public   interest
         considerations ... removal of the appellants is not  justified  and
         proportionate  when  weighed  against  the  interests  of  all  the
         individuals concerned".

 5. The SSHD's grounds  of  appeal  are  set  out  in  an  application  for
    permission  dated  18  April  2019.   Headed  as  "making  a   material
    misdirection in law of any material matter", the grounds say that there
    were no exceptional circumstances,  and  no  dependency  beyond  normal
    emotional ties.

 6. Permission was granted on 9 May 2019, on the view that arguably the FtT
    erred in its article 8 assessment, and in  particular  in  finding  the
    case exceptional.

 7. Mr  Govan  relied  on  the  grounds.   The  points  I  noted  from  his
    submissions were these:

      i) The SSHD's grounds were based on Agyarko.  The FtT cited that case,
         but its decision was not consistent with it.

     ii) The judge found  it  reasonable  for  the  children  to  return  to
         Pakistan.  Her sole reason for allowing the appeal was the help the
         second appellant gave his aunt.

    iii) The immigration rules did not provide a right to remain based on an
         extended family network.

     iv) The FtT did not go so far as finding the appellants to have  family
         life with Ms K, in the sense of  qualifying  for  protection  under
         article 8.

      v) If the decision was to be read as including such a finding, it  was
         not justified on the evidence.

     vi) The judge found clearly at [23] that Ms  K  had  another  practical
         option, and no good reason for not taking it.  She failed  to  deal
         with the respondent's submissions recorded at [13]  on  page  4  on
         other support available to Ms K, and  on  relationships  not  going
         beyond the norm.

    vii) The judge took no account of the  appellants'  unlawful  residence,
         and did not correctly apply the public interest considerations.

   viii) The decision should be set aside and reversed.

 8. The points I noted from Ms Loughran were these:

      i) The grounds did not formulate any error on any point  of  law,  but
         simply repeated submissions made to the FtT.

     ii) The judge did make a clear finding at [25] of ties going beyond the
         norm, which was key to the decision.  There was  one  family  unit,
         including the aunt and her children, for article 8  purposes.  [28]
         was to be read in the same way.

    iii) The SSHD's grounds and submissions overlooked the position of Ms  K
         at [25], as a victim of domestic  violence,  support  from  Women's
         Aid, her ex-husband's conviction and a  non-harassment  order,  and
         her need for major medical operations [although  not  supported  by
         medical evidence], all showing her need for support.

     iv) The FtT's finding at [30] of exceptional circumstances disclosed no
         error of law.

      v) At [35], referring to "the families' interests",  although  in  the
         plural, the FtT was deciding on the basis of only  one  family  for
         article 8 purposes.

     vi) The appellant in the FtT had referred to Dasgupta [2016] UKUT 00028
         on the  question  of  family  ties  going  beyond  the  usual  core
         relationships as "intensively fact sensitive".  That case was  also
         relevant to no error of law being found where  the  FtT  reached  a
         decision open to it, even if a more structured  approach  and  more
         extensive findings would have been preferable.

    vii) The sole basis of the decision  was  not,  as  the  respondent  had
         submitted, the support given by a nephew to his aunt.  The decision
         was also based on her having been a victim  of  domestic  violence,
         and on vulnerability.

   viii) The decision should stand.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The SSHD's grounds to some extent are repetition of the case put to the
    FtT, but in my view  they  raise  questions  relevant  at  this  stage:
    whether the FtT has made a finding of  family  life  going  beyond  the
    usual core, which would be an essential underpinning; if such a finding
    was made, whether the FtT has given reasons capable of  supporting  it;
    and whether the FtT has given reasons capable of supporting the finding
    of exceptional circumstances.

11. As both sides say that their position is supported by Agyarko,  I  find
    it useful to look at the current understanding of the general  approach
    to be taken to article 8.

12. Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11 are now to  be  read  in
    light both of the amendment of the immigration rules to reflect article
    8 (effective from 9 July 2012) and of the setting out in Part 5A of the
    2002 Act of public interest  considerations  (effective  from  28  July
    2014).

13. In Agyarko and Ikuga [2017] UKSC 11 two applicants sought to  challenge
    decisions of the SSHD that there were no "insurmountable obstacles"  to
    family life being carried on outside the UK, in terms of the rules, and
    no "exceptional circumstances" to  warrant  leave  outside  the  Rules.
    Lord Reed, giving the judgement of the court, considered the  decisions
    of the European court and the approach approved in deportation cases in
    Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, and continued:

         [57]     That approach is also appropriate when a court or tribunal
         is considering whether a refusal of leave to remain  is  compatible
         with  article  8  in  the  context  of  precarious   family   life.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether the refusal  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the removal of the person  in  question  against
         the impact on private and family life. In doing so, it should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.

         [58]     The expression "exceptional circumstances"  appears  in  a
         number of places in the Rules and the Instructions. Its use in  the
         part of  the  Rules  concerned  with  the  deportation  of  foreign
         offenders was considered in Hesham Ali. In the present context, as
         has been explained, it appears in the Instructions dealing with the
         grant of leave to remain in the UK outside the Rules.  Its  use  is
         challenged on the basis that the Secretary of State cannot lawfully
         impose  a   requirement   that   there   should   be   "exceptional
         circumstances", having regard  to  the  opinion  of  the  Appellate
         Committee of the House of Lords in Huang.

         [59]     As was explained in para 8 above, the case  of Huang was
         decided at a time when the Rules had not been  revised  to  reflect
         the requirements of article 8.  Instead,  the  Secretary  of  State
         operated arrangements under which effect was  given  to  article  8
         outside  the  Rules.  Lord  Bingham,  giving  the  opinion  of  the
         Committee, observed that the ultimate question  for  the  appellate
         immigration authority was whether the refusal of leave to enter  or
         remain, in circumstances where the life of  the  family  could  not
         reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account
         of all considerations weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudiced
         the family life of the applicant in a manner  sufficiently  serious
         to amount to a breach of article 8. If the answer to that  question
         was affirmative, then the refusal was unlawful. He added:

             "It is not necessary that the appellate immigration authority,
             directing itself along the lines indicated  in  this  opinion,
             need ask  in  addition  whether  the  case  meets  a  test  of
             exceptionality. The suggestion that it should is based  on  an
             observation of Lord Bingham in Razgar [ R (Razgar) v Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC
             368] , para 20. He was there expressing an expectation, shared
             with the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  that  the  number  of
             claimants  not  covered  by  the   rules   and   supplementary
             directions but entitled to succeed under article 8 would be  a
             very small minority. That is still his expectation. But he was
             not purporting to lay down a legal test." (para 20)

         [60]     It remains the position that the ultimate question is  how
         a fair balance should be struck between the  competing  public  and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in  mind:
         that is to say, a requirement that the  case  should  exhibit  some
         highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the  test
         of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word
         "exceptional", as already explained, as meaning  "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that the refusal of the application  would  not
         be proportionate". So understood, the provision in the Instructions
         that leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply  involves  the  application  of  the  test  of
         proportionality to the circumstances of the  individual  case,  and
         cannot be regarded as incompatible with article 8. That  conclusion
         is fortified by the express  statement  in  the  Instructions  that
         "exceptional" does not mean "unusual"  or  "unique":  see  para  19
         above.

14. KO (Nigeria) and others [2018] UKSC 53 was  a  case  mainly  about  the
    treatment of qualifying children and their parents under part 5A. Under
    the heading "general approach" Lord Carnwath, giving the  judgement  of
    the court, said:

         [12]     This group of sections  needs  to  be  looked  at  in  the
         context of the history of attempts  by  the  Government,  with  the
         support of Parliament, to clarify the application of article  8  in
         immigration cases. In Hesham Ali ... this court had  to  consider
         rule changes introduced with similar objectives in July  2012.  The
         background to those changes was explained by Lord Reed  (paras  19-
         21),  their  avowed  purpose   being   to   "promote   consistency,
         predictability  and  transparency"  in  decision-making,  and   "to
         reflect the Government's and Parliament's view of how, as a  matter
         of public policy, the balance should be struck ..." (para 21).

         [13]     In a case heard shortly afterwards, ... Agyarko ... paras
         8-10, Lord  Reed  referred  to  the  previous  law  as  established
         in Huang ... where it was held that non-compliance with the Rules,
         not themselves reflecting the assessment of  proportionality  under
         article 8, was "the point at which to begin, not end" consideration
         of article 8. The new Rules, as he said by reference to  government
         policy  statements,  were   designed   to   change   the   position
         comprehensively by "reflecting an assessment  of  all  the  factors
         relevant to the application of article 8" (para 10).

         [14]     Part 5A of the 2002 Act takes that process a stage further
         by expressing the intended balance of relevant  factors  in  direct
         statutory form. It is  profoundly  unsatisfactory  that  a  set  of
         provisions which was intended to provide clear guidelines to  limit
         the  scope  for  judicial  evaluation  should  have  led  to   such
         disagreement among some of the most experienced Upper Tribunal  and
         Court of Appeal judges. Rather than attempt a detailed analysis  of
         all these impressive but conflicting judgments, I hope  I  will  be
         forgiven for attempting a simpler and more direct approach.

         [15]     I start with  the  expectation  that  the  purpose  is  to
         produce a straightforward set of rules, and in particular to narrow
         rather than widen the residual area of discretionary  judgment  for
         the court to take account of public interest or other  factors  not
         directly reflected in the wording of the statute. I also start from
         the presumption, in the absence of clear language to the  contrary,
         that the provisions are intended to be consistent with the  general
         principles relating to the "best interests" of children,  including
         the principle that "a child must not  be  blamed  for  matters  for
         which he or she is not  responsible,  such  as  the  conduct  of  a
         parent"  (see Zoumbas  v  Secretary  of  State   for   the   Home
         Department [2013] UKSC 74, [2013] 1 WLR 3690, para  10  per  Lord
         Hodge).

15. (The court went on to hold  the  misconduct  of  a  parent  was  not  a
    balancing factor, and that the reasonability  of  the  departure  of  a
    child was to be approached in "the real world" of where the parent  was
    expected to be.)

16. As well as looking at the general approach to article  8,  I  note  the
    submission of Ms Loughran, based on Dasgupta, on the area  of  decision
    open to the FtT.  To apply  the  correct  test  and  reach  a  generous
    conclusion is not erroneous in law.

17. In MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10 the Court said:

         [107]    It is no doubt desirable that there should be a consistent
         approach to issues of this kind at tribunal level, but as  we  have
         explained there are means  to  achieve  this  within  the  tribunal
         system. As was said in Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, para 40 (per Carnwath LJ):

             "... It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
             tribunals, without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
             different conclusions on the same case ... The mere fact  that
             one tribunal has reached what may seem an  unusually  generous
             view of the facts of a particular case does not mean  that  it
             has made an error of law ... Nor does it create any precedent,
             so as to limit the Secretary of State's right to argue  for  a
             more restrictive approach on a similar  case  in  the  future.
             However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of
             the specialist tribunal should be respected."

18. MM makes it clear that the principle continues to apply, but the extent
    of "generosity" or discretionary judgment available to tribunals is  as
    explained in Agyarko and KO.

19. The first question in this case is whether the FtT found  family  life,
    not in the broad  sense  but  as  qualifying  for  consideration  under
    article 8, to extend beyond the appellants to the aunt  of  the  second
    appellant and to the cousins of the third and fourth appellants.

20. The decision is not quite as clear as it  might  have  been.   At  some
    points  the  two  families  are  considered  together  and  at   others
    separately.  There is no explicit conclusion that the four  appellants,
    the aunt of the second appellant, and  her  children,  are  so  closely
    bound by ties beyond the ordinary that they constitute one core family.
     However, the overall reading is that such a conclusion was reached.

21. The next question is whether the  evidence  and  reasons  justify  that
    conclusion.

22. Although the issue is fact-sensitive,  and  all  cases  are  different,
    there is force in the SSHD's challenge.  The  needs  of  Ms  Kazmi  for
    support were not backed by much evidence.  The  matters  advanced  were
    police, medical and social work responsibilities, not  responsibilities
    of the second appellant.  There was a justified finding  that  he  gave
    support, but its nature was not out  of  the  ordinary.   Relationships
    among the children were close, but no more than might be expected among
    cousins living nearby.  Most notably, the FtT at  [23]  found  that  Ms
    Kazmi had an obvious alternative, and could see no reason for  her  not
    to choose it.  Her future was  not  conditioned  on  support  from  the
    appellants.

23. Making all allowance for the scope open to the FtT, its conclusion that
    article 8 protection went beyond the four appellants is  not  supported
    by adequate reasons.  The  findings  at  [23]  point  in  the  opposite
    direction.

24. Separation from extended  family  members  is  inherent  in  migration.
    There must be much more to constitute strong and compelling reasons, or
    exceptional circumstances.

25. The FtT found that there were no insurmountable obstacles to  the  four
    appellants as a family going to live in Pakistan, and it was reasonable
    to expect them to do so.

26. Even if the extended family did qualify for consideration, it would  be
    difficult to identify any feature of  such  strength  that  the  appeal
    might succeed.

27. After excising  the  FtT's  insupportable  conclusion  of  an  extended
    family, there is nothing by which the appeal might rationally succeed.

28. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  four
    appeals, as originally brought to the FtT, are dismissed.

29. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


    [pic]


    5 August 2019
    UT Judge Macleman
