
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/02729/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 19th April 2017                    |       On 9th May 2017                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             Mr SAHADEO JADEGEO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Thorne, promulgated on 8th August 2016 following a hearing  at  Bennett
    House, Stoke-on-Trent on 25th July 2016.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, and was born
    on 22nd April 1972.  He applied on 3rd  September  2014  for  leave  to
    remain as the partner of Germalyn Dunga, who is a British citizen.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge at the outset noted how the Appellant had entered the  UK  on
    24th March 2006 as a visitor and had then applied to remain here on the
    basis of his relationship with Germalyn Dunga.   However,  neither  the
    Appellant nor Germalyn Dunga were in attendance at the  hearing  before
    the judge.  Nor, was any explanation  given  for  such  non-attendance.
    The judge concluded that the Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
    partner Rule of Appendix FM because EX.1 did not apply.  He also  could
    not succeed under paragraph 276ADE because he had not been resident  in
    the UK for twenty years.  In addition, no explanation had been given as
    to why the Appellant's partner could not relocate with the Appellant in
    Trinidad, were it to come to that, such as could  be  regarded  as  not
    being reasonable.  The judge went on to conclude that the human  rights
    of the Appellant,  and  his  partner,  are  outweighed  by  the  public
    interest.  There was a strong public interest in maintaining  effective
    and fair immigration control (see paragraph 47).

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that the judge  applied  the  test  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" rather than the correct test of "exceptional
    circumstances" as to whether Article  8  was  engaged  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. On 10th February 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me on 19th April 2017, the  Appellant  was  again
    unrepresented.  Nor, was any explanation given for his  non-attendance.
    Neither was  his  partner  in  attendance.   There  cannot  be  a  more
    important matter, I am bound to say, than the immigration status  of  a
    person on an appeal, who is facing the prospect of  being  required  to
    return back to his own country, and a failure to attend, together  with
    a failure to provide any explanation for such non-attendance, cannot be
    of assistance to a person in such a situation.

 7. For his part, Mr Norton, appearing on behalf of the Respondent,  raised
    two  matters.   First,  there  had  been  an  earlier  judicial  review
    application before the Upper Tribunal  which  was  determined  on  30th
    September 2015, where the Tribunal had stated that, "despite  providing
    voluminous documentation with this application the  Appellant  did  not
    raise any issue relating to any difficulties his partner would have, as
    a result of her ethnic origins, in relocating to Trinidad  and  Tobago"
    (paragraph 2).  There were no insurmountable obstacles  in  this  case.
    Second, as far as the determination of Judge Thorne was  concerned,  he
    would rely now upon his Rule 24 response.   The  grounds  are  outdated
    (referring curiously to Izuazu and the Rules have been changed)  so  it
    was very hard to discern from the grounds how this  judge  had  applied
    the wrong test.  Since then, the Supreme Court in Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC
    11 had emphasised how "insurmountable obstacles" was to be interpreted.
     The evidence  before  Judge  Colyer  was  lacking  and  it  left  many
    questions unanswered, which had the Appellant attended, may  have  been
    probed.  The Appellant could not fulfil the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii), (iv), (v) or (vi).  No case  had  been  made  out  that
    there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   the   Appellant's
    integration into Trinidad and Tobago.  Third, the Appellant  had  lived
    in Trinidad and  Tobago  up  to  the  age  of  33  and  there  were  no
    conceivable circumstances which would have led the judge to a different
    decision.  Fourth, the judge did consider the appeal  under  Article  8
    and found that the Appellant had failed to make out  his  case.   There
    was  simply  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that   the   Appellant's
    circumstances outweigh the public interest in immigration control.

No Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

 9. First, this is a case where the Appellant arrived in 2006 as a visitor.
     He has overstayed since then.  He has had no leave at all since  then.
    He maintains that since 2008  he  has  been  with  a  British  citizen,
    namely,  Germalyn  Dunga,  but  his  own  status  has  throughout  been
    precarious.

10. Second, against the background of these facts, the  judge  undertook  a
    detailed and careful proportionality balancing exercise (see  paragraph
    46), pointing out that, "although it may be difficult for A  and  W  to
    move to Trinidad and Tobago, there is inadequate evidence to  establish
    that they would be caused real and lasting hardship or that it would be
    disproportionate to expect A  to  return  with  W"  (see  sub-paragraph
    (vii)).  Nothing that the Appellant put  forward  by  way  of  evidence
    shows that this conclusion was wrong.  In point of  fact,  neither  the
    Appellant nor his partner attended the hearing.

11. Third, it is indeed true that the Grounds of Appeal are outdated and do
    not address the relevant applicable law at  the  moment.   The  Supreme
    Court judgment in Agyarko [2017]  UKSC  11  makes  it  clear  that  any
    reference to "exceptional circumstances" means that in cases  involving
    precarious family life "something very compelling ...  is  required  to
    outweigh the public interest" (see paragraph 56).  That  has  not  been
    the case here.

12. As far as "insurmountable obstacles" are concerned, it  is  made  clear
    that the  decision  maker  has  to  consider  the  seriousness  of  the
    difficulties and "whether they entail  something  that  could  not  (or
    could not reasonably be expected to) be overcome, even with a degree of
    hardship for one or more of the individuals concerned"  (see  paragraph
    18).

13. Nothing put forward by the Appellant suggests that the decision by  the
    judge was not open to him.   All  in  all,  therefore,  the  appeal  is
    without merit.

Notice of Decision

14. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th May 2017


