
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02871/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                          Mrs KIRANDEEP KAUR GREWAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  24  October  1990.   She
    appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana
    dismissing her appeal against the respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her
    leave to remain in the UK as the spouse  of  a  British  citizen.   The
    respondent claimed that the appellant produced a false English language
    ETS certificate document with her previous  application  for  leave  to
    remain.

2.   The respondent had also refused the application on the basis  that  the
    appellant and  her  partner  were  not  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  This part of the decision was withdrawn by the Secretary
    of State.

3.   Mr Biggs argued that in this case  there  was  one  clear  obvious  and
    unassailable point which was that the judge proceeded  to  analyse  the
    ETS report on  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case.  Mr Biggs referred to the judge's findings at  paragraphs
    23 to 25.  They are as follows:

         "23. There is no dispute that the  appellant's  test  results  were
             amongst the 10,000 test scores analysed  and  the  appellant's
             test was deemed to be invalid.  In that the  ETS  was  certain
             that there was evidence of proxy test taking or  impersonation
             in her case.


         24.  I take into account  the  generic  evidence  provided  by  the
             respondent.  It is evident from this generic evidence that the
             ETS informed the Home Office that they were able  to  identify
             impersonation  and  proxy  testing  using  voice   recognition
             software.  This evidence, provided by the  respondent  I  find
             that the witness statements  when  read  in  conjunction  with
             other details of  the  investigation  undertaken  by  ETS  has
             identified those tests found to be  questionable  or  invalid.
             It is clear from  the  statements  that  ETS  identified  this
             appellant after a lengthy and systematic investigation with an
             error rate of only 3%.  I find that the respondent  has  prima
             facie demonstrated an allegation of deception.


         25.  The Secretary of State having established a prima  facie  case
             against the appellant that she used deception it  is  now  for
             the appellant to provide a plausible and innocent explanation.
              I must find the  appellant's  explanation  is  plausible  and
             credible".

4.   I find that the judge's analysis of the ETS test was  wrong.   The  ETS
    had adjudged the appellant's test to be  merely  questionable  and  the
    judge failed to appreciate this.

5.   It was apparent from the respondent's Reasons for Refusal  Letter  that
    the appellant was interviewed because of the questionable test  result.
    The judge considered this evidence in addition to the evidence given by
    the appellant at the oral hearing and had found that the appellant  was
    not credible and had fraudulently attempted to deceive the respondent.

6.   I find that the  judge's  credibility  findings  were  tainted  by  her
    decision at paragraphs 23 to 25.  Consequently,  the  judge's  decision
    cannot stand.

7.   Mr Biggs relied on the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Shehzad  and
    Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.  At paragraph 22  the  Court  of  Appeal
    stated that the question in these appeals  only  concerns  the  initial
    stage and whether, the evidence of Mr Millington and Ms  Collings,  the
    evidential burden on the Secretary of State is satisfied.  If it is, it
    is then incumbent on the individual whose leave has been  curtailed  to
    provide evidence in response raising an innocent explanation.

8.   The Court of Appeal held that the Tribunal might be open  to  criticism
    in its treatment of the Millington/Collings  evidence  at  the  initial
    stage.  But,  in  circumstances  where  the  generic  evidence  is  not
    accompanied   by   evidence   showing   that   the   individual   under
    consideration's test was categorised as "invalid", then  the  Secretary
    of State faces a difficulty in respect of the evidential burden at  the
    initial stage.

9.   In this particular case, the error was committed by the judge  and  not
    by the Secretary of State.  The Secretary of State  was  clear  in  her
    Reasons for Refusal Letter that the ETS test result  of  the  appellant
    had been assessed as questionable and that was  why  the  Secretary  of
    State invited the appellant for an interview.  The  error  categorising
    her test as invalid was made by the judge.  Therefore, I find that  the
    decision in Shehzad and Chowdhury is not relevant to this case.

10.  In any event, the appellant's credibility will have to be  assessed  by
    her questionable test result, her oral evidence and the  interview  she
    had with the Secretary of State.  The burden of proof  remains  on  the
    respondent to prove that the appellant obtained her ETS test result  by
    deception, in turn impacts on the respondent's  refusal  to  grant  her
    leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a British citizen.

11.  The appellant's appeal is set aside in order to be re-made.

12.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross to be reheard  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 23 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
