

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02072/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Tribunal (IAC)                       |                                     |
|On 30th November 2017                |On 6th December 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                  DUONG [T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Genesis Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, a Vietnamese citizen and  an  illegal  entrant,  was
         granted permission to appeal  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Raikes dismissing his appeal against a refusal of his  human
         rights claim for leave to remain on the grounds of his relationship
         with Thi [D].

      2. Mr [T]'s claim had been refused by the respondent  on  the  grounds
         that he could not prove that  his  relationship  with  Ms  [D]  was
         genuine and subsisting because he had not been living with her  for
         two years; he could not meet the partner or  parent  Rules  because
         his partner and child were not British Citizens or settled  in  the
         UK and there was no reason why they could not return to Vietnam  as
         a family unit.




    Error of law




      3. Permission was granted on the grounds that despite the judge  being
         provided with a copy of the relevant extract from the  respondent's
         policy  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction   Family   Migration:
         Appendix FM section 1.0b Family life (as a partner or  parent)  and
         private life: 10 year routes August 2015, and despite MA (Pakistan)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 705, the First-tier Tribunal judge  found  that  it
         was reasonable for the British  Citizen  child  of  the  family  to
         relocate to Vietnam. Ms  Aboni  acknowledged  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge had failed to refer to the policy  guidance  in  her
         decision but submitted that the  decision  was  in  any  event  not
         subject to material error of law.




      4. The First-tier Tribunal judge made  findings  with  regard  to  the
         family make-up which were  not  the  subject  of  challenge.  These
         include:



          i) The relationship between Mr [T] and Ms [D] became  serious  in
             November 2013 and they have lived together since the beginning
             of February 2014;
         ii) They have a daughter born [ ] 2015;
        iii) Ms [D] has a daughter (H) by an earlier relationship  who  has
             just started school and is a British Citizen. That  child  has
             no contact with her birth father.  Ms  [D]  has  discretionary
             leave to remain in the UK;
         iv) Mr [T] does not have sole parental responsibility for H but he
             is effectively her step-father and the four  of  them  have  a
             family life together such as engages Article 8;
          v) H speaks English and Vietnamese;
         vi) Mr [T] cares for the two  young  children  on  a  daily  basis
             whilst Ms [D] works;
        vii) Although Mr [T] is not H's father,  H  views  Mr  [T]  as  her
             father and Mr [T] treats her as his child.




      5. The First-tier Tribunal judge set  out  in  her  determination  her
         reasons for finding it reasonable for Mr [T] to leave the  UK.  The
         judge concluded that the best interests of  the  children  were  to
         remain with both Mr [T] and Ms [D]; both children are young  enough
         to adapt to life in Vietnam if Ms [D] chose to go to  Vietnam  with
         Mr [T] and there was no reason why, if the family chose  to  remain
         together as a family unit, that could not be in Vietnam.




      6. The judge concluded that Mr [T]'s circumstances  did  not  outweigh
         the public interest in maintaining immigration control.




      7. The judge considered s117B (6) and concluded that it was reasonable
         for the children to leave the UK. It is  plain  that,  in  reaching
         that  conclusion,  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
         respondent's policy that  it  would  rarely  be  reasonable  for  a
         British Citizen child to leave the UK.




      8. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law such that  I  set  aside
         the decision to be remade, findings of fact retained.




    Decision




      9.  Although  public  interest  considerations  may  be  relevant   in
         determining whether it is reasonable for a child to remain  in  the
         UK, that analysis  of  reasonableness  has  to  retain  within  its
         consideration all relevant matters. Being a British Citizen is  not
         a 'trump' card but it is of more weight than whether  a  child  has
         been in the UK for more or less than seven years  and  during  what
         period of life those seven years  have  accrued.  The  respondent's
         policy makes that clear.




     10. Extracts  from  that  policy  were  reproduced  in  SF  and  others
         (Guidance,  post  2014  Act)  [2017]  UKUT  120  (IAC)  where  Vice
         President Ockelton said

             7.    Mr  Wilding,  however,  has  with  the  fairness   which
                  Presenting Officers always attempt  to  apply,  drawn  our
                  attention to an important guidance  document.  It  is  the
                  Immigration Directorate Instruction - Family  Migration  -
                  Appendix FM, Section 1.0(B) "Family Life as a  Partner  or
                  Parent and Private  Life,  10  year  Routes".  It  is  the
                  edition of August 2015 and therefore not in force  at  the
                  date of the decision under appeal, but it was in force  at
                  the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing and  decision,
                  and is still in  force.  It  contains  important  guidance
                  about  the  following  topic  at  11.2.3: Would  it   be
                  unreasonable to expect a British Citizen  Child  to  leave
                  the UK? We will set out the relevant parts, they  are  as
                  follows:

                  "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker
                  must not take a decision in  relation  to  the  parent  or
                  primary carer of a British Citizen child where the  effect
                  of that decision would be to force that British  child  to
                  leave the EU, regardless of the age of  that  child.  This
                  reflects  the   European   Court   of   Justice   Judgment
                  in Zambrano.

                      ...

                      Where a decision  to  refuse  the  application  would
                      require a parent or primary  carer  to  return  to  a
                      country outside the  EU, the  case  must  always  be
                      assessed on the basis that it would  be  unreasonable
                      to expect a British Citizen child  to  leave  the  EU
                      with that parent or primary carer.

                      In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant
                      leave to the parent or primary carer, to enable  them
                      to remain in the UK with  the  child,  provided  that
                      there is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a  genuine  and
                      subsisting parental relationship.

                      It may, however, be appropriate to  refuse  to  grant
                      leave where the conduct  of  the  parent  or  primary
                      carer gives rise to considerations of such weight  as
                      to justify separation, if the child  could  otherwise
                      stay with another parent or alternative primary carer
                      in the UK or in the EU.

                      The  circumstances  envisaged  could  cover   amongst
                      others:

                      .    criminality falling below the thresholds set out
                           in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;

                      .    a very poor immigration history, such  as  where
                           the  person  has  repeatedly   and   deliberately
                           breached the Immigration Rules.

                      In considering whether refusal may be appropriate the
                      decision maker must consider the impact on the  child
                      of any separation. If the decision maker is minded to
                      refuse, in circumstances where  separation  would  be
                      the  result,  this  decision   should   normally   be
                      discussed  with  a  senior  caseworker   and,   where
                      appropriate, advice may be sought from the Office  of
                      the Children's Champion on the implications  for  the
                      welfare  of  the  child,  in  order  to  inform   the
                      decision."

                  We were not specifically referred to  any  other  part  of
                  this document and we do not need to set any more out.

             8.   Mr Wilding very properly accepted this was not, from  the
                  point of  view  of  the  relationship  between  the  first
                  appellant, the mother, and the British  citizen  child,  a
                  case which involves criminality; and this was not  a  case
                  in which the  conduct  of  the  mother  or  of  the  other
                  children was such as to give  rise  to  considerations  of
                  such weight as to justify separation: but in any event  it
                  does not appear that  there  has  been  any  consideration
                  given to the possibility  of  the  British  citizen  child
                  staying with another parent or alternative primary care in
                  the EU. There is said to be a grandmother here.  No  other
                  details are known; certainly the Secretary  of  State  has
                  not at  any  stage  taken  the  view  that  there  was  an
                  alternative primary carer, and in any event, of course the
                  result of the decision would  be  the  separation  of  the
                  youngest child from his siblings and from  his  mother  if
                  they had to return to Albania leaving him here.

     11. H is not the biological  daughter  of  Mr  [T]  and,  as  Ms  Aboni
         submitted, the relationship between Mr [T]  and  H  does  not  fall
         within the definition of 'parent' as set  out  in  the  Immigration
         Rules. The finding of the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  is  however
         unequivocal: the child considers Mr [T] to be her father and Mr [T]
         treats her as his daughter; they are living in a family unit and he
         cares for her on a daily basis; she has a younger sibling  of  whom
         Mr [T] is the birth father.  In  circumstances  such  as  this  the
         family plainly fall  within  the  policy.  Mr  [T]  plainly  has  a
         parental relationship with H.




     12. It follows that it would only be in circumstances where the conduct
         of the parent or parents was  of  such  weight  that  it  would  be
         reasonable for there to be a separation.




     13. Mr [T] is an illegal entrant and has been in the UK since May 2010.
         The respondent has not relied upon other illegality or  behavioural
         matters that could lead  to  the  conclusion  that  separation  was
         justified. It follows that it would not be reasonable for the child
         H to leave the UK.




     14. I allow the appeal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


[pic]
     Date 30th November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
