
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/02934/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Oral decision given following hearing     | On 1 May 2018                    |
|On 11 April 2018                          |                                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             chandra kumar limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Nepal whose appeal  against
    the respondent's decision refusing to allow  him  entry  clearance  for
    settlement founded on his father's previous service in the  Brigade  of
    Gurkhas had been dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Geraint  Jones
    QC.  Although the appellant was initially refused permission to  appeal
    against this decision, it eventually transpired that the judge who  had
    refused permission had not been aware that grounds of appeal  had  been
    served, and also that a skeleton argument (which the judge thought  had
    not been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge) had in fact been  before
    Judge Jones.  When this  misconception  came  to  light  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington  on  25  September
    2017.

 2. The appeal subsequently came before this Tribunal on 15  December  2017
    when I found that there had been an error of law in Judge Geraint Jones
    QC's decision.  I set out my reasons in a decision which I gave  orally
    immediately following that hearing.  I also gave directions.  The  bulk
    of what I decided on that occasion will be paraphrased below.

 3. I noted that appearing on behalf of the respondent, Mr Tufan  (who  was
    then representing the  respondent)  accepted  (although  he  could  not
    formally concede this) that in his words "I would  be  hard-pressed  to
    argue that [the decision of Judge Jones] is sustainable", in particular
    with regard to the finding that Judge Jones had made at paragraph 25 of
    his decision.

 4. I noted that I understood it to be common ground  between  the  parties
    (and this remains the case) that the appeal of this appellant turned on
    whether or not his Article 8(1) rights to family life were engaged.  It
    was and remains the appellant's case, as advanced by  Mr  Jesurum,  who
    has himself been involved in a number of  previous  appeal  which  have
    been considered by the higher courts in relation  to  the  families  of
    Gurkha veterans (and in particular in the most recent decision in Rai v
    Entry Clearance Officer - New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320) that in  cases
    where it is either accepted or held that a veteran would  have  applied
    for settlement and his minor children or child would have applied  with
    him at the time, and where the family life with  that  minor  child  or
    children  had  continued  into  adulthood,  absent   weighty   reasons,
    settlement should be granted to that child.  I note at this point  that
    in the refusal letter dated 2 July 2015 the respondent  had  stated  in
    terms that "I am minded that an application for settlement  would  have
    been made [by the appellant's father, the Gurkha veteran]  before  2009
    had the option to do so been available  to  the  sponsor  on  discharge
    before 1 July 1997".  As I stated in my decision as to  error  of  law,
    the important issue which a Tribunal will always have  to  consider  in
    such cases is first whether there was family  life  between  the  child
    applicant and his father at the time that his  father  would  otherwise
    have applied for settlement and, secondly, provided that is  the  case,
    whether that family life is still  in  place.   At  the  error  of  law
    hearing this analysis of the legal issues was not challenged on  behalf
    of the respondent and it was common ground between the parties that the
    crucial issue in this case was, as it had always been, whether  or  not
    there was such family life between the appellant and his father now  as
    to engage Article 8(1).  The appellant's case is that if there was  and
    by reason of  the  "historic  injustice"  in  refusing  serving  Gurkha
    soldiers a right of settlement earlier, it will in most  cases  not  be
    proportionate to continue to refuse settlement to a (now  adult)  child
    applicant.  As will be apparent later, the respondent not only did  not
    seek to challenge that proposition at the error of law hearing, but she
    does not seek to challenge it now either.

 5.  I found that the judge had made an error of fact in  his  decision  by
    failing to avert to what was clearly stated at page 51  of  the  bundle
    which had been before him with regard to  the  appellant's  "persistent
    delusional disorder" for which he had been prescribed drugs.  This  was
    relevant to the issue of whether or not there is currently family  life
    between the appellant and his parents because it goes  to  the  reasons
    why his mother in particular returned to Nepal on a number of occasions
    after settling in the UK.  At page 22 of the bundle  which  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal there is set out a schedule  of  the  dates  on
    which the appellant's mother returned to be with her son after settling
    in the UK, amounting to some nineteen months in total.  If one  of  the
    reasons why she had returned and  continued  to  return  so  often  was
    because of the appellant's need for family support, this  was  relevant
    when considering the  extent  of  the  appellant's  dependence  on  his
    family, which is one of the factors the Tribunal needed to have in mind
    when considering whether there was still extant family life.

 6. I found that the judge's failure to take  account  of  the  appellant's
    medical condition as it appeared in the evidence was a material  error.
    The highest that Judge Jones had considered the position to be was that
    the appellant had "some  kind  of  panic  disorder"  which  is  not  an
    adequate finding with regard to evidence of what is a specific  medical
    condition.

 7. I also expressed concern as to the judge's treatment of the evidence of
    the doctor.  At paragraph 25 of his decision the judge had referred  to
    the evidence of "a Dr Kale" in which the doctor, having stated that the
    applicant lived alone,  had  continued  that  "no  one  is  taking  his
    responsibility.  He needs family care and social  support  for  further
    improvement of his illness".  The judge then continued as follows:

         "The illness is not identified.  I am in no doubt  that  the  final
         three lines of that letter were added at the request of or  at  the
         instigation of the appellant and/or one  or  more  of  his  parents
         because ordinarily a doctor would not simply volunteer that kind of
         comment.  There can be no doubt that he was asked to do so  with  a
         view to this letter being deployed as it has been in this appeal".

 8. At the error of law hearing, as  already  noted  above,  Mr  Tufan,  on
    behalf of the appellant had very fairly  accepted  that  this  specific
    finding was not sustainable  and  I  agree  that  this  concession  was
    rightly made.  I considered that the submissions  made  by  Mr  Jesurum
    with regard to this finding were unanswerable.  This finding was unfair
    because:

      a) this argument had not been relied  on  by  the  respondent  in  the
         refusal letter, even though the medical evidence  had  been  before
         the respondent;

      b) it was not relied on in any Entry Clearance Manager's review (which
         in fact in this case never seems to have been undertaken);

      c) it was not  relied  on  by  the  respondent  at  the  hearing  (the
         respondent having not been represented);

      d) it was not raised by the judge with the sponsor when  he  had  been
         giving evidence, and indeed at no point did the  judge  record  any
         question having been put to the sponsor as to the opinion expressed
         by the doctor (I noted also in my error of law  decision  that  the
         judge had even misrecorded the name of the doctor who is in fact Dr
         Kafle and not Dr Kale, let alone "a Dr Kale"); and

      e) it  had  not  been  raised  with  the  appellant's  Counsel  during
         submissions.

    I agreed with what was set out in the ground at paragraph 18 that  "The
    appellant therefore had no way of knowing the point  was  in  issue  or
    addressing the FtTJ on it".  I found that this  finding  by  the  judge
    that he was in "no doubt"  that  the  doctor's  contention  within  his
    report that "[the appellant] needs family care and social  support  for
    further improvement of his illness" and that "the chance of  recurrence
    is high without its family  support"  can  only  be  explained  by  the
    instigation of the appellant and/or one or more of his parents does not
    go beyond  speculation  and  there  is  no  proper  basis  for  such  a
    conclusion being made, especially in circumstances  where  neither  the
    witnesses nor Counsel had been given an opportunity to address  him  on
    this point.  It is also fair to say in this regard, which  is  a  point
    made at paragraph 20 of the grounds, that the judge made  this  finding
    without even considering when dealing with this aspect of the case  the
    evaluation  made  by  the  appellant's  father's   commanding   officer
    contained  within  the  appellant's  bundle  before  him  at  page  43.
    Although the judge referred in passing  to  his  exemplary  record,  he
    nonetheless saw fit to make what is  said  in  the  grounds  to  be  "a
    serious imputation of procuring the insertion of untrue opinions  in  a
    doctor's letter".

 9. The judge's self-direction at paragraph 3(ii) of his  decision  was,  I
    found, also wrong, where he had said that "Although nothing like  [sic]
    to turn on it in this appeal, I reject the submission  that  dependency
    will be established where  a  person  receives  real  or  committed  or
    effective support".  As Mr Jesurum  submitted  before  me,  this  self-
    direction ran counter to what was decided not just in  Kugathas  [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 but also affirmed and developed by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Rai, in particular at paragraphs 37 to 39 where the court  accepted  in
    substance the submissions which Mr Jesurum had made in that case  which
    was set out at paragraph 36.  There was, as I found,  an  abundance  of
    evidence before the judge from which he could properly have found  that
    there was family life still between the appellant and his parents, such
    that in accordance with both Kugathas and Rai a finding could  properly
    be made that it was not proportionate to  refuse  his  application  for
    settlement in light of the guidance previously given in  particular  in
    Rai.  For these reasons the judge's unfairness in the manner  in  which
    he dealt with the medical evidence and his failure properly to consider
    the effect of the appellant's medical  condition  with  regard  to  the
    issue of dependency and the importance of the assistance given  by  his
    parents (and his dependence on that support) was highly material.

10. Accordingly, I set aside Judge Jones's decision as containing  material
    errors of law and directed that the appeal would be relisted before  me
    in order that I could decide the relatively narrow issue  still  to  be
    determined.  I gave directions as to the service  of  further  evidence
    and  this  evidence  was  subsequently  served,  albeit  later  than  I
    directed.  However, very fairly, on behalf of the respondent before the
    Tribunal today, Mr Avery does not contend that the respondent has  been
    prejudiced by the late service of the bundle and so no point  is  taken
    with regard to that.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing before me today  I  heard  evidence  from  both  of  the
    appellant's parents, who both gave their evidence with  the  assistance
    of a Nepalese interpreter.  Both of them relied  upon  statements  they
    had previously made, and with regard to the appellant's father, he also
    relied  on  a  further  statement  which  was  contained   within   the
    supplementary bundle which had  been  served  in  accordance  with  the
    directions I had previously given.  I was also addressed on  behalf  of
    both parties.  I will refer below only to  such  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions as are necessary for the purposes of this decision,  but  I
    have had regard to everything which was said to me as well  as  to  all
    the documents contained within  the  file,  whether  or  not  they  are
    specifically referred to below.

12. At the outset, both parties agreed that in light of the various decided
    cases which are contained either in the appellant's  bundle  originally
    before the First-tier Tribunal or in the supplementary bundle which was
    prepared for today's hearing, the  issue  which  the  Tribunal  has  to
    determine is whether there is now family life between the appellant and
    his Gurkha veteran father.  The authorities  establish  (and  Mr  Avery
    does not seek to persuade the Tribunal otherwise) that if the situation
    is that a Gurkha veteran would but for what is now referred to  as  the
    "historic injustice" have applied for entry clearance earlier at a time
    when the present appellant was a minor child, and where that  applicant
    would at that time have been  granted  entry  clearance,  then  if  the
    position is that there  was  still  family  life  between  that  Gurkha
    veteran and his now adult child, by virtue of the "historic  injustice"
    it would not (absent  other  reasons)  generally  be  proportionate  to
    refuse entry clearance now to that child.  The crucial issue is whether
    or not Article 8(1)  is  now  engaged.   Mr  Jesurum  makes  the  point
    forcefully (and correctly) that that test  is  not  a  very  high  one;
    various issues which in other cases might go to  whether  it  would  be
    proportionate to refuse entry clearance will  not  apply  in  a  Gurkha
    case, because the decisions of the Court of Appeal  (affirmed  in  Rai)
    are such that the usual argument that the maintenance  of  a  fair  and
    effective system of immigration control is such a strong factor  as  to
    outweigh most other factors does not apply.

13. There are two other aspects of this appeal which I should  consider  at
    the outset and they are these.  Although  Mr  Avery  did  not  seek  to
    persuade the Tribunal that even if I was persuaded  that  Article  8(1)
    was engaged I should nonetheless still dismiss the appeal having regard
    to Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (inserted by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from 28
    July 2014).  This Tribunal is still obliged when making a  decision  to
    have regard to the factors set out within that Section  because  as  is
    stated in terms at 117B, with regard to Article  8  these  are  "public
    interest considerations applicable in all cases".  I  therefore  cannot
    ignore it.  However, I can dispose of  consideration  of  Section  117B
    factors by adopting what was stated in clear  terms  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Rai at paragraphs  55  to  57,  where  the  court  stated  as
    follows:

         "Section 117A and B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
         2002

         55.   With  effect  from  28  July  2014,  section  117A   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  requires  that
             where a court or tribunal is considering the public  interest,
             and  whether  an  interference  with  article  8   rights   is
             justified,  it  must  have  regard,  in  cases  not  involving
             deportation, to the matters set out in section 117B, including
             that the maintenance of effective immigration  control  is  in
             the public interest (section  117B(1)),  that  it  is  in  the
             public interest that  those  seeking  entry  into  the  United
             Kingdom speak English (section 117B(2)), and that it is in the
             public  interest  that  those  seeking  entry  be  financially
             independent (section 117B(3)).

         56.  Mr Jesurum pointed out that the Upper Tribunal judge  did  not
             consider the matters arising under  those  provisions  of  the
             2002 Act. He submitted, however, that in view of the 'historic
             injustice'   underlying    the    appellant's    case,    such
             considerations would have made no difference to  the  outcome,
             and certainly no difference adverse to him. Ms Patry submitted
             that if the Upper Tribunal's decision was  otherwise  lawfully
             made, the considerations arising  under  section  117A  and  B
             could not have made a difference in his favour.

         57.  The submissions made on either side seem right. Certainly,  if
             the Upper Tribunal  judge's  determination  is  in  any  event
             defective as a matter of law, which in my view it is, I cannot
             see how the provisions in section 117A and B of the  2002  Act
             can affect the outcome of this appeal."

14. In these circumstances, and on the facts of this case, although I  have
    to have regard to the public interest considerations applicable in  all
    cases within Section 117B, by reason of the "historic injustice" it  is
    now effectively the position that in Gurkha cases where Article 8(1) is
    engaged,  it  cannot  be  said  that  "the  maintenance  of   effective
    immigration  controls  is  in  the  public  interest",  and  in   these
    circumstances as it is effectively conceded on behalf of the respondent
    that if this Tribunal were to find that  Article  8(1)  is  engaged  it
    would not be in the public  interest  to  refuse  the  appellant  entry
    clearance, there is no basis upon  which  a  further  consideration  of
    Section 117B could affect what this court would in those  circumstances
    be obliged to do, which is to allow this appeal.

15. Mr Jesurum also referred to what he understood to be  the  position  of
    the respondent generally  which  was  that  in  other  cases  they  are
    believed to be seeking permission to appeal decisions on the basis that
    notwithstanding the law as it is understood by both parties  to  be  in
    this case, because Annex K has been added to the Secretary  of  State's
    policy subsequent to the decision in  Rai,  this  somehow  changes  the
    position.  I invited Mr Avery to argue this point if he wished  to  but
    he did not wish to do so and  accordingly  I  do  not  deal  with  this
    argument because it is not part of the respondent's case before me  and
    it is not appropriate to deal with  submissions  which  have  not  been
    made.

16. Accordingly, I turn to deal with the evidence in this case.  As I  have
    already  noted  above,  the  appellant's  parents  both  gave  evidence
    affirming the truth of the statements they had made previously, and  in
    the case of the appellant's father affirming the evidence contained  in
    his latest witness  statement.   They  were  both  cross-examined  very
    fairly by Mr Avery, and it is right to say that the evidence which  was
    given with regard to the appellant's life and condition and  so  on  in
    Nepal was less full than it might have been.  There are various gaps in
    the knowledge that this Tribunal has as to  precisely  how  severe  his
    condition is,  for  example,  and  also  as  to  his  day-to-day  life.
    Although both the appellant's parents were asked repeatedly as to  what
    is discussed in the telephone calls  that  are  made,  neither  of  his
    parents could go beyond asking him whether or not  he  was  taking  his
    medication and also how he very much wanted to  come  to  this  country
    because that was where his family life was.  It is also  right  to  say
    that there are minor  (and  I  stress  minor)  inconsistencies  in  the
    accounts given with regard to the  dates  in  particular  of  when  the
    appellant finished studying or when precisely his current illness first
    manifested itself.  However,  the  evidence  that  is  given  has  been
    consistent on the fundamental points which are these.  The appellant is
    ill.  When aged about 25 he burst into tears at  the  prospect  of  his
    parents coming to settle in the UK.   The  appellant's  father  had  to
    remain behind initially and leave for the UK later than he  would  have
    done to try and make the appellant more confident that everything would
    be done to bring him over when  the  appellant's  parents  could.   The
    appellant's parents provide between them something like 40,000 Nepalese
    rupees per month for his support.  Half of this is provided in payments
    sent by his mother (of which there is some evidence within the  bundle)
    and the other half is provided by means of his father being  paid  part
    of his pension from the army into a Nepalese bank  account  over  which
    the appellant has drawing rights.  The  appellant's  father's  evidence
    that when he cannot get hold of  the  appellant  on  the  phone  he  is
    sufficiently concerned to try to get other people  to  contact  him  to
    ensure that he is alright was not challenged.

17. I do not propose to set out in this decision trite law with  regard  to
    what amounts to family life between a parent and an adult  child,  save
    to say that it is clear that it must go beyond what are referred to  as
    "the normal emotional ties" to be expected  between  a  parent  and  an
    adult child.  Some guidance was given in Rai and in  particular  regard
    must be had (although this is not necessarily  determinative,  although
    it is important)  to  "dependence"  and  that  includes  financial  and
    emotional dependence.  However, as Mr Jesurum rightly  points  out  the
    dependence does not have to be of necessity, what matters is the degree
    of dependence that there is.  In this case, having regard  to  all  the
    evidence which is before the Tribunal, I find first that the  appellant
    (who has never worked and who clearly has a psychiatric condition which
    makes working hard for him) is financially dependent  on  his  parents.
    He is also, in my judgement,  emotionally  dependent  on  them  to  the
    extent that between them his family have  made  substantial  visits  to
    Nepal, the main purpose of which has  been  to  ensure  his  wellbeing.
    These visits are far greater than one would "normally"  expect  in  the
    case of an adult child.  It seems to be the case, and  I  accept,  that
    the appellant has only a very limited life beyond his relationship with
    his  family  who  are  in  the  UK.   Certainly,  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities, it is far more likely than not that his life centres and
    revolves around his family in the UK and he sees himself still as  part
    of that family as they still see him.  I have regard of course  to  the
    fact that the appellant's father was discharged from the army  with  an
    "exemplary" record and was considered  by  his  commanding  officer  as
    honest and reliable.  Nothing in the evidence which was before me, both
    on the papers and orally, persuades me otherwise.

18. It is of course always a difficult decision to make as to the depth  of
    a relationship between a child  and  his  or  her  parents,  and  these
    decisions are always fact-sensitive, but I am  quite  satisfied,  well-
    beyond the balance of probabilities, that in this case the relationship
    between this particular child and his  parents  goes  way  beyond  that
    which one would describe as "normal" between an  adult  child  and  his
    parents.  I am satisfied that the  bond  between  this  child  and  his
    parents has not been broken, that the appellant continues  to  rely  on
    his parents both for emotional and financial support,  and  indeed  his
    emotional life (whether by necessity or choice) remains centred on  his
    parents.  In these circumstances, as it is clear and  conceded  by  the
    respondent that but for the "historic  injustice"  an  application  for
    settlement would have been made on his behalf at a time when  it  would
    have been granted, and as he currently still has a family life with his
    parents such that Article 8(1) is engaged, it is not  proportionate  to
    continue to exclude him from the UK.

19. It follows that his appeal must be allowed and I so find.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint  Jones  QC  as
containing a material error of law, and remake the decision as follows:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, on human rights grounds, Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 April 2018



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 30 April 2018
