
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02470/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2018                              |On 17 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                           MS EVELYN MAY MACDONALD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Turner of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She  was  born  on  9  November
    1957.

 2. She appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse her  leave  to
    remain dated 12 January 2016.  Judge Metzer (the judge) in  a  decision
    dated 8 May 2017 allowed the appeal.  The judge  took  into  account  a
    combination of the  appellant's  lengthy  period  living  here,  albeit
    nearly all of it as an overstayer, the strength of her community  ties,
    her medical condition and  the  lack  of  any  remaining  contact  with
    Jamaica.   He  found  the  appellant's  removal  to  Jamaica  would  be
    disproportionate.

 3. The grounds claim the judge made a material misdirection in law, failed
    to give adequate reasons  for  findings  on  proportionality  and  made
    irrational findings.  The grounds claim the  judge  should  have  first
    considered the appeal in terms of the appellant's  ability  to  satisfy
    paragraph  276ADE  and  then  identify   what   were   the   compelling
    circumstances that warranted consideration of  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.  There was no analysis under S.117B, merely a  referral  to  the
    same without any engagement.  The claimed inability of the appellant to
    pay for her medical treatment in Jamaica was not a  consideration  that
    would be awarded much weight given medical cases such as MM  (Zimbabwe)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 797and GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.

 4. Judge Parkes granted permission to appeal on 5 January 2017.  He said:

         "4.  The judge appears to have treated Article 8 as a  freestanding
             exercise  without  reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and
             relevant statutes which set the basis for assessing the public
             interest.  D and N set the  relevant  guidance  in  healthcare
             cases and for an appellant to succeed under Article  8  it  is
             arguable that rather more than the facts of this case would be
             required".

 5. There was no Rule 24 response from the appellant.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Mr Tufan relied upon the grounds. The judge was obliged to engage  with
    the Immigration Rule and S.117B and failed to do so in a decision which
    lacked adequate reasoning.

 7. Mr Turner accepted that the judge's decision was brief but it was clear
    that he had both the Rules and S.117B in mind in reaching his  findings
    at [7].

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 is instructive in the approach the judge  should
    have adopted.  The application had been refused under  paragraph  276CE
    with reference to 276ADE(1)(iii) and (vi) of the Rules.  That being the
    case, the judge's first task was to consider the Rules and give  weight
    to them.  He was also obliged to consider the appellant's circumstances
    under S.117B, public interest considerations applicable in  all  cases.
    The judge referred to S.117B but there was no analysis of the same  and
    no reference to or analysis of the Rules.

 9. There was no analysis of the appellant's medical condition in terms  of
    her claimed inability to pay for the same in Jamaica nor did the  judge
    take into account  the  public  interest  in  the  appellant  accessing
    medical treatment here to which she was not entitled.

10. The judge referred to close relationships and bonds with people in  the
    United Kingdom but there was no consideration that  such  relationships
    were formed when the appellant had no lawful leave to be here.

11. In the circumstances, I find the judge materially  misdirected  himself
    in law and failed to adequately reason his decision.

Notice of Decision

12. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error of law.  I set aside the decision and remit  the  appeal
    for a de novo hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         12 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

