
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02787/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 August 2017                      |On 19 September 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     j a
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Shah of Taj Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on [ ] 1985.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 17 November 2005 with entry clearance  as
    a work permit holder valid until 9 November 2006.  On 20 October  2006,
    he applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  student  but  this  was
    refused on 16 November 2006.  The appellant's leave then expired.  On 9
    January 2009, he was encountered  working  illegally  and  served  with
    notice of removal.  A subsequent application for leave was  made  on  4
    March 2009 but, again, refused on 2 November 2009.   A  reconsideration
    was refused on 4 February 2013.  He appealed against that decision  but
    his appeal was dismissed on 8 July 2013 and  he  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 18 July 2013.  He was subsequently  detained  in  February
    2014 and removal directions were set for 12  April  2014.   These  were
    cancelled after the appellant lodged a judicial review application on 8
    April 2014.  His claim was again considered and  refused  on  13  March
    2014.  He was released from detention on 7 May  2014.   On  31  January
    2014, he applied for leave based upon his private and family  life  but
    that was refused on 13 March 2014.

 3. Most recently, the appellant applied for leave to remain again  on  the
    basis  of  his  private  and  family  life  on  16  April  2015.   That
    application was refused on 3 July 2015.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    to refuse him leave based upon his  private  and  family  life.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 14 November 2016,  Judge  Coaster  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 outside the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as
    amended).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Coaster's
    decision to the Upper Tribunal.  First, the grounds  argue  that  there
    were no "compelling circumstances" not covered by the Rules  sufficient
    to allow the appellant's claim outside the Rules.  Secondly, the  judge
    had  inadequately  reasoned  why  the  public  interest  in   effective
    immigration control was outweighed by the appellant's circumstances.

 6. On 31 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Keane)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

Discussion

 7. Before me, Mr Richards who represented the Secretary  of  State  relied
    upon the grounds but principally submitted that the  judge  had  failed
    properly to consider the public interest in reaching her  finding  that
    the appellant's removal would be disproportionate.

 8. The grounds first argue that the judge was wrong "to  venture...outside
    the Rules" as there  were  no  "compelling"  or  arguably  "compelling"
    circumstances  to  justify  it.  This  point  is,  in  large   measure,
    superseded by the Supreme Court's decisions  in  R  (MM  (Lebanon)  and
    others) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10 and R (Agyarko) and another v SSHD [2017]
    UKSC 11.  There is no 'threshold' requirement that  there  must  be  an
    arguable case of "compelling circumstances" before a judge is  required
    to engage in the proportionality assessment under  Art  8.   The  Rules
    remain a powerful statement  of  the  public  interest  and,  where  an
    individual cannot meet the requirements of the Rules, that reflects the
    public interest in "effective immigration  control"  as  is  stated  in
    s.117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA
    Act 2002").  In those circumstances,  as  the  Supreme  Court  held  in
    Agyarko, the public interest will  only  be  outweighed  if  there  are
    "compelling circumstances" (see [57], [59] and [60]).

 9. In this case,  it  is  apparent  that  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules because, as  at
    the date of application, there were not "insurmountable  obstacles"  to
    his relationship with his wife continuing in Bangladesh.   At  para  29
    the judge found that "the appellant does now"  meet  that  requirement.
    That was clearly a statement about the present  position,  taking  into
    account the fact that the appellant's wife was pregnant  and  that  her
    mother was seriously ill with cancer.  It is also clear that the  judge
    reached her decision in para 38,  having  at  paras  35-37  immediately
    preceding that, taken into account a number of matters relevant to  the
    appellant's claim outside the Rules.

10. Although Mr Richards did not explicitly put the  Secretary  of  State's
    case in this way, even if the grounds are  interpreted  as  raising  an
    argument based upon irrationality, I am not persuaded that the  judge's
    findings were irrational.  The two features which the judge  found,  in
    effect, to be "compelling" were features of the case  that  had  arisen
    since  the  appellant's  application  and,  therefore,  post-dated  the
    factors relevant to a consideration of the Rules.  The appellant's wife
    was fifteen weeks pregnant at the date of the hearing (see paras 9  and
    30).  Further, the mother of the appellant's wife  had  been  diagnosed
    with cancer and was undergoing chemotherapy (see paras 14 and 30).  The
    pertinent reasoning of the judge is at paras 30-38 of her determination
    as follows:

         "30.      Without  question  if  the  Appellant  were  removed   to
             Bangladesh, Ms Haque in her  state  of  pregnancy  would  find
             leaving the UK and her  family  to  continue  family  life  in
             Bangladesh very difficult.  Becoming  pregnant  has  not  been
             without difficulty.  Also her  mother  is  seriously  ill  and
             receiving chemotherapy.  The precarious immigration status  of
             her husband has caused Ms Haque additional distress.   However
             Ms Haque comes from a Bangladeshi family.   Her  parents  were
             born in Bangladesh and I believe it is inevitable that she has
             an understanding of the culture of her parents and Bangladeshi
             society in the UK albeit she has little personal experience of
             culture and society in Bangladesh.  I do  not  find  that  the
             prospect of learning  to  read  and  write  Sylheti/Bengali  a
             matter that cannot be overcome with reasonable effort.  Nor do
             I accept that there is no support for the  Appellant  and  his
             wife in Bangladesh as the Appellant's parents  are  supportive
             of the marriage and are happy that a baby is expected.   There
             would therefore be  some  emotional  family  support  for  the
             Appellant and Ms Haque in Bangladesh.  I accept however,  that
             it would not be culturally acceptable  for  the  Appellant  to
             seek financial support from his married sisters.

         31.  I have no doubt that the prospect of  permanent  residence  in
             Bangladesh would be a daunting prospect for Ms  Haque.   I  so
             not hesitate to find that it would be a serious  hardship  for
             Ms Haque at the current time, as a pregnant women to leave the
             United Kingdom, her family and her life and culture  in  which
             she has been brought up.  It is not a clear cut issue  whether
             the Appellant would satisfy EX.1(b).

         32.  I find that the prospective birth of the Appellant's child  in
             March  2017  and   his   wife's   circumstances   sufficiently
             compelling to justify consideration of Article 8  outside  the
             Immigration Rules.  If the Appellant  is  removed  before  the
             birth of his child, it would require Ms Haque to remain in the
             UK alone without her husband at a very important time  in  her
             life.  The alternative is to relocate with him and to rely  on
             the medical services of a third world country for her  child's
             birth and have no support from her close family,  particularly
             her older sisters, at a very special time in her  life.   This
             is a very harsh choice to present  to  a  pregnant  woman  and
             particularly so for Ms Haque at a time when, additionally, she
             has a deep concern for her mother's health.

         33.  From the documentary evidence  and  the  witness  testimony  I
             accept that the Appellant, having spent almost 11 years in the
             UK has integrated into UK society although I do not accept  he
             has lost all ties to Bangladesh.  That is an exaggeration.

         34.   I  find  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  a  grave
             interference with the Appellant's family and private life.  It
             cannot be said that the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
             unlawful.

         35.  I have regard to S117B.  The Appellant  speaks  English.   The
             Appellant would be able to  work  in  the  UK  in  the  Indian
             restaurant trade where he has already some experience.  He has
             been accepted into his wife's family who have to date appeared
             to willingly support him and his wife.   No  doubt  they  will
             expect the Appellant to support his wife and child if he  were
             permitted to work.  He would therefore also be able to make  a
             contribution to UK society.

         36.  The Appellant claims that he has not had  recourse  to  public
             funds but that is strictly speaking not the  case  because  he
             has made substantial use  of  publicly  funded  NHS  services.
             There was no evidence that he paid the NHS  for  such  medical
             services.  The Appellant is likely to make further use of  the
             NHS given his current medical needs for a urological  problem.
             However his wife and he will be able to work and that is their
             stated intention.

         37.  The Appellant's relationship with his  wife  and  his  private
             life in the UK was formed during the time that his immigration
             status was precarious.  The Appellant stated that he preferred
             the culture in  the  UK.   He  does  not  want  to  return  to
             Bangladesh where he would find it hard to adjust to life there
             after more than 10 years in the UK.  A cynical view  would  be
             that his relationship with a British  Citizen  was  fortuitous
             and strengthened or rather, founded his application for  leave
             to remain.  However from the various testimonies I have  read,
             the Appellant is well able to make a contribution  to  society
             in the United Kingdom.

         38.  I have stepped back and looked at the evidence  in  the  round
             with particular reference to the Appellant's wife, Ms  Haque's
             current condition and the likelihood of being able to maintain
             family life together in Bangladesh.  In this  case,  on  these
             facts, I find by a very narrow margin, that the removal of the
             Appellant would be  sufficiently  serious  that  it  would  be
             disproportionate when weighed against the  legitimate  aid  of
             maintaining effective immigration  controls.   The  appeal  is
             allowed."

11. Subject to the Secretary of  State's  submission  in  relation  to  the
    public interest, the judge clearly and unequivocally  identified  those
    factors as "sufficiently compelling" to outweigh the public interest. I
    am unpersuaded that her conclusion was irrational.

12. Further, I am unable to see the  basis  upon  which  the  Secretary  of
    State's second contention (principally relied upon by Mr Richards)  can
    be sustained.  The judge was plainly aware of  the  importance  of  the
    public interest.   She  set  out  the  relevant  law  at  paras  21-23,
    including setting out in full s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.  At paras 35-
    36, she dealt with a number of issues under s.117B including  that  the
    appellant could speak English and was not reliant on benefits, although
    accessing NHS medical services.  The judge specifically referred to the
    public interest in "maintaining effective immigration control"  in  the
    penultimate sentence of para 38; concluding  that  by  a  "very  narrow
    margin"  that  public  interest  was  outweighed  by  the   appellant's
    circumstances, in particular the impact upon his wife who  was  fifteen
    weeks pregnant and her need to support her mother  who  was  undergoing
    treatment for cancer.  Mr Richards sought to defend the grounds on  the
    basis that the judge's reference, ignoring the typographical errors, in
    para  39  to  the  "legitimate  aid  (sic)  of  maintaining   effective
    immigration controls" was not a reference to the public interest.  With
    respect,  that  is  untenable.   The  public  interest  in   "effective
    immigration control" is specifically spelt out in s.117B(1) of the  NIA
    Act 2002 and is, in substance, a manifestation of the  legitimate  aims
    in Art 8.2 of  the  "economic  well-being  of  the  country"  and  "the
    prevention of disorder or crime".  The judge  plainly  took  that  into
    account, having set out the appellant's immigration history earlier  in
    her decision.

13. I, therefore, reject the Secretary of State's contention that the judge
    failed to take into account the public  interest  and  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons why that public interest was outweighed by identifying
    "sufficiently compelling" circumstances based upon the pregnancy of the
    appellant's wife and her mother's ill-health.  To the extent  that  the
    grounds  implicitly  assert  the  balancing  exercise  resulted  in  an
    irrational conclusion, I reject that contention also.   Whilst  perhaps
    not all judges would necessarily have reached the conclusion that Judge
    Coaster reached, it was in my judgment within the range  of  reasonable
    conclusions that a judge properly directing herself could reach.

14. For these  reasons,  therefore,  I  reject  the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds.  The judge did not err in  law  in  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision, therefore, stands.

16. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                 Signed

                                                               [pic]
                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 18 September 2017



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Coaster made  no  fee  award  as  her  decision  was  based  upon  new
evidence.  I see no basis to depart from that conclusion and  none  was  put
forward before me.



                                 Signed

                                                                [pic]
                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 18 September 2017



