
                                    [pic]


|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: HU/02168/2019         |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House                |        |Decision & Reasons           |
|         |14 August 2019             |        |promulgated                  |
|On:      |                           |        |On 21st August 2019          |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Nikhilkumar Kanaiyalal Sheth                      |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the respondent:    Ms A Basharat,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  A  &  P
Solicitors.

                           Decision and Directions


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal M R Oliver who, in a determination promulgated on  9  May
    2019 following a hearing on 15 April 2019, allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr
    Sheth (hereafter the "claimant"),  a  national  of  India  born  on  24
    February 1973, against a decision dated 17 January 2019 to  refuse  his
    human rights claim.

 2. The decision letter states that the Secretary of State considered  that
    the claimant's presence in the United Kingdom was not conducive to  the
    public good and that he had therefore concluded that the  claimant  did
    not satisfy the suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules. The decision letter states that this was because
    the Secretary of State considered that the claimant had  used  a  proxy
    taker to take an English test on 17  April  2012  at  Premier  Language
    Training Centre and that he had  therefore  fraudulently  obtained  his
    TOEIC certificate. The decision letter then provides  detailed  reasons
    under the heading "Consideration of the evidence in  relation  to  your
    ETS test", which includes details from a "Revised Lookup Tool".

 3. The claimant and his wife attended the hearing before the  judge.  Both
    gave oral evidence. He was represented by Ms  Basharat.  There  was  no
    representation on the Secretary of State's behalf.

 4. At para 8, the judge noted that, on 14 March  2019,  the  Tribunal  had
    requested the Secretary of  State  for  service  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's bundle; that the hearing listed for 26 March 2019 was adjourned
    the day before "presumably as a result of a request by  the  [Secretary
    of State] on 25 March 2019 for the case,  which  had  been  listed  for
    float, to be moved to a list  with  a  presenting  officer";  that  the
    hearing was adjourned and  a  direction  made  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's bundle be served before 4 p.m.  on  10  April  2019;  that  the
    Secretary of State had not sent a Presenting Officer to the hearing  on
    15 April 2018; and no bundle had been received by the Tribunal  or  the
    claimant's representatives.

 5. The judge then proceeded to consider the claimant's Article 8 claim. He
    said, inter alia, that the Secretary of State had made a  very  serious
    allegation against the claimant but had not provided  any  evidence  in
    support, "not even the minimal printout of the lookup tool";  that  "in
    the  absence  of  such  evidence,  there  is  no  evidence  of  adverse
    immigration history" and that "In these compelling circumstances I must
    consider the appeal outside  the  rules".  He  then  proceeded  to  the
    balancing exercise and said that "the allegation of deception  was  the
    only reason given for the refusal of his application; in its absence it
    would appear that he satisfied the requirements and  the  usual  public
    interest in the maintenance of fair but firm immigration takes  a  less
    important role when compared against his private interests".

 6. The judge therefore allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 7. There are two grounds, the first of which was that the judge had failed
    to consider the evidence in the PF1 bundle which contained, inter alia,
    the ETS test analysis, the "ETS look up tool  print  out",  "CID  notes
    print out, "Revised look up tool print  outs",  witness  statements  of
    Peter Millington, Rebecca  Collings,  Adam  Sewells  and  a  report  on
    Premier Language Training Centre; and that there was therefore no  need
    to serve an additional ETS bundle.

 8. The second ground was that the judge had allowed the appeal outside the
    Immigration Rules but gave no reasons.

 9. At the hearing, I asked Mr Kotas whether he had any evidence  that  the
    PF1 bundle, which was date-stamped  by  the  Tribunal  as  having  been
    received on 2 August 2019, was before the judge. Mr Kotas  informed  me
    that he  had  accessed  the  Secretary  of  State's  "Case  Information
    Database" ("CID") system and noted that there was an entry that  stated
    that the direction for the PF1 bundle to be served had been  noted  but
    there was no entry that indicated that the direction had been  complied
    with or that the PF1 bundle had been served.

10. Mr Kotas then said that, on the information he had available, he  would
    have to accept that the direction of 26 March 2019 for the  PF1  bundle
    to be served by 10 April 2019 had not been complied with.  Accordingly,
    he agreed that the Secretary of State could not complain about the fact
    that the evidence in the PF1 bundle had not been taken into account  by
    the judge.

11. Accordingly, I have concluded that ground 1 is not established.

12. However, I noted that the judge's manuscript record of the  proceedings
    ("RoP") says:

     "I've not seen RFRL"

13. Ms Basharat then confirmed that neither the judge nor  she  had  had  a
    copy of the Secretary of State's decision letter dated 17 January 2019.



14. I ascertained that there was on file a  copy  of  the  decision  letter
    dated 17 January 2019 stamped as having been received by  the  Tribunal
    on 5 February 2019. This letter was therefore before the judge. Plainly
    he did not consider it because he said in his RoP that he had not  seen
    it.

15. It seems to me astonishing, as I said at the hearing, that the  hearing
    before the judge proceeded when neither Ms Basharat nor the  judge  had
    had sight of the decision  letter,  from  which  it  must  follow  that
    neither party had any idea what the Secretary of State's case  was.  In
    these circumstances, I simply cannot see how the judge felt able to say
    that "the allegation of deception was the only  reason  given  for  the
    refusal of his application". It plainly was not. The Secretary of State
    gave reasons why he considered that the eligibility requirement was not
    satisfied, why the family life  claim  was  refused,  why  neither  the
    claimant nor his wife would experience very  significant  obstacles  to
    their  reintegration  in  India  and  why  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances for the grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules.

16. Ms Basharat did not raise any  objection  to  my  raising  this  issue,
    rightly so in my  judgment.  Since  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    represented at the hearing before the judge, he could  not  have  known
    that the judge had stated that he had not seen the decision letter.  He
    therefore could not have raised in his grounds that the judge had  only
    considered the claimant's case.

17. For the reasons given at paras 12-16 above, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Secretary of State has been deprived of a fair  hearing  of  his  case.
    Even if I were to leave to one side the fact that the  decision  letter
    in the instant case sets out specific evidence taken from the "ETS look
    up tool", it is impossible to avoid the conclusion that the  fact  that
    the judge did not look at the decision letter means  that  he  did  not
    have in mind the case of one party to the appeal; he only had  in  mind
    the case of the claimant. If one then takes into account the fact  that
    the decision letter in the instant  case  sets  out  specific  evidence
    concerning the deception allegation, the already determinative case  in
    the Secretary of State's favour becomes wholly unanswerable.  There  is
    therefore no need to consider ground 2.

18. I am grateful to Ms Basharat who did not seek to  try  and  defend  the
    judge's decision.

19. For the reasons given above, I set aside the judge's decision and remit
    the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on the merits
    by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M R Oliver.

20. I record that Mr Kotas submitted a copy of the determination  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Manyarara on the papers, promulgated  on  22
    March 2017.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M  R  Oliver  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that the decision is set aside.  This
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  on  all
issues on the merits by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
M R Oliver.


[pic]
Signed                              Date: 16 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
