
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/02774/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23 January 2018                         | On 29 January 2018              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                       PAMELA CHANDRA VICTOR EMMANUAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Wass, Counsel,
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Malaysia.  She  married  Mr  Yogaratnam
    Ramesh, a Sri Lankan national, during a visit to  the  UK  in  2008.  A
    Hindu ceremony was conducted on 31 August 2008  but  the  marriage  was
    only registered on 22 April 2013. Mr Ramesh had come to the UK in April
    2001, seeking asylum. He was not recognised as a refugee but, in  April
    2013, he was granted  discretionary  leave  for  three  years.  He  was
    granted a further three years' discretionary leave on 23 October  2015.
    When this expires he will be eligible to apply for indefinite leave  to
    remain.

 2. On 15 December 2015, the  appellant  made  her  application  for  entry
    clearance. This was considered and refused on 13 January 2016  for  the
    following reasons: (1) the sponsor was not either British, settled or a
    refugee, so the requirement of paragraph E-ECP.2.1 of the rules was not
    met,  and,  (2)  the  application  did  not   raise   any   exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave to enter outside  the  rules.
    The appellant appealed but the decision was maintained on review by the
    entry clearance manager.

 3. At the hearing before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Farmer, held  at
    Hatton Cross on 22 May 2017,  it  was  argued  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances to justify allowing the appeal outside the rules.  Had  a
    decision been made on Mr Ramesh's case under the  policy  dealing  with
    'legacy'  claims  prior  to  July  2011  he  would  have  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain. Judge Farmer  was  not  persuaded  by  this
    argument  and  held  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances.   She
    dismissed the appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal because  it
    was arguable the Judge  had  erred  "by  not  engaging  with  the  five
    questions raised by Lord Bingham in the case of Razgar[1]".

 5. I heard submissions from the representatives on the  issue  of  whether
    the Judge's approach to the question of family life was erroneous.

 6. Ms Wass argued that, had the Judge  taken  a  structured  approach  and
    followed the Razgar steps, it was possible she  might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion. She argued the Judge  had  failed  to  conduct  a
    proportionality balancing exercise. She had looked at the  position  of
    the sponsor, Mr Ramesh, not the appellant. She had not  considered  the
    fact that all the requirements of Appendix FM of  the  rules  were  met
    apart from the requirement for the sponsor to be settled or a  refugee.
    If the Judge had balanced the factors out, she might have concluded the
    public interest did not outweigh the appellant's family life.

 7. Mr Nath argued the Judge did not need to set out the Razgar  steps.  He
    pointed out the Judge had  recorded  that  the  case  was  only  argued
    outside the rules (see  [11]).  She  had  conducted  a  proportionality
    assessment in which she had considered the factors  in  favour  of  the
    appellant. The decision was one which it was open to the Judge to make.
    She had referred to R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [20]  and  she
    must have had the 'insurmountable obstacles' test in mind.

 8. Ms Wass disagreed that the decision contains a balancing  exercise  and
    argued the Judge was simply searching for exceptional circumstances. In
    doing so she had omitted to balance all the factors.

 9. I reserved my decision as to whether the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contained a material error of law.

10. Having done so, I have concluded the  decision  does  not  contain  any
    material error of law and shall stand. My reasons are as follows.

11. The task of the Judge can best be explained by borrowing the  following
    passage from the decision of  McCloskey  J  in  Kaur  (children's  best
    interests/public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC):

        "32. As the decision in Hesham Ali  makes  clear,  the  fundamental
        task for tribunals in appeals involving recourse to  Article  8  of
        the Convention is, having made appropriate  findings  of  fact,  to
        identify the public interest  engaged,  to  correctly  measure  its
        strength and, ultimately, to  determine  whether  the  private  and
        family life factors advanced by the appellant outweigh  the  public
        interest  to   the   extent   that   the   impugned   decision   is
        disproportionate.  While this  is  the  general  approach,  in  the
        particular context of deportation the public interest is especially
        potent and will be outweighed only by an Article 8 claim  which  is
        "very strong indeed - very compelling":  per  Lord  Reed  at  [50].
        Furthermore, in all cases the tribunal will give appropriate weight
        to the decision maker's reasons for the proposed course of  action:
        per Lord Reed at [44], reaffirming Huang v Secretary of  State  for
        the Home Department [2007] UKHL 11, per Lord Bingham at [16].

        33. Given the recent vintage of the  decision  in  Hesham  Ali  and
        having regard to the recurring challenges encountered by judges  at
        the first tier of decision making in  immigration  appeals,  it  is
        appropriate to highlight the  short  concurring  judgment  of  Lord
        Thomas LCJ.  In a welcome contribution,  the  Lord  Chief  Justice,
        echoing  the  jurisprudence  of  this  Tribunal,   emphasises   the
        importance of making clear findings on  material  issues  of  fact.
        The next requirement on Judges is to "set out in clear and succinct
        terms their reasoning", with particular reference to [37]  -  [38],
        [46] and [50] of the judgment  of  Lord  Reed.   Lord  Thomas  then
        advocates the adoption of the "balance sheet" approach.  This is  a
        self-evidently important stage in the judicial decision making.  It
        involves the identification  of  the  material  facts  and  factors
        belonging to the two basic sides of the equation.  This serves as a
        timely reminder to First-tier Tribunal  Judges  to  continue  doing
        what one already finds in the strongest judgments.  ..."

12. In R (on the application of Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11, the Supreme
    Court explained that the  ultimate  question  in  article  8  cases  is
    whether a fair balance has been struck between the competing public and
    individual interests involved, applying  a  proportionality  test.  The
    rules and IDIs do not depart from that position and are compatible with
    article 8. Appendix FM is said to  reflect  how  the  balance  will  be
    struck under article 8 so that if an applicant fails to meet the rules,
    it should only be in genuinely  exceptional  circumstances  that  there
    would be a breach of article 8. In this context, 'exceptional' does not
    mean something unique or unusual but means "something very  compelling"
    which is capable of outweighing the public interest.

13. Turning to Judge Farmer's decision, I note the following. It  is  plain
    that, on the undisputed facts of the case, the appellant did  not  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM because her  partner's  leave  did  not
    fall within the available categories provided for in paragraph GEN.1.3.
    Unsurprisingly, therefore, the Judge  recorded  that  counsel  for  the
    appellant primarily sought to argue the  article  8  case  outside  the
    rules (see [10] - [11]). The submission made was that the facts of  the
    case  were  "exceptional  in  that  the   refusal   would   result   in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the couple such that refusal would
    not be proportionate". The basis  for  that  submission  was  that  the
    sponsor's status had been determined by a change of policy  outside  of
    his control.

14. I note from this that the Judge  started  her  consideration  from  the
    point that the rules could not be met and premised the remainder of her
    decision on a correct understanding of the need to show that there were
    genuinely exceptional circumstances capable of outweighing  the  public
    interest. Moreover, the case was argued on  the  basis  that  the  very
    compelling feature of the case related to the sponsor's bad luck as  to
    the change of policy, which meant he could not  immediately  settle  in
    the UK.

15. As for the absence of any mention of the Razgar steps, I cannot see any
    material error. The determinative issue, as in most  appeals,  was  the
    proportionality of the decision and I have already laboured  the  point
    that  Judge  Farmer's  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  exceptional
    circumstances was correct.

16. Ms Wass argued the  Judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  fact  the
    remainder of the rules were met. However, Judge Farmer  notes  this  at
    [13].

17. Paragraphs [15] to [18] deal with a rather exotic  submission  made  to
    the Judge concerning the principle in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40. Ms Wass
    did not make any submissions on this point. She agreed  that  the  case
    had no application in this  appeal  in  which  the  appellant  was  not
    seeking to resist removal but was applying  for  leave  to  enter  from
    abroad.

18.  Paragraphs  [19]  to  [21]  set  out  the   Judge's   conclusions   on
    proportionality. She noted the long period of time the couple had lived
    apart and also the  visits  made  by  the  sponsor  to  the  appellant,
    presumably in Malaysia. She concluded it was a matter of choice for the
    sponsor to remain in the UK rather than join his partner  in  Malaysia.
    This was a conclusion Judge Farmer was plainly  entitled  to  reach  on
    these facts. It is clear she conducted  a  balancing  exercise  of  the
    relevant factors and found the appellant's interests were outweighed.

19. There is no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal and the decision shall stand. The appellant's appeal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a material  error  of  law
and her decision dismissing the appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 23 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
-----------------------
[1] [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC 368.

