
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02931/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 7th October 2016                  |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                  AMIR [R]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karwik, Counsel instructed by Cambridge
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born on  13th  April  1965.
    The Appellant last entered the UK on 9th January 2015 when he was given
    leave to enter as a visitor until 8th July 2015.  On 12th May 2015  the
    Appellant applied for leave to remain as the wife of the  Sponsor  [KA]
    whom he had married on 15th April 2015.  That application  was  refused
    for the reasons given in the Respondent's letter  of  10th  July  2015.
    The Appellant appealed, and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Garbett (the Judge) sitting at  Stoke-on-Trent  on  11th  January
    2015.  He decided to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and
    on human rights grounds for the reason given in his Decision dated 18th
    January 2016.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision,  and
    on 29th July 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge found the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  both  of  whom  gave
    evidence to him to be credible witnesses.  He was satisfied  that  they
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship and had lived together  as  a
    married couple.  He  also  found  that  the  Sponsor  suffered  from  a
    cancerous tumour in her foot which rendered  her  virtually  unable  to
    walk and that she was in receipt of  chemotherapy.   He  further  found
    that the Sponsor's daughter whom the Appellant had regarded as his  own
    had died in July 2015.

 4. The Judge decided that the Appellant could not  qualify  for  leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM of HC 395 as the Appellant had entered the  UK
    as a visitor.  The Judge also decided  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    benefit from the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 because there
    were no very significant obstacles to the  Appellant's  integration  on
    return to Pakistan for the reasons set  out  in  paragraph  25  of  the
    Decision.  Further, the Judge  found  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances which allowed him  to  consider  the  Appellant's  rights
    under Article 8 ECHR following the decision in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.  The  circumstances  considered  by  the  Judge  in  this
    respect are those set out at paragraph 27  of  the  Decision.   In  the
    alternative, the Judge decided that although the Respondent's  decision
    amounted to a breach of the Appellant's right to a family life of  such
    gravity as to activate his Article 8 ECHR rights, such a breach was not
    disproportionate.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Karwik argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to these conclusions.  It was now accepted that  the  Judge  had
    erred at paragraph 30 of  the  Decision  in  taking  into  account  the
    proposition that the  Appellant  had  remained  in  the  UK  after  the
    expiration of his visit visa.  This was not the case.  This amounted to
    a material error because the immigration status of  the  Appellant  was
    relevant to the proportionality exercise.  Further, the Judge had erred
    by failing to consider the provisions of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM
    of HC 395, and had referred to the factors given in Section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  whereas  the  Appellant's
    case was based upon his private life.  The Judge was confused as to the
    correct legal framework to apply, and  had  failed  to  carry  out  the
    balancing exercise as required by the decision in  SSHD  v  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  The Judge had used a test of  exceptionality  and
    not compelling circumstances which was less of a  hurdle  to  surmount.
    In any event, considering the facts of the case, the  Judge's  decision
    that there were no compelling circumstances was perverse.

 6. In response, Mr Mills referred to the Rule 24 response.  Apart from the
    Judge's error as to the Appellant being an overstayer,  the  Judge  had
    considered all the relevant facts  at  paragraphs  27  and  28  of  the
    Decision and had applied them to the appropriate test.  It could not be
    said that the Judge's decision was  perverse.   Something  considerably
    more than a disagreement with the Judge's decision was required to show
    perversity.  There was no error of law.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  therefore  I
    do not set aside.  The issue in the appeal was whether the decision  of
    the Respondent amounted to a breach of the Appellant's rights protected
    by Article 8 ECHR.  The  Judge  correctly  began  his  deliberation  by
    considering Appendix FM of HC 395 and his decision that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the eligibility requirements set out  in  E-LTRP.2.1  is
    correct in law.  The  Appellant  entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor,  and
    therefore the Judge's decision that he  was  not  allowed  to  consider
    paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM is also correct.  The  Judge  then  found
    that the provisions of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 did not apply.   That
    decision has not been challenged in this  appeal.   Finally  the  Judge
    decided that he could not  consider  the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights outside the Immigration Rules because there were  no  compelling
    circumstances allowing him to do so.  This is a correct  interpretation
    of the decision in SS (Congo).  To reach  that  conclusion,  the  Judge
    considered all the relevant circumstances which he listed at paragraphs
    27 and 28 of the Decision.  His finding that there were  no  compelling
    circumstances was one open to him on those facts and whereas it may  be
    a decision that not many would agree with, it cannot be said to satisfy
    the very high threshold to amount to perversity.  The Judge did make an
    error of fact as to whether the Appellant was an overstayer,  but  this
    does not amount to a material error of law because it was not a  matter
    taken  into  account  by  the   Judge   when   considering   compelling
    circumstances.  The Judge did refer to the factors set out  in  Section
    117B of the 2002 Act,  but  only  in  the  context  of  an  alternative
    decision that any breach of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights  was
    proportionate and therefore in mentioning those factors  there  was  no
    material  error  of  law  in  respect   of   the   Judge's   compelling
    circumstances decision.

 8. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

