
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02505/2018
     HU/02514/2018
     HU/02521/2018
     HU/02523/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th May 2019                      |On 12th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                  ms c c c
                                   mr c c
                                  mr c j c
                                  mr k e c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Grell of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 4th December 1966, 6th April  2000,  5th  August
    2002 and 26th September 2005 are all nationals of Nigeria.   The  first
    Appellant is the mother of the second,  third  and  fourth  Appellants.
    The Appellants had  made  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  25th
    September 2015 on human rights grounds.  The Respondent  had  initially
    refused their application on  21st  January  2017  and  then  following
    judicial review proceedings or the potential of  such  proceedings  the
    Respondent reconsidered the matter and again refused their  application
    on 28th December 2017.

 2. The Appellants had appealed that decision and their appeal was heard by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Anstis sitting at Hatton Cross on  1st
    March 2019.  The judge had allowed all the Appellants' appeals on human
    rights grounds.  Application for permission to appeal was made  by  the
    Respondent and permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Murray on 10th April 2019.   It  was  said  that  it  was
    arguable that the factors identified by the judge at paragraph 79  were
    not sufficiently compelling to outweigh the public interest in  removal
    given the fact that one child was an adult and the others had not  been
    in the UK for seven years.  It was said that it was also  arguable  the
    judge had not considered the availability of healthcare  and  education
    in Nigeria on return.

 3. A response pursuant  to  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules was provided on behalf of the  Appellants  on  3rd  May
    2019.  Further a notice pursuant to  Section  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules was submitted also on 3rd May 2019  on
    the basis that the new evidence not  available  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 1st March 2019 was that  the  Appellant's  children
    who arrived in the UK on 21st April 2012 had now resided in the UK  for
    over seven years and accordingly those  children  could  be  considered
    qualifying  children  under  the   Immigration   Rules   and   relevant
    legislation.

 4. Directions had been issued firstly for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide
    whether an error of law had been made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    this case and the matter comes  before  me  in  accordance  with  those
    directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. It was submitted by  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  that  the  judge's  decision
    essentially relied upon factors that he had identified at paragraph  79
    of the decision but in consideration of those  factors  had  failed  to
    adequately  consider  the  public   interest   or   the   question   of
    proportionality.   It  was  submitted  that  the  Appellants  had   not
    integrated, that the judge had found little in respect  of  the  matter
    concerning the fourth Appellant's ADHD and that there was little or  no
    problems in terms of  reintegration  in  terms  of  language.   It  was
    further submitted that the judge had previously in  the  decision  made
    negative findings on issues that he then  relied  upon  in  respect  of
    those factors  identified  in  paragraph  79.   It  was  said  that  no
    indication had been given as to the weight  that  the  judge  may  have
    given to those statutory requirements under Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 6. It was said that the central feature in the decision was that which was
    said by the judge from paragraph 57 onwards.  It was noted that it  was
    essentially a case regarding private life only  having  regard  to  the
    matter raised by the judge at paragraph 58.  It was  further  submitted
    that there was reliance placed upon the fourth Appellant's diagnosis of
    ADHD.

 7. In response  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  if  the  judge  had
    accepted the  concession  that  the  Appellants  did  not  come  within
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules then that meant that  it  was
    accepted that it would not  be  unreasonable  for  them  to  return  to
    Nigeria and therefore issues such as potential destitution referred  to
    at paragraph 79 of the decision were not compelling features.

 8. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and the evidence  provided.   I  now  provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. The first Appellant was the mother of the other three Appellants.   The
    second Appellant was an adult at the time of the appeal  hearing.   The
    third and fourth Appellants had entered  the  UK  on  21st  April  2012
    (paragraph 3) and were therefore one month short  of  being  qualifying
    children at the date of the appeal hearing.  They now have been in  the
    UK for seven years.

10. The judge had noted at paragraph 38 that  the  appeal  was  limited  to
    human rights grounds.  In this respect the judge had  referred  himself
    to Razgar (paragraph 39), and  PD  (Sri  Lanka)  [2016]  UKUT  108,  in
    respect of conjoined Article 8 applications by multiple family  members
    (paragraph 42).  He had also firstly considered the best  interests  of
    the children in accordance with Section 55 of the Borders Act 2009.

11. At the conclusion of his initial factual analysis under Section  55  of
    the best interests the judge said at paragraphs 58 to 59 the following:

         "58. The Respondent  is  not  suggesting  in  this  case  that  the
             Appellants be separated.  They either all remain in the UK  or
             they are all removed to Nigeria.  To that extent  the  primary
             point of the children  remaining  with  their  mother  is  met
             either way.

         59.  As it is generally in the best interests of children  to  have
             stability of upbringing it is generally in the best  interests
             of the third and fourth Appellants remain in the UK.  This  is
             particularly so in the case of the fourth Appellant given  his
             ADHD and particularly so in the case of  both  the  third  and
             fourth Appellants given the risk I have found below that  they
             may be destitute and homeless in Nigeria".

12. The judge had at paragraph 60 to 70 looked at other  factors  presented
    in the case.  He had for reasons provided found:

      a) The alleged threat from Boko Haram did not amount to a  reason  why
         they could not return.

      b) There was no real risk to  the  second  Appellant  of  FGM  in  the
         circumstances of this case.

      c) Whilst it was accepted that there was no accommodation to return to
         in Nigeria the judge accepted that of itself that could  not  count
         against the decision to refuse the application.

      d) There will be significant difficulties in  obtaining  accommodation
         and supporting the family on return.

      e) There will be no real language difficulties.

      f) The family's private life was developed whilst their status in  the
         UK was precarious but that should not count against the  third  and
         fourth Appellants in terms of their best interests.

      g) An application by the first Appellant alone was bound to fail.

      h) A factor counting against the first Appellant was her conviction.

13. The judge had noted at paragraph  74  that  as  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants had not been in the UK for seven years then Section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act nor paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  applied.
    He noted therefore that he was not considering whether or  not  it  was
    reasonable for them to leave the UK but the question of proportionality
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  At paragraph 74 he opined

         "proportionality is above all a matter of degree with few, if  any,
         clear dividing lines.  The private life of a child who has been  in
         the UK for a month short of seven years may be put as developed and
         significant as the private life of one who has been in the UK for a
         month over seven years".

    Those comments from what he said at paragraph 75 later indicate that in
    his assessment he did not regard their presence in the UK of one  month
    short of seven years to make  any  real  difference  in  terms  of  the
    assessment of proportionality.  In his  assessment  of  proportionality
    the judge had noted that the case was "finely balanced" (paragraph 82),
    and found removal of the third and fourth  Appellants  disproportionate
    for the reasons he gave essentially at  paragraph  79.   Those  factors
    were:

      a) their long residence;

      b) risk of destitution and homelessness in Nigeria;

      c) the consequences of the fourth Appellant's ADHD.

14. In KO [2018] UKSC 53 (at paragraph  18)  the  court  said:  "Inevitably
    relevant in both contexts to consider where the parents, apart from the
    relevant provision, are expected  to  be  since  it  will  normally  be
    reasonable for the child to be with them".  The  court  further  quoted
    from EV [2014] EWCA Civ 74 in the context of consideration  of  Section
    55 by stating

         "if neither parent  has  the  right  to  remain  and  that  is  the
         background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus  the
         ultimate question will be is it reasonable to expect the  child  to
         follow the parent with  no  right  to  remain  to  the  country  of
         origin".

15. Whilst that case was primarily concerned with a  qualifying  child  and
    issues under Section 55 and Section 117B(6) of  the  2002  Act,  it  is
    clear that the judge in  this  case  when  considering  proportionality
    under Article 8 had essentially and understandably  treated  the  third
    and fourth Appellants as if they were  for  all  intents  and  purposes
    qualifying children (as indeed they now are) given they were  only  one
    month short of qualification.

16. In paragraph 79 when looking just at the third  and  fourth  Appellants
    the judge had noted the three factors that  led  to  him  allowing  the
    appeal of all Appellants.  In terms of long residence that had not been
    analysed further to see whether that long  residence  would  mean  that
    return was either unreasonable or disproportionate.  The  factors  that
    appeared to have led  the  judge  to  conclude  that  return  would  be
    disproportionate was firstly the risk of destitution and  homelessness.
    He had accepted that the lack of accommodation on return was not  alone
    a factor to prevent removal.  The future risk was  potentially  nothing
    more than speculative.  The only other factor referred to in  paragraph
    79 was the fourth Appellant's ADHD.  However that needs to  be  set  in
    context with the findings made by the judge earlier in his decision  at
    paragraphs 54 to 56.  He had noted inter alia

         "No doubt the fourth Appellant's ADHD will make it  more  difficult
         for him to settle and establish himself at school in Nigeria.  This
         is a factor but it is a long way  from  the  significance  that  Ms
         Grell sought to give it of him being liable to  be  regarded  as  a
         witch on return to Nigeria".

    The judge had further noted that the medical  evidence  indicated  that
    the Appellant's ADHD was only diagnosed later in life  along  with  the
    indication that for  six  months  there  had  been  no  major  incident
    suggesting to him that the fourth Appellant's condition was not in  the
    nature of an over visible disability that may tend  to  put  him  in  a
    disadvantaged position.

17. In all the circumstances therefore the judge appeared at  paragraph  57
    to be relying upon essentially two factors, one of which  can  best  be
    described as speculative and the second a factor that  he  had  already
    set in context as  not  demonstrating  any  significant  risk.   It  is
    difficult to see  in  those  circumstances  when  conducting  a  proper
    balancing exercise by application of the balance sheet method  endorsed
    in Hesham Ali and AS that the judge could have concluded  that  removal
    was disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

18. I find that a material error of law was made by the judge in this  case
    and I do not uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  This case
    should be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal before a judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 11 June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
