
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02953/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2016                            |On 9 December 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Gregory Cooley
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant (hereafter the Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  brings  a
    challenge to the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  (FtT)  Dhaliwal
    sent on 2 June 2016 allowing on Article 8 grounds under the Immigration
    Rules and outside the Rules the appeal of the respondent (hereafter the
    claimant) against the decision made by the SSHD) on 7 December 2015  to
    make a deportation order  against  him  by  virtue  of  s.5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.

2.   The claimant is a citizen of the US aged 58.  It appears he  served  in
    the US Air Force between 1977 and 1992,  being  stationed  during  this
    time in the UK.  In March 1994 he was granted ILR as the spouse of  Mrs
    G P Cooley.  He has worked as a Defence Contractor and latterly  taught
    for over six years at FE colleges and university.  He and his wife have
    three adult children and three grandchildren all of  whom  are  British
    citizens.  He is registered disabled, suffering  from  a  severe  heart
    condition, chronic asthma, breathlessness, Type  II  diabetes,  chronic
    bouts of angina and obstructive sleep apnoea which requires the use  of
    a  Positive  Airways  Pressure  Device  (CPAP)   machine.    He   wears
    orthopaedic leg braces and uses a walking stick.  He also suffers  from
    severe depression.  His GP describes his prognosis as  poor.   His  ill
    health is such that he is cared for on a daily basis by  his  wife  and
    requires help with day-to-day hygiene.   He  is  on  sixteen  different
    medications on a daily basis.

3.   The FtT Judge considered the claimant's case on the basis of the  above
    facts.  He noted first of all that the  claimant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paras 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules and so could
    only  succeed  under  the  Rules  if  able  to  show  very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those described in paras 399 and 399A.

4.   The judge noted that on the  public  interest  side  of  the  balancing
    exercise, the claimant had  pleaded  guilty  to  3  matters  of  sexual
    assault on two students whilst in a  private  tutorials  and  that  the
    sentencing judge took a serious view of these offences, noting that the
    victim SW "has suffered a terrible impact.  Her victim impact statement
    makes it clear that  even  now,  years  later,  she  feels  scared  and
    vulnerable".  The FtT judge also noted that there  remained  a  concern
    that the claimant does not accept full  culpability  in  that  "in  his
    evidence, he did not appear to accept the extent and seriousness of his
    offending".  Elsewhere the judge noted that the OASys Report considered
    the risk he posed to members of the public to be  at  a  medium  level.
    Whilst noting that the claimant had been in the UK for a  very  lengthy
    period, the judge observed that he had not been granted ILR until March
    1994, which meant he had begun his relationship with  his  wife  to  be
    when his immigration status was precarious.

5.   The judge found also that there would be no very significant  obstacles
    to his (re-)integration in the USA because he was born and bred there ,
    had a mother still  living  there,  that  he  still  held  an  American
    passport and the language spoken in the US was English.

6.   On the claimant's  side,  the  judge  noted  that  there  has  been  no
    offending prior to the three offences and nothing since.  The  claimant
    was hitherto a man of good character.  The judge also  noted  that  the
    OASys Report dated 20 April 2016 stated  that  there  were  no  current
    concerns about a risk of harm and that, albeit  the  report  considered
    the risk in the community to members of the public to be  at  a  medium
    level, that risk would be reduced because the  claimant  would  not  be
    returning to work  with  students,  and  could  deal  with  stress  and
    depression through correct practices.  He stated that the claimant  did
    not pose a threat  to  others  and  that  in  his  view  "the  risk  of
    reoffending is low".  Also to  the  claimant's  credit  the  FtT  Judge
    counted the fact that he had been in the UK for a very  lengthy  period
    (since at least 1994) that he was married to  a  British  citizen,  had
    raised three adult children and has three grandchildren and that he  is
    socially and culturally integrated.  Note was also  made  of  the  fact
    that he had worked in the UK for  many  years  teaching  and  had  also
    become an approved reading mentor for the Shannon Trust helping inmates
    read.

7.   The judge also took account of the  claimant's  poor  ill  health.   At
    paras 65 to 66 he concluded:

         "65. I carefully carried out a balancing exercise and found that in
             the specific set of circumstances that I had  before  me,  the
             public interest was outweighed specifically by the severe  ill
             health of the  Appellant  and  this  alone  amounted  to  very
             compelling circumstances.  When added to  the  fact  that  the
             Appellant had all of his family in the United Kingdom and  had
             not been to the United States at all since  1992,  the  public
             interest in deporting the Appellant was further outweighed and
             that the combination of factors together also amounted to very
             compelling circumstances which outweigh the public interest to
             deport on this occasion.


         66.  On that basis, the Appellant succeeded in his  appeal  against
             the decision of the Respondent under the Immigration Rules."


8.   The judge went on to conclude  that  the  claimant  also  succeeded  on
    Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules, setting out paras 68 -
    70 that:

         "68. Furthermore, the case of KMO  (section  117  -  unduly  harsh)
             [2015] UKUT 00543 declined to follow MAB  and  held  that  the
             Immigration  Rules,  when  applied  in  the  context  of   the
             deportation of a foreign criminal, are a  complete  code.   In
             looking at the public interest and at the aims  of  rules  for
             deportation for non-UK criminals, I do  of  course  take  into
             account the seriousness of the offences and  that  the  public
             are entitled to be protected from such offenders and that  the
             openness of the United  Kingdom  in  welcoming  citizens  from
             abroad cannot be extended to persons who pose a  serious  risk
             of harm to the United Kingdom public.  However, this  case  is
             so exceptional in its particular facts and that the imperative
             of proportionality  demands  an  outcome  in  the  Appellant's
             favour.  I am satisfied that his health issues are relevant to
             the issue of proportionality.


         69.  Whilst s.117B and s.117C set  out  statements  of  the  public
             interest, it is of note that the I.D.I at paragraph 2.3.4 sets
             out factors which are capable of adding weight to  the  public
             interest I deportation.  Those factors have been considered by
             me under the Immigration Rules and  under  Article  8.   I  am
             satisfied that the public interest in deporting the  Appellant
             can be and has been  outweighed  specifically  by  his  health
             issues and more so, when I consider  that  the  Appellant  has
             built up strong roots in the  United  Kingdom  and  wishes  to
             continue to live in a country to be with his immediate family.
              Of course, the public are entitled to be protected from those
             citizens who commit serious offences  whilst  they  are  being
             allowed to live here in the United Kingdom but I am  satisfied
             that the public would still expect this to be done fairly.


         70.  Therefore, in all the  circumstances,  I  are  satisfied  that
             there are exceptional and  very  compelling  circumstances  in
             this  case  such  that  outweighs  the  public   interest   in
             deportation  and  I  are  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has
             discharged  the  burden  of  proof  to  establish   that   his
             deportation would be contrary to his Article 8 rights."


9.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal were fourfold.   First  it  was  contended
    that the judge's assessment that there was no risk of re-offending  was
    flawed because she did not take any or sufficient account of  the  fact
    that the claimant committed his sexual  assault  against  his  students
    when he was already seriously ill:

         "The judge fails to explain ... why the claimant's  current  health
         problems were materially different from those that existed  at  the
         time of the offences.  The judge failed to take account of his  own
         finding that the claimant did not accept the  full  nature  of  the
         offending, nor did his wife and the sentencing judge  had  observed
         that '[y]ou tried to cover up your  offending  by  excusing  it  as
         accidental when it was clearly not'."


    Second the grounds averred that the judge had erred in considering that
    the claimant's inability to reoffend was material to his success  under
    para 398.  Third, it was contended that the judge erred in treating the
    claimant's ill health as enough on its own to amount to very compelling
    circumstances - the claimant's was far from being a 'deathbed case' and
    there was no evidence to suggest he could not receive medical treatment
    in the US.  Fourth, the grounds complained that the judge's reliance on
    the fact that all the claimant's family are in the UK and  he  has  not
    been to the US since 1992 failed to factor in  her  findings  elsewhere
    that it would not be unduly harsh for the claimant's wife to live  with
    him in the US or further to  be  separated  from  him  by  way  of  his
    deportation (paras 42 - 43) and that there would be no very significant
    obstacles to his reintegration in his home country (para 47).


10.  At the hearing the claimant stated that he wished to appear in  person.
     I explained to him that my first task was confined to deciding whether
    the FtT Judge erred in law and that his  and  Mr  Tarlow's  submissions
    should focus on that issue, not on giving evidence.  Mr Cooley directed
    my attention to several bundles of documents in which he  had  set  out
    his arguments.  He reiterated several of the points made in his written
    claims, in particular that the SSHD had been given sufficient  evidence
    to establish that he had been in the UK for most  of  the  period  from
    1976 as a serving soldier until 1992, that the deportation  order  made
    against him was prejudicial in nature and an excessive  penalty  as  he
    had not been the subject of a court recommendation for deportation  and
    his offences were minor and he was not a persistent offender,  that  he
    was not a danger to the public, that he had had  a  positive  probation
    report, that he was deeply remorseful,  that  the  SSHD  had  currently
    overlooked the significant challenges he faced coping  with  his  long-
    term  disabilities,  that  in  the  US  he  would  be  left  completely
    vulnerable, unsafe and destitute, physically  disabled  and  unable  to
    support himself and he had no family to  support  him  and  he  had  no
    private pension or medical insurance.  He pointed out  that  separation
    from his family in the UK would cause him permanent emotional damage.

11.  Before me Mr Tarlow elaborated on  the  SSHD's  four  grounds,  arguing
    that the judge had failed to take account of his own finding that there
    had been no essential  change  in  the  claimant's  underlying  medical
    conditions since his offence in 2014.  The judge appeared, he said,  to
    take no account of her own finding that neither the  claimant  nor  his
    wife had accepted the full nature of his offending.

12.  Mr Cooley submitted that the judge had given an independent  assessment
    and it should not be interfered  with.   He  said  the  SSHD's  grounds
    contained a falsification of the fact  in  stating  that  he  had  been
    convicted of sexually assaulting three women, when it was two.  He said
    he had taken full  responsibility  for  his  offences  and  was  deeply
    remorseful.  The offences occurred over two and a half years  ago  now.
    Contrary to what the SSHD alleged, his health  had  deteriorated  since
    the time of his offences: he was to have a  cardiac  re-assessment  and
    had been fitted with two additional hearing aids.  Prior to  sentencing
    the Probation Service had recommended a twelve  month  community  order
    sentence but the prosecution had then asked for  sixteen  months.   The
    offences had happened at a highly stressful time when he had  overdosed
    in his medication.

13.  Having heard the parties' submissions I reserved my decision so that  I
    could make sure I had  taken  careful  account  of  all  the  (lengthy)
    documentation.

14.  I have decided that the FtT Judge did materially err in  law  and  that
    her decision should be set aside.  There were  at  least  two  material
    errors in the judge's determination.  First, her statement at  para  65
    that "the public interest was outweighed specifically by the severe ill
    health of the [claimant] and this alone  amounted  to  very  compelling
    circumstances"  was  contrary  to  established  case   law   principles
    governing ill health claims reliant on Article  8,  GS  (India)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40 in  particular.   Whilst  the  evidence  before  the  judge
    demonstrated that the claimant was in poor  ill  health,  with  a  poor
    prognosis, it did not show that his was a deathbed  case  or  that  his
    matrix of medical conditions posed an immediate  threat  to  his  life.
    Further the judge did not find, nor would she have been able to find on
    the available evidence, that the claimant would be  unable  to  receive
    adequate medical treatment  back  in  the  US.   The  judge  completely
    ignored the objective evidence showing there would be adequate  medical
    treatment identified by the SSHD in her refusal decision pp 10 - 11.

15.  A second error made by the judge concerned her failure to  factor  into
    her assessment that the  claimant  had  shown  his  circumstances  came
    within para 398 her own earlier  finding  relating  to  the  matter  of
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the claimant or his  wife  to  re-
    settle in the US.  At paras 42 - 43 she stated:

         "42. The United States is deemed to be a  safe  country,  it  is  a
             country where the language spoken is English and the Appellant
             had lived there prior to him moving  to  the  United  Kingdom.
             Indeed, it appears that the Appellant's mother is still in the
             United States.  If the Appellant were to be deported  and  the
             Appellant's wife decided to join him, other than a  separation
             from her adult children and her grandchildren which  would  be
             difficult,   inconvenient,    undesirable,    unwelcome    and
             challenging for the wife of the Appellant, it would not, in my
             view, be unduly harsh.


         43.  For similar reasons, it would not be unduly harsh for  her  to
             live in the United Kingdom without  the  Appellant.   She  has
             been in the  United  Kingdom  all  of  her  life,  speaks  the
             language, knows the  customs  and  has  all  of  her  children
             nearby."


16.  There is nothing to indicate, when the judge turned to the question  of
    whether the claimant had shown "very  compelling  circumstances",  that
    she treated these findings as relevant  considerations.   In  addition,
    her observations at para 65 that all of the claimant's family  were  in
    the UK was factually incorrect (on the claimant's own evidence he had a
    brother living there) and in any event, like  her  observation  in  the
    same paragraph that he had not been to the US since 1992, were  plainly
    inadequate reasons, when read together with paras 42 - 43.

17.  Having found a material error of law and set aside the decision of  the
    FtT Judge, I turn to consider whether I am in a position to re-make the
    decision under appeal myself without further ado.   When  I  asked  the
    parties hypothetically at the hearing what they proposed I should do if
    I decided to set aside the FtT decision, both said I should  decide  it
    myself.  Mr Cooley has submitted extensive documentation including more
    up-to-date medical information including the letter of 10  August  2016
    from a Specialist Registrar in Cardiology, so I have all the evidence I
    need.  This is not a case in which there is any real dispute about  the
    facts.

18.  The decision I re-make  is  to  dismiss  the  claimant's  appeal.   The
    claimant does not dispute the judge's assessment that  he  cannot  meet
    the requirements of paras 399 and 399A.  To the extent that his written
    submissions appear to assert that he believes that on return to the  US
    he would face destitution, I do not consider that opinion is consistent
    with the background information  cited  by  the  SSHD  in  her  refusal
    letter.  The only basis on which the claimant  can  succeed  under  the
    Rules,  therefore,  is  if  he  is  able  to   show   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above those arising under paras 399 and 399A.

19.  Earlier in this decision I have identified factors which  are  properly
    to be weighed in the claimant's favour.  To  summarise,  there  is  his
    very lengthy period of residence, his history of employment, his strong
    family life  with  his  wife,  children  and  grandchildren,  his  good
    character and absence of convictions prior to his 2014 conviction,  his
    work in the community, helping prisoners to read, the fact that he  has
    not committed any offences since 2014, his poor ill health and the fact
    that he does not pose a threat to the public and is not at risk of  re-
    offending.  However, I consider that the factors weighing  against  him
    possess considerably greater weight.  Two sets of factors seem to me to
    be of particular importance in this case.  First of all,  his  offences
    were clearly serious offences.  That is  not  only  apparent  from  the
    judge's sentencing remarks but from the fact that he received  a  total
    sentence of sixteen months' imprisonment for  three  counts  of  sexual
    assault (involving two women).  This length  of  sentence  was  imposed
    notwithstanding the claimant's plea in mitigation the he had been under
    great stress and had overdosed on his medication.  The  fact  therefore
    that since he was sentenced the claimant continues to rely on the  same
    mitigation indicates that he has not  fully  accepted  the  nature  and
    extent of his offences, which he continues to describe as "minor".   It
    is true that he no longer poses a threat to the public and  is  not  at
    risk of re-offending, but the public interest incorporates a  deterrent
    element over and above the issue of re-offending.

20.  The second set of factors is this.  As  noted  earlier,  the  objective
    evidence as to his likely situation on return to the US does  not  bear
    out his claims that he will face  destitution  and  denial  of  medical
    treatment.  Nor does it establish that return  there  would  be  unduly
    harsh or pose very significant obstacles to  him  and  his  wife.   The
    essential difference in this case between his situation in the  UK  and
    his situation in the US resolves into one main matter - that in the  US
    he  would  be  denied  close  contact  with  his  adult  children   and
    grandchildren.  However, because it is not unduly harsh to  expect  his
    wife to join him in the US, he will be able to enjoy family life in the
    US with his wife, where it is not unduly harsh for her to live with him
    if she chooses.  His children are now adults and it  is  not  suggested
    that he is financially dependent on them.  His deportation will deprive
    him of regular contact with his grandchildren, but it will not  prevent
    them from being able to maintain electronic contact  with  him  and  to
    visit him from time to time.  In the particular circumstances  of  this
    case, I do not consider that such disruption would be disproportionate.

21.  Taking these sets of considerations together with all other  factors  I
    am not satisfied that the claimant has established that there are  very
    compelling circumstances over and above those described  in  paras  399
    and 399A.

22.  There is no basis for making a  separate  consideration  of  Article  8
    since, as held by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MF  (Nigeria)  para  398
    encompasses all the circumstances  pertaining  to  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 at large. In any  event,  whether  within  paragraph  398  or
    outside the Rules and fully taking  into  account  the  guidance  given
    recently by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 I arrive at the same result.

23.  For the above reasons:

    The FtT Judge materially erred in law, her decision is set aside.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.


No anonymity direction is made.

                    [pic]
Signed                                  Date

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

