
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02372/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2020                   |On 10 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              mr Namdar Subhani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs, instructed by Whitefield Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated on 19 June 2019, dismissing  his
    human rights  appeal.    For  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  attached
    decision, I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.



The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance  as  a
    student  on  16  September  2007.   He  held  leave  in  that  capacity
    subsequently varied to leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, then  as  a
    Tier 1 Post-Study Work Migrant, further  grants  being  made  until  23
    August 2016.

 3. On 23 August 2016 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant an application which, on  19  April  2018
    varied to that one of application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on
    grounds of long residence.

 4. On 26 November 2018 the respondent wrote to the appellant  including  a
    questionnaire to be completed which asked him for details about his tax
    records.  Of this questionnaire is  usual  in  cases  where  indefinite
    leave to remain is sought on the basis of a Tier 1 Migrant application.
     Although the questionnaire required  the  documents  to  be  submitted
    within ten days, the appellant's solicitors wrote requesting additional
    time, in this case fifteen working days,  that  being  submitted  on  3
    December 2018.  A further  request  to  that  effect  was  made  on  28
    December 2018 but  on  20  January  2019  the  respondent  refused  the
    application pursuant to paragraph 322(9) on the basis that he  had  not
    produced within a reasonable time information required by the Secretary
    of State to establish his claim under the Rules.

    The Respondent's case

 5. The respondent refused the application under the Immigration  Rules  on
    the basis that as paragraph 322(9) applied,  the  applicant  could  not
    meet the suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules.

    The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant appealed on the basis that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    erred with respect to paragraph 322(9) (although it is clear  that  the
    questionnaire was not returned until 15 May 2019).  The judge  directed
    herself at [55] to begin by considering the general ground for  refusal
    in 322(9) not with a view to determining whether the  decision  was  in
    accordance with the Rules or otherwise but as informing the  assessment
    of proportionality of the decision.  She set out  the  factual  context
    having at [36] to [54] their view of the law as to fairness.  In  doing
    so she noted that there were differences in  this  case  which  is  not
    under the points-based system and at [54] the Secretary  of  State  has
    not applied to enter into a dialogue with the applicant.  She concluded
    that as the appellant was being asked to produce records he  was  bound
    to maintain [66] and had failed to explain why the  delay  was  needed,
    that no indication as to why a delay was needed was made in the  second
    letter [73] and that in this factual context  the  appellant  had  been
    given a reasonable time to provide the requested documentation and  the
    respondent's delay between the application to vary of 19 April 2018 and
    letter of 26 November 2018 did not lead to a different conclusion  [80]
    and that although this was a discretionary ground,  was  not  satisfied
    that the Secretary of State had erred in deciding how to  exercise  her
    discretion.  Concluding [86] the Secretary of State had  been  entitled
    to exercise discretion as she had done and find that the general ground
    of refusal applied.

 7. The judge then went on to consider the  issue  of  fairness  concluding
    that the Secretary of State had not acted unfairly, was not obliged  to
    enter into a dialogue with the appellant and when looking  at  that  in
    the context found there is no breach of the public law duty of fairness
    in the application the relevant falls to the case [99].

 8. The judge then considered Article  8  "outside  the  Rules"  concluding
    [102] that as there was no proposal for a removal  date  the  appellant
    could have made a further application for indefinite leave to remain on
    the ground of long residence, this did not constitute  an  interference
    with his right to respect for a private life as such  as  would  engage
    Article 8.  The judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  issue  in  the
    alternative taking into account Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.   When
    concluding  that  the   public   interest   outweighed   the   proposed
    interference with the appellant's right  to  respect  for  his  private
    life.

 9. The judge did, however conclude as follows at paragraph [115]:-

         "I should say, by both postscript, that although the appellant  has
         now produced the requested documentation, I do not consider  myself
         to be in a position to determine whether or not any of the  general
         grounds of refusal apply in his case.  That is because, I not  only
         have no  means  of  verifying  the  information  contained  in  the
         documentation of the HMRC, but more importantly, I do not know what
         figures for income the appellant claimed in  his  applications  for
         leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.   It  follows,  that
         this is not a case in which the Tribunal is well placed to rely  on
         its own judgment  and  expertise,  in  the  general  evaluation  of
         whether the requirements of the Immigration Rules  have  been  met,
         for the purposes of assessing proportionality."

10. Having found an error of law, I adjourned the hearing until 28  January
    when I heard submissions from both representatives.

11. Mr Biggs submitted first that on a proper interpretation  of  paragraph
    322(9) it could not be applied by the Secretary of State on  the  facts
    of this case as this had not been invoked "within  a  reasonable  time"
    nor did it relate to documents which could be "required"  to  establish
    the facts of the application, following Balajigari v SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
    Civil 673.  He submitted that  following  that  decision,  it  was  not
    reasonable on the facts of this case for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    require documents from the appellant, there being nothing to stop  them
    from making inquiries with HMRC and then  to  put  any  questions  that
    might arise to the appellant.

12.  Mr  Biggs  submitted  that,  if  the  appellant  were  wrong  on  this
    interpretation, he had a reasonable excuse for the delays as set out in
    the material before me and, at the date of decision, the  Secretary  of
    State had not afforded a reasonable time in all the circumstances.

13. Mr Biggs submitted that it was in any event for the Tribunal to  decide
    for itself whether the appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules at the
    date of consideration of the  appeal  and  that  where  the  Rules  are
    satisfied there would be no public interest in removal, relying  on  TZ
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civil 1109 at [34].

14. Relying on MM (Lebanon) v the SSHD [2017] UKSC 10, Mr  Biggs  submitted
    that whilst considerable weight should be attached to the judgments  by
    the Secretary of State in her exercise of constitutional responsibility
    for immigration policy, that did not extend so far as all  the  matters
    set  out  in  the  Rules,  there  being   different   public   interest
    considerations and different formulations, in the case of  322(9)  this
    being of less weight, it being merely for  administrative  convenience.
    He further  submitted  that  it  is  not  affected  by  the  subsequent
    enactment of Section 117A to D of the 2002 Act.  He  submitted  in  the
    circumstances that even were 322(9) to apply, little  weight  could  be
    attached to it in the analysis here given that paragraph  322(9)  could
    not be applied to any subsequent application and that there was nothing
    to prevent the appellant from now  making  (or  in  future)  making  an
    application in which that would not apply and there would be  no  other
    apparent basis for him  being  refused  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276B.

15. Mr Tufan submitted the Secretary of State had been  entitled  to  raise
    paragraph 322(9) and on the facts of this case sufficient time had been
    given for the appellant to  respond  to  requests  for  documents.   He
    submitted the Secretary of State would  be  entitled  to  require  that
    certain documents should be provided  for  within  a  reasonable  time,
    drawing my attention  to  the  significant  period  of  time  that  had
    elapsed.  He submitted it took time for  the  HMRC  to  answer  queries
    raised by the Home Office.

16. Mr Tufan submitted that MM (Lebanon) is not relevant on  the  facts  of
    this case, now, the rationale being to ensure  that  the  Secretary  of
    State had all the relevant documents available to reach a decision  and
    that although evidence had been provided  postdecision,  this  did  not
    alter the situation.

17. In response, Mr Biggs submitted  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed
    properly to explain why 322(9) was engaged on the facts of  this  case;
    that MM (Lebanon) did apply; and, that a proper application of  Section
    117B(1) of the 2002 Act would not assist the Secretary of  State  given
    that immigration control encompasses the system of appeals in which the
    appellant could make good his case.

The Law

18. Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules provides:

         '276B. The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:

         (i)  (a) he has had at least 10 years continuous  lawful  residence
         in the United Kingdom.

         (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
         it would be undesirable for him to be  given  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

           (a) age; and

           (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

           (c) personal history, including character, conduct, associations
           and employment record; and

           (d) domestic circumstances; and

           (e) compassionate circumstances; and

           (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

         (iii) the applicant does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general
         grounds for refusal.

         ...'

19. Paragraph 322(9) of the Immigration Rules provides:

         '322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension  of  stay
         set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following provisions apply
         in relation to the refusal of an application for leave  to  remain,
         variation of leave to enter or remain or,  where  appropriate,  the
         curtailment of leave, except that only paragraphs (1A), (1B),  (5),
         (5A), (9) and (10) shall apply in the case of an  application  made
         under paragraph 159I of these Rules.

         ...

         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom should normally be refused

         (9) failure by an applicant to produce  within  a  reasonable  time
         information, documents or other evidence required by the  Secretary
         of State to establish his claim to remain under these Rules'

20. The sole basis for refusal under  paragraph  276B  was  that  paragraph
    322(9), one of the general grounds for refusal, was engaged.

21. As both parties accepted, and I have found nothing to indicate  to  the
    contrary, paragraph 322(9) has not been judicially  considered  in  any
    depth.  That is perhaps unsurprising.  When the grounds  for  appealing
    permitted a challenge on  the  basis  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the Immigration Rules, the first consideration would be
    whether the Rules other than the general refusal grounds had been  made
    out as at the date of the decision of the appeal.  The  Tribunal  would
    then have had to  consider  whether,  exercising  its  own  discretion,
    whether nonetheless the appeal should be dismissed on the grounds  that
    paragraph 322(9) was met.

22. It was accepted in Kaur v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civil  1101  at  [16]  that
    there are limits on the extent to which it can be invoked, it not being
    open to the Secretary of State to refuse leave to remain on  the  basis
    of a failure to provide necessary documents if that failure was  itself
    the result of an act or omission on the part of the Secretary of State.
     That of course is not the position here.

23.  The  Secretary  of  State's  right  to  require  information  is   not
    unfettered; the information must be required to establish the claim  to
    remain under the Rules and it is for the Secretary of  State  to  prove
    that that was so.  It also follows it is for the Secretary of State  to
    prove that the time in question was "reasonable".

24. It is evident from the letter of 26 November 2018 that the Secretary of
    State considered that she should be satisfied with  the  evidence  that
    the appellant had provided in support of previous applications and that
    he has complied with the conditions of leave.  He was then required  to
    provide and return a questionnaire and to provide SA302 forms  and  tax
    returns for the period in which he was registered as  self-employed  or
    had been a director of a limited company.

25. I am satisfied that in all the circumstances of this case the Secretary
    of State was entitled to require these documents.  It  is  not  evident
    that the relevant material could have been obtained from HMRC and  that
    is certainly not the case in the case as regards the  questionnaire  to
    be completed.  The refusal letter records as follows:-

         "Your legal representatives in their correspondence of  3  December
         2018, and 28 December 2018 requested an extension of fifteen  days
         in order for you to  obtain  the  relevant  information  from  your
         accountant.  It is noted however that to date you have not complied
         with our request  to  submit  the  relevant  information  required.
         Therefore under paragraph 322(9) your application has been refused.
          It also recorded that  the  application  is  refused  pursuant  to
         paragraph 276D.  The letter of 3 December requests another  fifteen
         working days as it is said that the appellant needs time to collect
         all  the  required  evidence  from  HMRC   and   his   professional
         accountant.  The letter of 28 December again  requests  a  further
         fifteen working days and  again  states  that  the  appellant  will
         struggle to collect all the  original  documents  within  the  time
         limit."

26. The First-tier Tribunal's assessment of this issue as at  the  date  of
    the respondent's decision was, however, preserved - see  the  error  of
    law decision at [15].

27. There was no submission made to me that the Immigration Rules were  not
    met other than through the failure to comply with the request to supply
    information, a request which has now been met.  No submission  is  made
    that there is anything in that material which casts  doubt  on  whether
    the appellant meets the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    situation now is that, since the documents have been provided,  it  has
    been open to the Secretary of State to  have  considered  the  material
    provided.  Since the error of law decision the Secretary of  State  has
    been given time in order to raise that and whilst  Mr  Tufan  submitted
    that there had not been sufficient time to do  so,  equally  there  has
    been no request by the Secretary of State to extend the deadline or  to
    seek an adjournment.  Further, in any event it has always been open  to
    the Secretary of State to withdraw her decision in  the  light  of  the
    material and there is of course nothing to prevent her from relying  on
    the material provided in future.

28. I have had regard to OA and Others (human rights;  new  matter)  [2019]
    UKUT 65 at 27 and 28:

         "27. The significance of  an  appellant  proving  to  a  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  that  he  or  she  meets  the  requirements  of  a
         particular immigration rule, so as to be entitled to be given leave
         to remain, lies in the fact that - provided Article 8 of  the  ECHR
         is engaged - the respondent will  not  be  able  to  point  to  the
         importance of maintaining immigration controls as a factor weighing
         in favour of the respondent in the proportionality balance, so  far
         as that factor relates to the particular immigration rule that  the
         Tribunal has found to be satisfied.

         28.  Whether or not such a finding in favour  of  an  appellant  is
         likely to be determinative of the human rights appeal  will  depend
         upon whether the respondent has any additional reason,  effectively
         overriding that particular rule,  for  saying  that  the  effective
         operation  of  the  respondent's  immigration  policy  nevertheless
         outweighs the appellant's interest in remaining in this country. To
         take one simple example, an appellant who persuades the  First-tier
         Tribunal that he meets the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
         relating to entrepreneur migrants will not thereby succeed  in  his
         human rights  appeal  if  the  appellant  has  been  found  by  the
         respondent (and the Tribunal agrees) that the appellant falls  foul
         of one or more of the general grounds of refusal contained in  Part
         9 of the Rules; for example, because he made false  representations
         in connection with a  previous  application  for  leave  (paragraph
         322(2))."

29. In effect the  sole  reason  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B  is  the  failure  to  supply  documents
    within time.  That is a defect which has been cured; and, as  Mr  Biggs
    submitted, were the appellant now to make an application this provision
    could not be relied upon.

30. It is also to observed that in the case of paragraph 276B, an applicant
    must not fall to be refused on public interest grounds, as is  provided
    for at paragraph 276B (ii).  It is not submitted that  that  is  so  in
    this case.

31. Looking at the evidence at  the  date  of  hearing,  I  note  that  the
    appellant has now complied with the request for information.  I  accept
    also from the material provided that there were good  reasons  for  the
    delay in obtaining the material sought, albeit not ones  known  to  the
    respondent.

32. I therefore consider that in all the circumstances  of  this  case  and
    given the explanations which  now  exist  for  the  failure  to  supply
    material at the relevant time, that it would not now be  reasonable  to
    penalise the appellant for having failed to comply with the requirement
    to supply the documents as at the relevant date.   It follows that I am
    not satisfied that the requirements of paragraph 322 (9) are  met,  and
    so the appellant also meets the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

33. In the circumstances and given the extent to which the appellant  meets
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules, I am not satisfied that this
    is a matter in which Section 117B (1)  is  engaged.   Accordingly,  and
    having had due regard to all the  other  provisions  of  Section  117B,
    I consider that on the facts of this case requiring the  appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom would be disproportionate given  that  he  now
    meets the Immigration Rules.

34. Accordingly, I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 18 February 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                       ANNEXE - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02372/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 29 October 2019                   |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                              MR NAMDAR SUBHANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, instructed by Whitefield Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Devlin promulgated on 19 June 2019, dismissing  his
    human rights appeal.



The Appellant's Case

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance  as  a
    student  on  16  September  2007.   He  held  leave  in  that  capacity
    subsequently varied to leave as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, then  as  a
    Tier 1 Post-Study Work Migrant, further  grants  being  made  until  23
    August 2016.

 3. On 23 August 2016 the appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant an application which, on  19  April  2018
    varied to that one of application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on
    grounds of long residence.

 4. On 26 November 2018 the respondent wrote to the appellant  including  a
    questionnaire to be completed which asked him for details about his tax
    records.  Of this questionnaire is  usual  in  cases  where  indefinite
    leave to remain is sought on the basis of a Tier 1 Migrant application.
     Although the questionnaire required  the  documents  to  be  submitted
    within ten days, the appellant's solicitors wrote requesting additional
    time, in this case fifteen working days,  that  being  submitted  on  3
    December 2018.  A further  request  to  that  effect  was  made  on  28
    December 2018 but  on  20  January  2019  the  respondent  refused  the
    application pursuant to paragraph 322(9) on the basis that he  had  not
    produced within a reasonable time information required by the Secretary
    of State to establish his claim under the Rules.

 5. The respondent refused the application under the Immigration  Rules  on
    the basis that as paragraph 322(9) applied,  the  applicant  could  not
    meet the suitability requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The appellant appealed on the basis that the  Secretary  of  State  had
    erred with respect to paragraph 322(9) (although it is clear  that  the
    questionnaire was not returned until 15 May 2019).  The judge  directed
    herself at [55] to begin by considering the general ground for  refusal
    in 322(9) not with a view to determining whether the  decision  was  in
    accordance with the Rules or otherwise but as informing the  assessment
    of proportionality of the decision.  She set out  the  factual  context
    having at [36] to [54] their view of the law as to fairness.  In  doing
    so she noted that there were differences in  this  case  which  is  not
    under the points-based system and at [54] the Secretary  of  State  has
    not applied to enter into a dialogue with the applicant.  She concluded
    that as the appellant was being asked to produce records he  was  bound
    to maintain [66] and had failed to explain why the  delay  was  needed,
    that no indication as to why a delay was needed was made in the  second
    letter [73] and that in this factual context  the  appellant  had  been
    given a reasonable time to provide the requested documentation and  the
    respondent's delay between the application to vary of 19 April 2018 and
    letter of 26 November 2018 did not lead to a different conclusion  [80]
    and that although this was a discretionary ground,  was  not  satisfied
    that the Secretary of State had erred in deciding how to  exercise  her
    discretion.  Concluding [86] the Secretary of State had  been  entitled
    to exercise discretion as she had done and find that the general ground
    of refusal applied.

 7. The judge then went on to consider the  issue  of  fairness  concluding
    that the Secretary of State had not acted unfairly, was not obliged  to
    enter into a dialogue with the appellant and when looking  at  that  in
    the context found there is no breach of the public law duty of fairness
    in the application the relevant falls to the case [99].

 8. The judge then considered Article  8  "outside  the  Rules"  concluding
    [102] that as there was no proposal for a removal  date  the  appellant
    could have made a further application for indefinite leave to remain on
    the ground of long residence, this did not constitute  an  interference
    with his right to respect for a private life as such  as  would  engage
    Article 8.  The judge then  went  on  to  consider  the  issue  in  the
    alternative taking into account Section 117B of  the  2002  Act.   When
    concluding  that  the   public   interest   outweighed   the   proposed
    interference with the appellant's right  to  respect  for  his  private
    life.

 9. The judge did, however conclude as follows at paragraph [115]:-

         "I should say, by both postscript, that although the appellant  has
         now produced the requested documentation, I do not consider  myself
         to be in a position to determine whether or not any of the  general
         grounds of refusal apply in his case.  That is because, I not  only
         have no  means  of  verifying  the  information  contained  in  the
         documentation of the HMRC, but more importantly, I do not know what
         figures for income the appellant claimed in  his  applications  for
         leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.   It  follows,  that
         this is not a case in which the Tribunal is well placed to rely  on
         its own judgment  and  expertise,  in  the  general  evaluation  of
         whether the requirements of the Immigration Rules  have  been  met,
         for the purposes of assessing proportionality."

10.  The appellant then sought permission to appeal  on  extensive  grounds
    running to some sixteen pages.

11. It is averred that the judge erred:

      i) in not assessing whether the appellant met  the  Immigration  Rules
         for grant of ILR at the date of the appeal, but instead  reached  a
         conclusion as to the  appellant's  entitlement  to  ILR  under  the
         Immigration Rules by  reference  to  the  facts  known  before  the
         respondent as at 20 January 2019;

     ii) in  giving  inappropriate  weight  as  in  treating  the  point  as
         dispositive as to whether 322(9) just via  the  refusal  as  at  20
         January 2019, the correct approach. being to consider  whether  the
         appellant met the requirements for ILR at the date of determination
         and to consider what weight to be given to the respondent's ability
         to rely on paragraph 322(9), it being submitted that this should be
         given little weight;

    iii) in her interpretation of paragraph 322(9) in particular failing  to
         consider whether the appellant had provided

         (1)  the required information and  documents  within  a  reasonable
             time, the question of reasonableness to be undertaken  by  the
             First-tier Tribunal itself not by way of  a  review  into  the
             reasonableness  of  the  respondent's   decision   to   invoke
             paragraph 322(9) and  should  have  assessed  whether  it  was
             proportionate, lawful and appropriate to use paragraph  322(9)
             as a matter of discretion at the date of determination of  the
             appeal;

     iv) in failing to make findings of fact when considering Article 8  and
         paragraph 322(9) in particular for them to consider the reasons set
         out in the appellant's accountant's letter,  overlooking  that  the
         requested period for an extension had not expired by  the  date  of
         decision, 20 January 2019,  in  failing  to  consider  whether  the
         appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules at the date  of  decision
         and failing to consider whether it was proportionate for  paragraph
         322 at the date of determination if the  appellant  met  the  other
         requirements of the Immigration Rules.

The Law

12. The background to this appeal is an application for indefinite leave to
    remain, leave having been accrued in part as a Tier 1 migrant.  As  was
    noted in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 at [2] to [5],  the  respondent
    has become aware of discrepancies between income declared to  SSHD  and
    to HMRC.  At [26], the Court of Appeal noted that:

         "... sub-paragraphs (2)-(13) set[s] out grounds on which  leave  to
         remain and variation of leave to enter or remain  "should  normally
         be refused". It is common ground  that  this  is  not  a  mandatory
         ground for refusal  but  that  it  does  create  a  presumption  of
         refusal."

13. It is evident from many cases, including Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 as well
    as TZ (Pakistan v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 and other  cases  that  the
    Immigration Rules fall to be treated as an expression of the  Secretary
    of State's policy; that is, that they set out who is and who is not  to
    be permitted to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.

14. What is in issue is whether the immigration rules can  be  met  at  the
    date of decision. In some cases, such as those  where  the  requirement
    is, for example, to have acquired a certificate or degree prior to  the
    application, that cannot be met by subsequent  acquisition  of  such  a
    document.

15. Here, what the judge did was to focus on  whether  the  respondent  had
    been correct to refuse the application as at the date of that decision,
    not at the date of hearing.  While  that  was  carefully  analysed  and
    sustainable findings were made that the appellant  had  been  given  an
    opportunity to provide the relevant documents, that was not the correct
    approach.  The judge should have assessed the situation at the date  of
    hearing, and considered whether a failure to comply with paragraph  322
    (9) of the Immigration Rules, was still in issue as part of the overall
    consideration of proportionality. That in turn required an analysis  of
    the whether the long residence rules were met.

16. The judge erred in declining to  make  findings  with  respect  to  the
    document provided.  The judge appears to have considered that the  task
    was an assessment of whether there had been different  declarations  of
    income to the respondent and to HMRC - the  scenario  in  Balajigari  -
    when there was no allegation to that  effect  put  by  the  respondent.
    That was an error compounded by declining to make relevant findings

17. For these reasons, the decision  that  removal  was  proportionate  was
    infected by an error  of  law,  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside.

18. I consider that the decision will  need  to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The issues and fact-finding to be undertaken  are  relatively
    narrow; there  is  no  dispute  as  to  when  relevant  documents  were
    submitted.



Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

2.   The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal.



Directions

1. If the appellant wishes to adduce any further evidence he  must  make  an
   application pursuant to rule 15 (2A) of the   Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal)  Rules  2008   at  least  10  days  before  the  hearing,  such
   application to be accompanied by the evidence upon which it is sought  to
   rely.

2. Should the respondent wish  to  raise  any  issue  with  respect  to  the
   documents now supplied in response to the questionnaire or to the answers
   now provided in the questionnaire; or,  to  raise  any  new  reasons  for
   refusal, this must be done in writing at least 10 working days  prior  to
   the relisted hearing.


Signed                                  Date 11 November 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

