
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02750/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 December 2017                           |On 8 January 2018              |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ms Cathrine Lal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Prime Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of  India.   In  a
    decision sent on  6 February  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
    Malcolm allowed her appeal against a decision  made  by  the  appellant
    (hereafter the Secretary of State, or SSHD) refusing leave to remain on
    the basis of her marriage on 17 April 2015 to  a  British  citizen  KW.
    The SSHD had not accepted the couple were in a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and did not accept  in  any  event  that  there  would  be
    insurmountable obstacles to the couple conducting their family life  in
    India.

2.   The judge heard evidence from the couple and three  witnesses  and  was
    satisfied  the  couple's  evidence  was   credible   and   that   their
    relationship was genuine  and  subsisting  and  that  they  would  face
    insurmountable obstacles living in India.

3.   The SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  were  two-pronged.   The  first  prong
    challenged the judge's credibility findings; the  second  assailed  the
    judge's conclusion on insurmountable obstacles.

4.   I consider the SSHD's first ground to fall well  short  of  identifying
    an error of law.  The points raised merely disagree  with  the  judge's
    findings.  Ms Ahmad sought  to  argue  that  the  judge's  findings  on
    certain issues of inconsistency  were  inconclusive.   However,  it  is
    clear that the judge, having seen and heard from the couple  and  three
    witnesses and having also considered  a  number  of  other  statements,
    including  from  stepchildren,   was   satisfied   that   the   alleged
    inconsistencies identified by the SSHD were either not upon examination
    actual or significant  inconsistencies  or  were  of  a  minor  nature.
    Paragraphs 77-88 represents a careful examination of  all  the  alleged
    inconsistencies.

5.   The second prong of the grounds is another matter, however.   It  takes
    aim at the judge's treatment of the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles
    at paragraph 94:
    "94. The appellant's husband is a British citizen and has always  lived
         in the U.K, his family are in the U.K.  It was his evidence that he
         would not be able to move to India if  his  wife  was  required  to
         return to India as he simply would not be able  to  cope  with  the
         heat in the country and was very clear in his evidence that if  his
         wife was required to return to India that he would not be  able  to
         return with her.  I accept that this met the test of insurmountable
         obstacles to family life continuing outside the U.K  (in  terms  of
         EX.1 (b))."

6.   On its face this passage is clearly an unsatisfactory treatment of  the
    issue.  It was one thing for the judge to  accept  Mr  KW's  subjective
    evidence that he would simply not be able to  cope  with  the  heat  in
    India.  What the judge was  required  to  undertake,  however,  was  an
    objective assessment of whether Mr KW could in fact cope with the  heat
    and whether a difficulty of this  kind  would  pose  an  insurmountable
    obstacle.  The Supreme Court has confirmed in Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11
    that  insurmountable  obstacles  is  a  stringent  test  requiring   an
    applicant to show serious hardship.  Difficulty coping with heat is not
    in itself  a  serious  hardship  in  a  country,  where  there  is  air
    conditioning and available urban environments built to  protect  people
    against the heat.

7.   Ms Jones sought to argue that the judge's assessment  at  paragraph  94
    had to be read in the light of the decision as a whole and the evidence
    as a whole, but looking wider there is  really  nothing  else  that  is
    shown  over  and  above  Mr  KW's  difficulties   with   hot   weather.
    Significantly, there was no  medical  evidence  identifying  Mr  KW  as
    having any specific condition that would make exposure to  hot  weather
    medically harmful.  Paragraph 94 represents a singular failure to treat
    the insurmountable obstacles threshold as a high one.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that the decision of the FtT Judge  is
    legally flawed.

9.   I have considered whether I am in a position to  re-make  the  decision
    without further ado.  I have decided I am.  The claimant  has  produced
    extensive documentation in support of his appeal and I have the benefit
    of the judge's  findings  of  fact  on  all  aspects  of  the  couple's
    relationship and  their  circumstances  in  the  UK.   The  only  issue
    concerns insurmountable obstacles.

10.  As regards insurmountable obstacles, the only  matters  apart  from  Mr
    KW's difficulties with hot weather that were  identified  by  Ms  Jones
    were his age and the relationships the couple have  with  other  family
    members and friends in the UK.  As regards age, Mr KW is 73 but is  not
    said to be in poor health or to have medical problems.  Whilst I attach
    significant weight to the ties the couple have in  the  UK,  I  do  not
    consider that  they  suffice  to  show  that  disrupting  the  couple's
    enjoyment of those ties would pose  insurmountable  obstacles  to  them
    living in India.  Neither have any minor  children  (Mr  KW's  youngest
    child from a former marriage is aged 20 and was said to  live  with  KW
    only as a temporary measure).

11.  It will doubtless seem harsh to the claimant and her husband and  other
    family members and friends that the decision made  in  this  appeal  is
    adverse  to  the  claimant.   Unfortunately  the  relevant  legislative
    framework imposes rigorous criteria that must be met by all  applicants
    and appellants and one reflection of that is the  requirement  to  show
    insurmountable  obstacles.   The  claimant  cannot  meet  an  essential
    requirement  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   So  far  as  concerns   her
    circumstances considering Article 8 outside the Rules, the difficulties
    in the way of the claimant being able to succeed are even  greater,  as
    s117B(4) of NIAA 2002 requires me to attach little weight to a couple's
    relationship when that has been entered into at a time  the  claimant's
    immigration  status  is  precarious.   When  the  couple  entered  into
    marriage the claimant was an overstayer and she has never  had  settled
    status.  There are no compelling circumstances that demonstrate that in
    India the claimant would not be able to live with her  husband  without
    serious hardship.  Accordingly I have no alternative but to dismiss the
    claimant's appeal.

12.  To conclude:-

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 4 January 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

