
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02379/2018
                                                               HU/02389/2018
                                                               HU/02397/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 January 2019                       |On 29 January 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                            MFA (first appellant)
                            MF (second appellant)
                            MA (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Briddock, Counsel instructed by Lighthouse
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are a family of three from Pakistan.  The second
    appellant was born on 18 June 1988.  The third appellant, his wife, was
    born on 13 December 1985.  The first appellant is the daughter of the
    second and third appellant.  She was born on 15 August 2014.

 2. The second and third appellants entered the UK in 2013 under a Tier 4
    (General) Student visa which was valid until 30 September 2014.  On 29
    September 2014 they applied for further leave which was initially
    refused but then reconsidered and granted until 8 September 2016
    because of the first appellant's medical condition.  On 7 September
    2016 the appellants applied for further leave which was refused on
    27 December 2017.  They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where their
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Keefe.  In a
    decision promulgated on 4 October 2018 their appeal was dismissed.  The
    appellants are now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The first appellant suffers from a rare medical condition known as
    Carnitine Transporter Deficiency ("CTD") and is dependent on drug
    therapy in the form of L-carnitine.

 4. In her decision, Judge O'Keefe carefully considered the medical
    evidence adduced by the appellants and, based on that evidence,
    summarised the first appellant's condition as follows:

    (a)  The first appellant suffers from an incurable metabolic disorder
         and is dependent on drug therapy without which her condition will
         progress to further cardiomyopathy leading to heart failure and
         even death.  However, with the drug therapy and appropriate support
         her life expectancy is good.

    (b)  Before the first appellant received treatment she presented with
         life threatening cardiac failure needing multiple resuscitations.

    (c)  Failing to take L-carnitine for one or two days would not be
         detrimental but anything longer than this would result in
         deterioration of her health.

    (d)  Maintaining the first appellant's health relies on treatment from
         cardiologists and metabolic specialists working together, along
         with the supply of L-carnitine.

 5. The judge found that in 2015 the appellants travelled to Pakistan to
    investigate the availability of treatment.  The judge stated that
    whilst in Pakistan they sought the opinion of Prof Dr Taeed Butt, a
    consultant in paediatric endocrinology, who advised the mortality rate
    in Pakistan for children with CTD is extremely high due to the lack of
    crossover of specialism in cardiology and metabolic medicine, and L-
    carnitine being unregistered and difficult to obtain.

 6. The judge considered the evidence of Dr Grunewald, a consultant
    metabolic paediatrician at Great Ormond Street Hospital, who contacted
    Dr Afroze, an associate professor and clinical biochemical geneticist
    at Aga Khan University Hospital in Karachi.  Dr Afroze advised that
    pharma-grade L-Carnitine is not available and that they relied on a
    nutritional supplement where purity and concentration is uncertain,
    which poses serious safety concerns.  Dr Afroze also advised that there
    are no facilities to measure blood carnitine levels on site and that
    the testing of free carnitine is outsourced, which causes delay in
    receiving results which in turn impacts on the accuracy of dosing the
    medication and increases the risk of unacceptable low carnitine levels
    that has a risk of life threatening complications.  Dr Grunewald
    concluded that relocating the first appellant to Pakistan would pose a
    serious risk to her health.

 7. The judge concluded that on the evidence before her it had been
    demonstrated that the first appellant is reliant on L-carnitine and
    that without it her health will deteriorate and result in the likely
    occurrence of serious cardiac problems.  The judge found at paragraph
    39 of the decision:

         "Whilst the appellant may be able to access L-carnitine in Pakistan
         as a food supplement, the evidence provided to me by Professor Butt
         and Dr Grunewald, relying on information from Dr Afroze,
         demonstrates that the first appellant would not be able to access
         pharma-grade carnitine and would have to rely on importing the
         drug.  I find that any delay in accessing the appropriate
         medication would be detrimental to the first appellant's health".

 8. At paragraph 40 the judge considered the best interests of the first
    appellant and found that they are met by continuing to receive
    specialist medical care in the UK.  She stated:

         "The first appellant's condition also requires supervision by both
         cardiac and metabolic specialists.  The evidence before me
         demonstrates that it would be difficult for the first appellant to
         access such specialist medical care in one place.  On the evidence
         before me considered as a whole, I find that it has been
         demonstrated that the appellant would not be able to access L-
         carnitine supplement in Pakistan without the delay associated in
         attempting to import pharma-grade supplements.  Whilst there are
         cardiac and metabolic specialists in Pakistan, they are not in one
         place meaning that the first appellant would not have access to
         holistic treatment necessary to ensure that she is prescribed
         accurate and timely amounts of her medication whilst ensuring that
         her cardiac health is maintained.  I find that her best interests
         are met by continuing to receive specialist medical care in the
         UK".

 9. The judge considered the first appellant's claim under Article 3 ECHR.
    She noted that it had been conceded by the appellants that the high
    threshold required for Article 3 under N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 was not
    met.  Following AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64, the judge
    considered whether the lower threshold in Paposhvili v Belgium [2017]
    Imm AR 867 was satisfied and concluded that it was not. At paragraph 45
    the judge stated that although the appellant's condition was likely to
    deteriorate in Pakistan it had not been demonstrated that "it is
    defined by the imminence of intense suffering or death".  The judge
    found that the treating doctors had not given a timescale for the first
    appellant's likely deterioration, or indicated whether the
    deterioration would be rapid.  She stated at paragraph 46:

         "On the evidence before me considered as a whole, I find that it
         has not been demonstrated that the prognosis for the first
         appellant's health falls within the test as set out in AM should
         she return to Pakistan".

10. The judge then turned to Article 8 ECHR, directing herself to consider
    the Court of Appeal judgments in SL (St Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 and
    GS (India) v SSHD [2015].  She stated that an Article 8 claim is not
    merely an Article 3 claim with a lower threshold and that it does not
    provide some sort of safety net.

11. The judge referred to MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279 where it
    is stated that:

         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be deported will
         be relevant to Article 8 is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance with other factors which by themselves
         engage Article 8".

12. At paragraph 52 of the decision the judge found that it had not been
    demonstrated that Article 8 is engaged as the first appellant's Article
    8 claim was centred entirely around her medical condition and there
    were no other aspects to her private life claim given her very young
    age.  She concluded that because Article 8 was not engaged the appeal
    must fail.

Grounds of Appeal

13. There are four grounds of appeal:

14. The first ground of appeal submits that it was perverse, based on the
    accepted and uncontested medical evidence, for the judge to find that
    there is not a real risk that the first appellant would suffer an
    Article 3 ECHR breach to the Paposhvili standard if removed to
    Pakistan.

15. The second ground of appeal contends that the judge failed to properly
    take into account the lack of holistic services available in Pakistan
    and the non-availability of pharmaceutical grade L-carnitine.

16. The third ground of appeal argues that the judge erred by failing to
    appreciate that AM (Zimbabwe) is authority for the proposition that the
    appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds as this case provides
    that where a person facing removal can show she satisfies the test in
    Paposhvili her removal should be stayed.

17. The fourth ground of appeal contends that the judge failed to consider
    the first appellant's best interests when considering proportionality
    of her removal from the UK under Article 8 ECHR.

Submissions

18. Before me, Mr Briddock expanded upon the arguments in the grounds of
    appeal.  He argued that, based on the judge's own findings, it was
    simply perverse to find Paposhvili was not met and that if had been
    found to be met, then under AM (Zimbabwe) the appeal should have been
    allowed under Article 8.  Mr Briddock's argument in this regard was
    that the only reason given by the judge for not finding the Paposhvili
    standard was met was that the first appellant's treating doctors had
    not provided a timeline for her death in the absence of the required
    medication.  However, in his view a timeline had been given in that the
    doctors had explained that if the first appellant went for more than
    two days without L-carnitine then her health would deteriorate and she
    would be at risk of further cardiomyopathy leading to heart failure and
    potentially death at any time.  He distinguished the case from those
    where patients suffered from a disease with a recognised timeline where
    a doctor could readily set out the likely course of events.  In this
    case there is not a timeline as such but rather the first appellant
    after going for just two or three days without her required medication
    would face a serious risk of cardiomyopathy.  He noted that before the
    appellant had been diagnosed and put on the correct treatment this is
    exactly what had happened to her.

19. Mr Briddock contrasted the factual matrix in this appeal to those in
    other cases where leave to remain had been sought on the basis of a
    serious health condition.  He argued that the factual matrix in this
    case was in fact similar to Paposhvili itself.  He contrasted the
    severity of the position of the first appellant with the appellants in
    MM (Malawi) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 2482 where in his view the risks
    faced by the appellants were far less serious.

20. With respect to the Article 8 ECHR, Mr Briddock contended that the
    judge had, at paragraph 40, properly assessed the first appellant's
    best interests, finding that these are met by her remaining in the UK,
    but had then failed to factor this into the proportionality assessment.
     I put it to Mr Briddock that the judge had not carried out a
    proportionality assessment because she had not found Article 8 was
    engaged.  His response was that reading the decision as a whole it
    appears that proportionality was assessed and that, in any event, it
    was not open to the judge to find Article 8 was not engaged given the
    factual findings which are not in dispute.

21. Mr Tarlow's response was that the challenge to the judge's decision is
    merely a disagreement and that the decision contains valid and clear
    reasoning.  In particular, the judge found that a timescale for the
    accepted deterioration that would occur in Pakistan had not been given
    and in light of this she was entitled to find that the Paposhvili
    threshold was not met.  Mr Tarlow also argued that there was no error
    in the Article 8 analysis because the judge found, as she was entitled
    to, that Article 8 was not even engaged and therefore there was no need
    to proceed with a proportionality analysis.

Error of law

22. In my view, the decision contains a material error of law such that it
    must be set aside.

23. This is a case which concerns the removal from the UK of a child.
    Where removal of a child is contemplated the First-tier Tribunal must
    consider that child's best interests.  Although the judge, at paragraph
    40, reached a conclusion as to the first appellant's best interests -
    finding that "her best interests are met by continuing to receive
    specialist medical care in the UK" - this finding was not factored into
    the assessment of the Article 8 claim.

24. As is made clear in numerous higher court judgments, including, for
    example, ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4, the best interests of a
    child play a central role in an Article 8 case and are a primary
    (although not a paramount or determinative) consideration when removal
    is considered.

25. Mr Tarlow argued that the failure to consider the best interests of the
    first appellant when assessing Article 8 was not an error because the
    judge found (and was entitled to find) that Article 8 was not engaged.
    I disagree.  The threshold for the engagement of Article 8 is not high
    and it is clear from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in SQ
    (Pakistan) [2013] EWCA Civ 1251 that Article 8 will ordinarily be
    engaged when a child has been receiving medical treatment in the UK,
    even for far less time than the first appellant.

26. In SQ (Pakistan), the child in question, who suffered from beta
    thalassaemia, had been in the UK for only a very short time when his
    appeal was heard, and the First-tier Tribunal in that case was quick to
    dismiss his Article 8 private life claim.  The Court of Appeal rejected
    the First-tier Tribunal's approach, finding that notwithstanding the
    short period of time the child had been in the UK the real issue was
    proportionality.  At paragraph 24 of the judgment it states:

         "It was incumbent upon the judge to identify all features of MQ's
         private life which would be subjected to interference upon his
         removal.  These were headed by the discontinuation of the treatment
         he is receiving in this country.  It seems to me that the issue of
         interference admits of only one answer here and the FTT erred in
         coming to the contrary conclusion.  The real issue is
         proportionality.  Unfortunately, the FTT seems to have excluded
         health considerations and the discontinuation of the UK treatment
         from its ZH assessment.  That was a material error of law".

27. The first appellant was born, and has lived her entire life, in the UK.
    In light of the medical evidence it is clear that the quality and
    nature of her life is likely to be radically different in the UK to
    that which she will experience in Pakistan, and it is in her best
    interest to remain in the UK.  In these circumstances, it was not open
    to the judge to conclude that Article 8 was not engaged and that a
    proportionality assessment was not required. As the Court of Appeal
    found in SQ (Pakistan), where the circumstances were, in my view, far
    less compelling, "the real issue is proportionality".

28. The failure to consider the proportionality of removing the first
    appellant from the UK, taking into account as a primary consideration
    that it is in her best interests to remain in the UK, was an error of
    law. The decision must therefore be set aside.

29. The appellants are not able to succeed on their other grounds of
    appeal.  The judge has set out in a comprehensive and clear way the
    serious medical condition faced by the first appellant and the
    implications for her of moving to Pakistan.  The judge has then applied
    these facts to the Paposhvili test.

30. In AM (Zimbabwe) it is explained that the relaxation in Paposhvili to
    the test for a violation of Article 3 in the case of removal of a
    foreign national with a medical condition is only modest.  At paragraph
    38 Sales LJ stated that:

         "The boundary of Article 3 protection has been shifted from being
         defined by imminence of death in the removing state (even with the
         treatment available there) to being defined by the imminence (i.e.
         likely rapid experience) of intense suffering or death in the
         receiving state, which may only occur because of the non-
         availability in that state of the treatment which had previously
         been available in the removing state".

31. It is undoubtedly the case that the first appellant will suffer
    significant detriment by moving to Pakistan where, inter alia, her
    parents will likely face a very difficult challenge of finding adequate
    medication and care.  They will, for example, have to look into
    importing medicine and/or rely on substandard alternatives.  The
    implications for the first appellant will be extremely serious.
    However, it does not necessarily follow from this that she will face
    imminent or rapid intense suffering or death and in my view it was open
    to the judge, for the reasons she gave, to conclude that the Paposhvili
    threshold was not met.

Remade Decision

32. In re-making the decision my starting point is that the factual
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal, which are comprehensive and clear,
    are preserved in full.  I also, for the reasons set out above, accept
    the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion in respect of Article 3 ECHR.

33. The first issue to be determined is whether the private life of the
    first appellant engages Article 8(1) ECHR.  The threshold for the
    engagement of Article 8(1) is not high and I am satisfied that it is
    met in this case, where the first appellant was born in and has lived
    her entire life in the UK, and where she has had extensive medical
    treatment in the UK that has not only kept her alive but has profoundly
    affected the quality and nature of her life.

34. As Article 8 is engaged, it is necessary to consider whether removing
    the first appellant with her parents to Pakistan would represent a
    disproportionate interference with her private life in the UK.  This
    requires a balancing exercise where factors on both sides of the scales
    are weighed against each other.

35. As explained at paragraph 7 of AE (Algeria) [2014] EWCA Civ 653, which
    concerned the removal of a child with a serious medical condition,
    "everything will ultimately depend on the balancing exercise pursuant
    to Article 8.2."  In AE (Algeria), Kay LJ stated at paragraph 9:

         "It is not possible to be confident that the approach to Article 8
         was free from material legal error. What was required was a
         structured approach with the best interests of Maya and her
         siblings as a primary consideration but with careful consideration
         also of factors pointing the other way. Such factors include but
         are not limited to the overstaying of the children and their mother
         and the illegal entry and bogus asylum claim of the appellant
         father. The latter is no doubt what the UT had in mind when
         referring to the need to maintain immigration control. Moreover, I
         do not consider that it would be inappropriate for the future cost
         and duration of Maya's treatment and care in this country to play a
         part in the balancing exercise as matters relating to the economic
         wellbeing of this country, given the strains on the public
         finances".

36. A similar point is made at paragraph 27 of SQ (Pakistan), where it is
    stated.

         "I do not intend to predict or seek to influence the outcome of the
         present case on remittal. On the one hand, MQ can pray in aid his
         lawful entry and his status as a child with the protection of the
         ZH approach. On the other hand, he arrived with his serious medical
         conditions at an advanced stage and, although not an unlawful
         entrant, it will be relevant to consider whether his arrival here
         was a manifestation of health tourism. If it was, that would fall
         to be weighed in the balance. After all, this country is under no
         international obligation always to act as the hospital of the
         world. The difficult question is whether it would be
         disproportionate to remove this child in the light of all the
         evidence in the case, including the medical evidence which, at
         present, is not as clearly presented as it could be".

37. Weighing in the first appellant's favour is that it is firmly in her
    best interests to remain in the UK.  Whilst the consequences of
    removing her from the UK are not sufficiently severe to meet the tests
    in N or Paposhvili they are nonetheless extremely significant.  If she
    remains in the UK she will, on the balance of probabilities, continue
    to obtain an uninterrupted supply of L-carnitine and lead a full and
    relatively healthy life. In contrast, if she moves to Pakistan she
    will, on the balance of probabilities, have a precarious existence
    where she will be dependent on the ability of her parents to source
    medication in difficult circumstances and be reliant on a medical
    system that will not provide her with the co-ordinated and multi-
    disciplinary care that she needs.

38. Also weighing in the first appellant's favour is that her parents came
    to the UK lawfully and have at all times been in the UK with lawful
    leave. Moreover, this is not a case of "health tourism".  The first
    appellant was born in the UK with her condition.  Her parents did not
    move to the UK in order to take advantage of the National Health
    Service.

39. A further factor weighing in the appellant's favour is that the second
    and third appellants, appreciating that they were not entitled to
    remain in the UK, diligently attempted to ascertain whether suitable
    treatment would be available for the first appellant in Pakistan.  This
    demonstrates a respect for the immigration system of the UK.

40. On the other side of the scale, weighing against the appellants is that
    have no basis under the Immigration Rules to remain in the UK.  It is a
    statutory requirement under Section 117B(1) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") to have regard to the
    public interest in the maintenance of effective immigration controls.
    As the appellants have no basis under the Immigration Rules to remain
    in the UK, the integrity of the immigration system weighs in favour of
    their removal.

41. Also weighing in favour of removal is that the appellants have family
    support in Pakistan and would not face any significant difficulties
    integrating into society. The second and third appellants would, on the
    balance of probabilities, be able to find work and provide for all
    aspects of the first appellant's life (apart from the medical issue
    discussed in detail above).

42. A further factor which weighs against the appellants is that the first
    appellant is likely to be a significant financial burden on the NHS
    given the need for medical treatment, co-ordinated consultant lead
    care, and medication for the remainder of her life.

43. The second and third appellants are both in employment and earning
    incomes such that they are financially independent within the meaning
    of Section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act.  They also speak English which is
    relevant under 117B(2) of the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, these
    considerations do not count against them.

44. The other considerations in Section 117B of the 2002 Act are not
    applicable in this case.

45. There are factors of substantial weight weighing on both sides of the
    scales in the Article 8 balancing exercise. After carefully weighing
    all of the relevant factors - and recognising, in particular, that
    although the best interests of the first appellant are an important
    consideration they can be outweighed by other factors - I have reached
    the view that the proportionality assessment falls in favour of the
    appellants. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 21 January 2019               |

