
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02882/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2018                           |On 26 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     Kd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Fonladvand (Legal Representative) MAAS
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  1  January  1940.   He
    claims to have arrived in this country in 2003 and made an  application
    on 26 November 2005 for indefinite leave to remain outside  the  Rules.
    This application was refused in 2009.  His appeal against that decision
    was dismissed by Immigration Judge Neyman on 15 December 2009.  Further
    applications followed and the  decision  giving  rise  to  the  instant
    proceedings was taken on 31 January 2017 when  the  respondent  refused
    the application both under the Rules and on human rights  grounds.   In
    relation to the appellant's claimed fear  of  return  to  Pakistan  the
    respondent pointed out that if he had  such  a  fear  of  returning  he
    should make an appropriate application.  Furthermore Judge  Neyman  had
    found his account to be lacking in credibility.  A  particular  feature
    of the appellant's case is his medical condition but the  Secretary  of
    State did not consider that  the  appellant's  case  reached  the  high
    threshold set out in N v Secretary of State [2005] UKHL 31.  There  was
    treatment for mental health conditions in Pakistan.  It  would  not  be
    unreasonable for the people who currently assisted the appellant in the
    United Kingdom to continue doing so in Pakistan and  it  was  also  not
    unreasonable to expect any family or friends in Pakistan to assist  and
    support him as well.

2.   The appellant appealed his decision and his appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on 30 May 2018.  The judge helpfully summarised the  grounds
    in the appellant's case as follows:

         "15. The Appellant is now aged 77 years and  suffers  from  various
             medical conditions  including  hypertension,  hyperlipidaemia,
             osteoarthritis of the knees, ATI in  2009  as  well  as  heart
             condition  and  fatigue.   He  suffers  from   moderate/severe
             depression with psychotic features and insomnia.  He is taking
             medication for this and under the treatment of  Ealing  mental
             health team.   His  GP  has  referred  him  to  the  Cognitive
             Impairment  and  Dementia  team  after   displaying   dementia
             symptoms.


         16.  The Appellant has continuously lived in the UK now for over 14
             years.  He has made friends in the  local  community  and  the
             mosque who support  him  emotionally  and  financially.   They
             provide him with food and accommodation.  He  is  currently  a
             lodger at the house of a family who have befriended him.


         17.  The Appellant has  no  family  or  friends  to  return  to  in
             Pakistan.  He lost property  in  Azad,  Kashmir  in  the  2005
             earthquake which also killed his wife and three children.  His
             eldest son has already been killed in the violence  which  had
             followed the sacking of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court
             in Pakistan.  Those who killed his  son  then  threatened  the
             Appellant forcing him to flee Pakistan.


         18.  The Appellant has also lost  his  brother  and  sisters.   The
             closest he has to family are his friends in the UK.  With  his
             deteriorating mental health and other issues  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to him returning and integrating in
             Pakistan.  He wishes to maintain and  continue  to  enjoy  his
             family and private life in the UK without interruption."

3.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant.  The judge noted  the
    previous determination by Judge Neyman  and  reminded  himself  of  the
    principles in Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702.   The  judge  notes  in
    paragraph 25 of his decision that the case then was similar to the  one
    before him in that the appellant's wife and three of his four  children
    were killed during the earthquake in Kashmir in 2005,  that  his  elder
    son was killed in political violence, and that the appellant  had  been
    threatened by those he blamed for his elder son's death and that in the
    UK the appellant was suffering from various medical conditions and  was
    being supported and accommodated by good people and the community.  The
    judge  then  set  out  the  relevant  parts  of  the  determination  of
    Immigration Judge Neyman as follows:

         "39.  ...He has totally failed to explain why the people he says he
             lives with have lodged him and at least partially fed him, for
             no consideration at all.  I find it very likely  that  he  has
             deliberately attempted to deceive the Tribunal on  this  issue
             and that attempted deception counts against his credibility.


         40)  The Appellant was asked to explain how he knew that  his  wife
             and three children  were  all  killed  in  the  earthquake  in
             Pakistan  as  claimed.    His   replies   were   evasive   and
             unsatisfactory and had an adverse effect on  his  credibility.
             In any event, there is no  satisfactory  independent  evidence
             that any of his family has been  killed  in  Pakistan,  by  an
             earthquake   or   by   anything/anyone   else.     In    these
             circumstances, the  Appellant  has  failed  to  discharge  the
             burden of proof to show that any of his family in Pakistan has
             died as a result of an earthquake, or for  any  other  reasons
             claimed.


         41)  Given the various  significant  adverse  credibility  findings
             made above, the Appellant has failed to  show  that  he  is  a
             credible witness, or that anything he says  can  be  taken  at
             face value.  For these reasons, the Appellant  has  failed  to
             show that his son was murdered in Pakistan, or that anyone has
             ill-treated him in any way in Pakistan or threatened  him,  or
             that he fears ill-treatment from anyone in  Pakistan  for  any
             reason whatsoever.  In these circumstances, the Appellant  has
             failed to discharge the burden of proof to show that anyone in
             Pakistan would subject him to any ill-treatment whatsoever  in
             that country or that anyone there would persecute him for  any
             reason whatsoever.  For this reason, his  asylum  appeal  must
             fail."

4.   The First-tier Judge noted that Judge Neyman  had  also  dismissed  the
    appellant's Article 8 claims and  found  in  relation  to  the  medical
    evidence that it was not established that these  issues  could  not  be
    dealt with satisfactorily in Pakistan.

5.   The First-tier Judge found that the appeal before him was basically  on
    the same grounds as those before Immigration Judge  Neyman.   The  only
    fresh facts were that the appellant  was  now  eight  years  older  and
    claimed to be suffering from depression and some cognitive impairment.

6.   The judge commented  in  paragraphs  29  and  30  of  his  decision  as
    follows.

         "29. Whilst I follow and adopt Immigration Judge Neyman's  findings
             about the Appellant's lack of credibility  there  is  in  fact
             fresh evidence available today  that  reinforces  the  adverse
             credibility finding.


         30.  In the Appellant's bundle of documents is a letter  from  West
             London Mental Health to the Appellant's GP and dated  6  April
             2017.  This  sets  out  some  of  the  Appellants'  background
             history and as related by him to the consultant  psychiatrist.
             The consultant psychiatrist states that the background history
             is very unclear.  This refers to him giving different accounts
             of what happened to his family in Pakistan and it refers to an
             older son being killed by the Taliban.  It also refers to  him
             having lost contact with his wife and the rest of  the  family
             as they dispersed.  This is of course substantially  different
             from his original claim that his wife and three children  have
             been killed in the Kashmiri earthquake."

7.   The judge notes that matters had become further confused  as  a  result
    of fresh documentation presented by  the  Home  Office  representative.
    Having considered this material the judge found as follows:

         "35.  I  am  satisfied  that  this  Appellant  has  been  employing
             deception not only in his immigration appeals  but  also  with
             regard to his identity  and  immigration  applications.   This
             latest documentation endorses Judge Neyman's earlier  findings
             that this Appellant was not credible and had failed  to  prove
             his claims.


         36.  The Appellant had claimed to have made friends  in  the  local
             community and mosque who have supported  him  emotionally  and
             financially.  There has been no attendance  by  any  of  these
             friends today.  I find it suspicious that if a person who  has
             the generosity  and  goodness  to  provide  accommodation  and
             support for an elderly person yet is not prepared or  able  to
             come to an appeal hearing to  give  evidence.   This  lack  of
             witness and supporting evidence points towards  the  situation
             not being as claimed by the Appellant.


         37.  Neither do I accept his claims to have no  family  contact  or
             links with Pakistan.  He has totally failed to show that  this
             is the case.  I do not accept there would be very  significant
             obstacles to his  integration  into  Pakistan.   He  therefore
             cannot satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.


         38.  The Appellant has also made claims with regard to his state of
             health and under Article 3 of ECHR.  As in the previous appeal
             he has failed to show that his various health issues cannot be
             dealt with in Pakistan and that the medication  he  is  taking
             would not be available there.  Indeed the only evidence of the
             availability of treatment and medicines in  Pakistan  is  that
             contained in the refusal letter and which shows  it  is.   The
             threshold  that  an  applicant  is  required  to  surmount  is
             illustrated in the case of N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31.  This is a
             very high threshold and the Appellant has  not  been  able  to
             show that he is in the terminal stage of any life  threatening
             illness.  He has claimed to have depression but  the  evidence
             of  this  is   not   totally   convincing.    The   consultant
             psychiatrist's report that I have already mentioned and  dated
             6 April 2017 refers to him continuing with the combination  of
             antidepressants and anti-psychotic medication.  The consultant
             stated, 'I am not convinced that there is enough  evidence  to
             suggest that he has any significant cognitive  disorder.   His
             Rudas score  of  6/30  is  not  reflective  of  his  cognitive
             ability.  I am discharging him from the  Cognitive  Impairment
             and Dementia service but I have arranged to review  him  again
             in my recovery clinic on 27 July 2017 at 10am at  the  Limes.'
             The only other evidence are some appointment letters from  the
             Limes giving the Appellant appointments on 26 April 2018 and 7
             June  2018.   There  is  no  evidence  that  he  attended  the
             appointment on 26 April nor any further medical reports."

8.   In relation to the appellant's case under Article 8 the judge  directed
    himself correctly by reference to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  concluded
    as follows:

         "40. The Appellant has failed to show that he has any  family  life
             in the UK.  I accept that he will have some degree of  private
             life but the true extent  of  this  is  not  known  given  his
             deception and lack of credibility.  Nevertheless I assume that
             his claims of spending time at his local  mosque  is  correct.
             This by itself is not of such gravity as to engage Article  8.
             I find that the Respondent's decision is a lawful one  and  it
             was  made  with  a  legitimate  aim  in  mind,  that  is   the
             maintenance of effective immigration control.


         41.   Finally,  I  find  that  the  Respondent's  decision   is   a
             proportionate one.  The need is this instance is  to  maintain
             effective immigration control and far  outweighs  any  limited
             interference the Appellant may have with his private  life  in
             the UK.  Even taking the Appellant's claim at its  highest  he
             appears to have spent his time  within  the  Pakistani  Muslim
             community so he will certainly not have forgotten the customs,
             culture and language of his mother country.  His main language
             and mother tongue is Urdu and it was obvious during the course
             of the Appeal that his knowledge of English was very  limited.
             He will be able to attend a mosque of his choice on return  to
             Pakistan and no doubt follow the same routine  and  activities
             there."

9.   Accordingly the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  both  on  human  rights
    grounds and under the Rules.

10.  There was an application for permission  to  appeal  in  which  it  was
    complained that the decision was irrational and  perverse  and  against
    the weight of the evidence.   It  was  "absolutely  obvious"  that  the
    appellant's difficulties would mean that he would face very significant
    obstacles to integration into Pakistan  and  there  had  been  "unsound
    scepticism" in relation to  the  compelling  evidence  presented.   The
    appellant's dementia had not been taken  into  consideration  properly.
    The documents presented by the respondent at the  hearing  appeared  to
    raise an issue of identity theft.  Reference was made to  the  judgment
    of the  Grand  Chamber  of  the  European  Court  of  Human  Rights  in
    Paposhvili v Belgium (13 December 2016) [2017] Imm AR 867.   Permission
    to appeal was granted by a First-tier Judge on 20 September 2018.  On 5
    November 2018 the Secretary of State filed a response in which  it  was
    submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge  had  considered  all  relevant
    matters.

11.  At the hearing  Mr  Fonladvand  argued  that  the  appellant  was  aged
    between 77 and 78 and had been in the UK for fourteen years and had  no
    ties in Pakistan and it was obvious that the appeal  should  have  been
    allowed on human rights grounds.  He drew  attention  to  the  Rule  in
    relation to those who had been in the country for  twenty  years.   The
    appellant suffered from multiple illnesses.

12.  Ms Pal noted that in  paragraph  30  of  the  decision  the  judge  had
    referred to the psychiatrist finding that  the  appellant's  background
    history was very unclear and in paragraph 38 the judge  had  noted  the
    limited evidence regarding the appellant's mental  health.   The  judge
    had correctly addressed himself by reference to N v Secretary of  State
    as had been confirmed in subsequent  cases  such  as  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    Secretary of State [2018] EWCA Civ 64.  The judge had been  correct  to
    find that there  would  not  be  significant  obstacles  on  return  to
    Pakistan.  The appellant was a national in Pakistan who had lived there
    until aged over 60.  He would be familiar with the customs.  There  was
    no material error of law in the judge's decision.

13.  In response Mr Fonladvand submitted that the  appellant  was  suffering
    various illness for which treatment might be available but he would not
    have the support in Pakistan that he had from the Health Service in the
    United Kingdom.  He always depended on other people and to  remove  him
    would be unreasonable at his age.  He needed to be treated with dignity
    and compassion.  He had suffered from minor strokes in the past.

14.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me and remind myself  that
    I can only interfere with the decision of the First-tier  Judge  if  it
    was flawed in law.

15.  The First-tier Judge correctly directed himself  by  reference  to  the
    guidance in Devaseelan.  Judge Neyman had found that the appellant  had
    failed to show he was a credible witness "or that anything he says  can
    be taken at face value."  As the First-tier  Judge  found,  the  appeal
    before him was basically on the same grounds.  The judge concluded that
    the material lodged before him did nothing to dispel  the  findings  of
    Judge Neyman and indeed as he puts it reinforced those  findings.   The
    judge had in mind that the appellant was some  eight  years  older  and
    that he claimed to be suffering  from  depression  and  some  cognitive
    impairment.

16.  The judge deals satisfactorily with these issues  in  paragraph  28  of
    his decision.  He directed himself correctly as  Ms  Pal  submitted  by
    reference to N v Secretary of State.
17.  The case of N v Secretary of State is  binding  as  has  recently  been
    confirmed in MM (Malawi) [2018] EWCA Civ 2482.  As Ms  Pal  points  out
    the judge properly considered the medical evidence and  the  fact  that
    the consultant was not satisfied that the appellant had any significant
    cognitive disorder.  The judge had  also  referred  to  the  consultant
    psychiatrist stating that the appellant's  history  was  very  unclear.
    The judge notes that none of the appellant's friends had  attended  the
    hearing and the lack of witness and supporting evidence "points towards
    the situation not being as claimed by the appellant."  It was  open  to
    the judge to reject the claim that the appellant had no family  contact
    or links with Pakistan and to find there would be no  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration there.  The judge did not  materially  err
    in law in concluding as he did and in finding that the decision of  the
    respondent was  proportionate.  Mr  Fonladvand  referred  to  the  rule
    covering 20 years residence but I do not find  that  this  assists  the
    appellant given he has not achieved such a period of residence.   There
    is no irrationality in the decision as claimed  in  the  grounds  -  to
    establish perversity is no light matter. Further permission  to  appeal
    was granted with the emphasis on the judge's treatment of  the  medical
    evidence and it is clear the judge  carefully  took  into  account  the
    medical evidence when making his findings.

18.  The decision of the First-tier Judge was not materially flawed  in  law
    and this appeal is dismissed.

19.  It is appropriate in this case to make an anonymity order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 23 November 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

