
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/02738/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st November 2019                     |On 6th November 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                 Adeel Aslam
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Aslam, in person
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated on 4 July 2019, in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim dated 29 January 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 28 November 1990,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom with entry clearance as a student  and
    leave to remain as such initially to 17 November 2013 and  extended  to
    21 March 2015.  The Appellant's leave to remain was cancelled on return
    to the United Kingdom on 11 February 2015 on the basis that he had used
    deception in his previous application for leave to remain  by  replying
    on  a  false  TOIEC  English  language  certificate.    The   Appellant
    successfully appealed against that cancellation, with findings that the
    Respondent had not established the use of deception because  there  was
    no specific evidence  in  relation  to  him  or  his  specific  English
    language test.  The Appellant's leave was ultimately reinstated  for  a
    short period following his appeal to expire on 31 May 2017.

 3. The Appellant made an application for further leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of human rights on 30 May 2017, which was initially  rejected  as
    invalid and a further claim was  submitted  on  4  January  2018.   The
    Respondent refused this application  firstly  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the suitability  grounds  because  he  had  used
    deception in a previous application for leave to remain by replying  on
    a false TOIEC English language certificate and secondly because he  did
    not in any event meet the requirements for a grant of leave  to  remain
    on family life grounds under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or on
    a  private  life  grounds  under  paragraph   276ADE   of   the   same.
    Specifically,  there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles   to   the
    Appellant's reintegration into  Pakistan  on  return.   The  Respondent
    considered whether there were any exceptional circumstances to  warrant
    a grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom, recognising that  the
    Appellant's desire to continue and complete his studies which had  been
    interrupted because of the previous translation of his leave to remain,
    but found that the  appropriate  route  would  be  an  application  for
    further leave to remain as a student and not on human rights grounds.

 4. Judge Lawrence dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 4 July
    2019 on all grounds.  In relation to the suitability criteria,  it  was
    found that the Respondent had discharged the initial  burden  of  proof
    that the Appellant  had  relied  on  a  false  TOIEC  English  language
    certificate  and  that  the  Appellant  had  not  given   an   innocent
    explanation  to  rebut  that  which  reached  the  minimum   level   of
    plausibility, primarily because the Appellant had not "been  active  in
    marshalling his evidence" against the deception  allegation.   Further,
    it was found that the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules for  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain and that there were no other compelling circumstances to justify
    grant  of  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8  grounds  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

The appeal

 5.  The  Appellant  appeals  on  four  grounds.   First,  that  there  was
    procedural unfairness in the conduct of the Appellant's appeal in  that
    he was only handed the Respondent's bundle on the day of  the  hearing,
    which included evidence about the English language  test  and  what  is
    known as  the  ETS  look-up  tool,  together  with  incomplete  witness
    statements.  The Appellant, who was not legally  represented,  was  not
    granted an adjournment and was simply told to read  the  documents  and
    reply to them on the day.  Secondly, in the context of the  Appellant's
    previous appeal against a refusal on the same topic grounds having been
    successful and no documents being served upon him  prior  to  the  most
    recent appeal hearing, the Appellant states that he was unaware of  the
    detail of the allegations against him and as such was unable to contact
    ETS or pursue further evidence in support of his claim.  The First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law in holding his failure to do so against him  when
    assessing whether he had provided an  innocent  plausible  explanation.
    Thirdly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    failing to take  into  account  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  English
    language ability.  Finally, in  light  of  the  previous  findings  and
    generally, that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its  assessment
    of the Appellant's right to respect for private life in the context  of
    him having lawfully entered the United Kingdom as a student  but  being
    unable to finish his studies because of a previous unlawful decision of
    the Respondent.

 6. At the oral hearing, Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Respondent  accepted  a
    material error of law in the first ground of appeal which is sufficient
    of itself to justify setting  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Findings and reasons

 1. As properly  accepted  by  the  Respondent  in  this  case,  there  was
    procedural unfairness to the Appellant, acting in person,  in  that  he
    was not provided with a full bundle from the Respondent  prior  to  his
    appeal hearing and was not given a proper opportunity to  consider  the
    contents of and respond to them to  pursue  his  own  appeal.   In  the
    context of an  allegation  of  deception  for  use  of  a  false  TOIEC
    certificate, where detailed evidence was relied upon by the Respondent,
    both generic about the ETS and the testing system and also specific  to
    this Appellant and where the Appellant was previously successful in  an
    appeal on the same issue in 2015; fairness required  that  the  hearing
    should have been adjourned with the Appellant being given a  reasonable
    opportunity to fairly pursue  his  appeal.   Whilst  it  is  not  clear
    whether the Appellant expressly sought an adjournment on the day, I  do
    accept that he was simply told to proceed with his  appeal,  which  was
    procedurally unfair in all  the  circumstances.   That  unfairness  was
    compounded by the First-tier Tribunal's  reliance  on  the  Appellant's
    lack of response to the allegation of deception as essentially the sole
    reason why his innocent explanation had not been accepted as plausible.

 2. The errors identified above are sufficient of themselves to require the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside and remitted for  a
    fresh appeal hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  errors  are
    clearly material and at least potentially affect the overall assessment
    made on Article 8 grounds.
Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the appeal  to
the First-tier Tribunal (Birmingham hearing centre)  to  be  heard  de  novo
before any judge except Judge Lawrence.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]         Date         4th November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
