
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02779/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 November 2017                       |On 29 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                           ms grace adenike lucas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She was born on 8 October 1959.
     She first came to the United Kingdom on 29 November 2006 as a  visitor
    and has remained in the United Kingdom as an overstayer from  the  time
    her leave as a visitor came to an end.  On 10 September 2015  she  made
    an application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis
    of family life as the partner of a British citizen, and  private  life.
    The Secretary of State refused her application by  way  of  a  decision
    dated 5 January 2016.  The appellant appealed against the  respondent's
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. In a decision promulgated on 24 April 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    FitzGibbon  QC  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The   First-tier
    Tribunal found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules and that there were no features to make it  necessary
    to consider the case outside of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  On 7 June 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baker
    refused to grant permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant  renewed  her
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  on  14
    September 2017 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 4. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  having
    accepted that the appellant and her partner were  truthful  and  honest
    witnesses, made contradictory findings in dismissing the appeal despite
    being made aware of overwhelming difficulties that  the  appellant  and
    her partner would face even during a short trip  to  Nigeria.   It  was
    contradictory for the judge to have then not accepted their account  of
    the serious issues posed by a return to Nigeria.  The grounds of appeal
    also assert that the appellant is aware that the respondent has  a  ten
    year partner route available to persons in her  situation  who  do  not
    meet all the requirements of the Rules but have no  suitability  issues
    and consequently she expected to  be  considered  under  the  ten  year
    provision.

 5. The respondent submitted a Rule 24 response arguing that there  was  no
    error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   The  judge,  at
    paragraph 14, found that he was not satisfied that  the  appellant  and
    her partner's worries meant  that  return  would  entail  very  serious
    hardship and also  found  that  they  appeared  able  to  overcome  any
    difficulties that her return might cause.

 6. At the beginning of the hearing I explained the procedure to  Ms  Lucas
    and invited her to make submissions as to why the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision contained an error of law.  Ms Lucas submitted that  she  told
    the judge that there would be significant troubles facing  her  if  she
    were to have to go back to Nigeria and that she would have to start all
    over again.  She also submitted that her partner  had  told  the  court
    that he was unable to finance the trip for her to go to Nigeria to make
    an application.

 7. Mr Nath  asked  the  Tribunal  to  take  into  consideration  that  the
    appellant came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2006  as  a  visitor  and
    overstayed.  He referred to paragraph 13  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and said the judge considered  the  Rules  appropriately.  The
    judge made findings as to whether  or  not  the  appellant  would  face
    serious hardship  and  found  that  she  would  not.   He  referred  to
    paragraph 11 of the decision and indicated that the evidence before the
    judge was not that the appellant's partner could not finance the  trip.
    The evidence was that the appellant's partner was concerned  about  the
    expense of the move and that it would take up  all  his  savings  which
    were not substantial.  In any event he indicated that the cost  of  the
    appellant returning to Nigeria is not a factor that would indicate that
    she would face very serious hardship in Nigeria.

Discussion

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge in this case found that the appellant and
    her partner were truthful witnesses.  The First-tier Tribunal found:

 9. The judge summarised the evidence which was not disputed  at  paragraph
    8.  At paragraph 10 the judge set out the evidence as:

    10.  As for returning to Nigeria, the appellant maintains that she  has
         no home or the prospect of employment there.  She told me that  she
         used to have a small business supplying materials for the  building
         trade.   Although  she  has  maintained  contact  with   her   work
         colleagues, she does not think she could  restart  it  as  economic
         conditions have changed.  She has three grown  up  children  there,
         but they rely on financial support from Mr Ajose.  Although she has
         not heard from her husband in many years, she has residual concerns
         that he may make life difficult for her in Nigeria - but  that  she
         could not give a reason for having those concerns.

    11.  Mr Ajose though  originally  from  Nigeria,  has  been  a  British
         citizen since 1991.  He is unwilling to move to Nigeria.  He has no
         home there and does not want to sacrifice his  job  here,  or  lose
         contact with his children.  In cross-examination, he said that  his
         greatest concern was the expense of a move, as it would take up all
         of his savings, which were not substantial.  He was not sure  about
         the possibility of the appellant returning temporarily to  make  an
         application from Nigeria; he preferred her to stay with him, but he
         acknowledged that nothing prevented her from applying from abroad.

10. The judge then considered the evidence and made the following findings:

    14.  In my view, the difficulties which  the  appellant  and  Mr  Ajose
         foresee for themselves in Nigeria are real, with the  exception  of
         the feared reappearance  of  the  appellant's  husband,  which  was
         speculative.  However, I am not satisfied that their  worries  mean
         that return would entail 'very  serious  hardship'  for  either  of
         them, but would  fall  short  of  that  level  of  hardship.   They
         appeared able to overcome any difficulties that  her  return  might
         cause.  The evidence that they have given does not persuade me that
         it would be unreasonable for them to be expected to continue  their
         relationship in Nigeria, without undue hardship.

    15.  For the private life claim, similar considerations apply.   Unless
         the appellant can  show  that  there  would  be  'very  significant
         obstacles' to integration in Nigeria, she cannot avail  herself  of
         paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In my view, she  cannot
         show that this is the case: she has family members there,  she  has
         colleagues from her previous employment,  and  she  has  spent  the
         first 47 years of her life living there.   She  has  not  lost  her
         family, social and cultural ties.  This application must fail.

11. It is clear that the judge considered that the  difficulties  that  the
    appellant had said  she  would  face  would  not  entail  very  serious
    hardship for the appellant or her husband. The appellant's husband  has
    adult children in the UK but the appellant also has adult  children  in
    Nigeria. This is not a case of the judge not accepting the  appellant's
    account  (apart  from  the  feared  reappearance  of  the   appellant's
    husband). The case turns on whether or not the  circumstances  amounted
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  UK  or
    very significant obstacles to integration in Nigeria for the  appellant
    under 276ADE.

12. Regarding insurmountable obstacles the test  is  a  stringent  one  and
    represents a high hurdle to be overcome. As found in Agyarko  &  Others
    (on the application of) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440:

         45. By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), "insurmountable obstacles"  are
         treated as a requirement for the grant of leave under the Rules  in
         cases to which that paragraph  applies.  Accordingly,  interpreting
         the expression in the same sense as in  the  Strasbourg  case  law,
         leave to remain would not normally be granted  in  cases  where  an
         applicant for leave to remain under the partner route was in the UK
         in breach of  immigration  laws,  unless  the  applicant  or  their
         partner would face very serious difficulties  in  continuing  their
         family life together outside the UK, which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship.



13. The judge had the benefit of seeing and hearing the appellant  and  her
    husband giving evidence. The judge considered all the relevant evidence
    and correctly  applied  the  law.   On  the  facts  of  this  case  the
    conclusion reached by the judge was one that was open to him.

14. With regard to obstacles to integration into Nigeria  the  judge  could
    not have reached a different  conclusion  given  that  she  has  family
    members there, she has colleagues from her previous employment, and she
    has spent the first 47 years of her life living there.

15. The evidence  regarding  the  financial  position  of  the  appellant's
    husband was that his greatest concern was the expense of a move, as  it
    would take up all of his  savings  not  that  he  could  not  fund  the
    appellant's fare  home.  In  any  event  this  would  not  amount  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria.

16. In this case the  appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  unlawfully  for  a
    considerable period of time. She entered into the relationship with her
    husband whilst she was here unlawfully.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

18. No anonymity direction is made.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material error  of
law. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 23 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

