
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/02555/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 8th December 2017                  |           On 25th January 2018      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Aroosa Akhtar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Harvey, instructed by Salisbury Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born on 5 September 1993. Her appeal against  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge I D Boyes on 7
    March 2017.

2.   The judge concluded that at the date of hearing the Appellant  met  the
    financial requirements of the Immigration Rules. Permission  to  appeal
    was sought by the Respondent on the ground that the judge  should  have
    dismissed the appeal on the basis that the Appellant could not meet the
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE having failed to provide  the  necessary
    specified documents with the  application.  Accordingly,  having  found
    that the Appellant met the requirements of the Rules the judge erred in
    law.

3.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge G A  Black  on  the
    grounds that the very brief  decision  contained  no  analysis  of  the
    evidence as to how the Appellant met the financial requirements or what
    documents  were  produced.  The  Appellant  provided  tax  returns  for
    2012/2013 and 2013/2014, and two tax returns and bank statements for  1
    August 2014 and 2 February 2015 with the application  which  failed  to
    meet the requirements of the Rules under 9(b), (c) and (d).  The  Rules
    require that the documents be produced at the date of application.  The
    judge concluded that the Appellant met the specified evidence Rules  at
    the date of hearing. The judge gave no consideration  to  the  relevant
    date for meeting the  requirements  of  the  Rules  and  therefore  the
    grounds were arguable.

4.   Mr Clarke submitted that this was a human rights  appeal  and  although
    the decision maker was not allowed to take into  account  material  not
    submitted with the application that was not the case in respect of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The judge could  look  at  this
    new evidence and was not precluded from doing so under  Section  85  of
    the 2002 Act as amended. Mr Clarke submitted that the grounds  did  not
    challenge the proportionality assessment and therefore it would not  be
    proper for him to argue a materiality point. It  was  accepted  by  the
    Presenting Officer, in his note on the court file, that  the  Appellant
    satisfied the Immigration Rules at the date of hearing.

5.   Accordingly, on that basis I find that  the  judge  was  not  precluded
    from looking at post decision evidence  and  his  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules at the date  of  hearing  was
    one which was open to the judge on the evidence before him.

6.   I find that there is no error of law in the decision of 7  March  2017,
    allowing the Appellant's human rights appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance, and I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.


Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 24 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
