
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02888/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |On 12 August 2020                    |
|Via Skype for Business               |                                     |
|On 31 July 2020                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               DOUAA AL KASSEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Kalsi, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 15 August 2000 and is  a  female  citizen  of
    Syria. The United Kingdom sponsor is Mr Alaa Al  Waked  (hereafter  the
    sponsor). The appellant and sponsor claimed to be parties  to  a  valid
    marriage contracted in Syria. The sponsor is also Syrian and a  refugee
    in the United Kingdom. Their claim was rejected  by  the  Secretary  of
    State who refused the appellant's application for a family reunion visa
    by decision dated 18 January 2019. The appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  29  July  2019,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are four grounds of appeal. At the initial hearing at  Manchester
    on 31 July 2020, Mr Holmes, who appeared for  the  appellant  and  also
    drafted the grounds of  appeal,  summarised  the  appellant's  case  by
    reference to two 'material issues': an application under rule  15(2)(a)
    to admit new  evidence  in  relation  to  the  deceased  child  of  the
    appellant and sponsor and Article 8  ECHR.  He  did  not  in  his  oral
    submissions touch  upon  grounds  (i)  and  (ii).  These  grounds  deal
    respectively with the assertion that the judge  had  erred  in  law  by
    finding that the appellant and sponsor were  not  lawfully  married  in
    Syria and that the judge had  failed  to  make  findings  on  the  oral
    evidence of witnesses who  had  appeared  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.

 3. It is perhaps not surprising that Mr Holmes did  not  concentrate  upon
    Grounds (i) and (ii) as they are without merit. It is  clear  from  the
    decision that the judge was entitled to reach the view, on the evidence
    before her, that the appellant and sponsor had not contracted  a  legal
    marriage  in  Syria.  At  [26],  judge  found,  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities, the parties had validly married in May 2013 in a  manner
    which complied with Syrian law; in particular, the  appellant  had  not
    been granted an exception given her age at the time (16 years old).  In
    addition, the judge found that 'given the time the sponsor  left  Syria
    [the parties had not been] living together in a  relationship  akin  to
    marriage or civil partnership which had subsisted for two years or more
    before the sponsor  [left  Syria]  to  seek  asylum.'  At  the  initial
    hearing, Mr Holmes did  not  challenge  those  findings.  Moreover,  as
    regards ground (ii), the evidence of the witnesses has been  summarised
    by the judge [16-21] and has effectively been analysed and rejected  in
    the judge's findings regarding claimed marriage at [26].  The  evidence
    of the witnesses was relevant only to  the  question  of  the  disputed
    marriage.

 4. I shall, therefore, concentrate on but the remaining grounds of appeal.
    These respectably concern the allegation that the judge failed to apply
    the correct test (insurmountable obstacles)  to  the  analysis  of  the
    Article 8 appeal and failed to take into account the  respondent's  own
    evidence regarding the state of internal armed conflict in  Syria  when
    assessing Article 8. This latter ground is advanced in the  grounds  of
    appeal (prepared in  August  2019)  by  reference  to  the  appellant's
    pregnancy at that time  and  the  difficulties  she  was  facing  as  a
    pregnant young  woman  in  Syria  without  her  male  partner.  At  the
    beginning of an initial  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Holmes
    informed me that the child had been born but, very sadly, had died from
    sepsis. That event is the reason for the application  to  adduce  fresh
    evidence. However, whilst I acknowledge, as did Mrs Aboni, who appeared
    for the Secretary of State, that while evidence concerning the death of
    a child might be relevant in any remaking of the decision  the  child's
    death is not relevant to the question now before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    namely whether the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  such  that  its
    decision forced  be  set  aside.  The  death  of  the  child  has  not,
    therefore, been considered in determining the question of error of law.

 5. Mr Holmes submitted that, although the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 352A of HC 395 (as amended), the judge should
    have allowed the appeal under Article 8 having found that the appellant
    and sponsor are in a relationship because the  United  Kingdom  is  the
    only place where family life may take place. Mrs Aboni  submitted  that
    the judge been right to dismiss the appeal on the  basis  that,  having
    failed to satisfy the Immigration  Rules,  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances in this instance and that the decision of  the  Secretary
    of State had  not  interfered  with  the  family  life  of  either  the
    appellant or the sponsor since it had not disturbed the pre-application
    status quo of those individuals.

 6. Paragraph 352 (ii), which sets  out  the  requirements  for  settlement
    United Kingdom as the partner of  a  recognised  refugee,  provides  as
    follows:

         (ii) the marriage or civil partnership did not take place after the
         person granted refugee status left  the  country  of  their  former
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum or the parties have been
         living together in a relationship  akin  to  marriage  or  a  civil
         partnership which has subsisted for two years or  more  before  the
         person granted refugee status left  the  country  of  their  former
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum

    The rule deals not only with married  applicants  but  also  those  who
    claim to be in a relationship akin to marriage.  The  requirement  that
    such a relationship  should  have  subsisted  for  two  years  or  more
    underlines the reasonable requirement that the relationship  should  be
    stable and subsisting. In the present appeal, the judge found that  the
    relationship between the appellant and  sponsor  was  neither  a  legal
    marriage nor did it comply with this  two-year  provision.  Those  were
    important findings in the context of the Article 8 appeal.  As  regards
    the  public  interest,  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rule was given  appropriate  weight  by
    the judge. There is also, in my opinion, some merit in the  status  quo
    argument advanced by the respondent and which clearly had an  influence
    upon the judge. Whilst public  authorities  arguably  have  a  duty  to
    promote  as  well  as  not  to  interfere  with  the  family  life   of
    individuals, it is clearly correct that the decision in  this  instance
    did not leave the family life of the appellant and sponsor in  a  worse
    position than before the application for a  visa  was  made.  Moreover,
    this was not a case in which the appellant and  sponsor  were  enjoying
    family life together in the United Kingdom and in which  the  threshold
    for the existence of exceptional circumstances  which  might  arise  if
    they were to be separated by  decision  of  the  state  might  be  more
    readily crossed. Set against that background, it is my  view  that  the
    decision to dismiss  the  human  rights  appeal  took  account  of  all
    relevant  evidence  and  cannot  be  described  as  perverse.  If   the
    appellant's submissions to the Upper  Tribunal  are  correct,  then  in
    every case where a relationship exists, no  matter  how  short,  and  a
    United Kingdom sponsor is a refugee unable to return to the country  in
    which the appellant is living, then entry clearance would  have  to  be
    granted. I do not consider that can be correct.  Whilst  I  acknowledge
    that there may be cases where  an  appellant  cannot  meet  the  Family
    Reunion rule but circumstances exist attracting the protection provided
    by Article 8, every case turns upon its own facts. There is nothing  in
    the present case to indicate that the  judge  has  not  considered  the
    relevant evidence in reaching a decision which was  available  to  her;
    she was not obliged, as the appellant submits, to allow the  appeal.  A
    different judge may have reached a different decision but that  is  not
    the point. There is no error in either the process by which  the  judge
    reached her decision or in the outcome.

 7. In the light of what I say above, I find that  this  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 6 August 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

