
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02031/2016
                                                               HU/02035/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th January 2017                         |On 25th January 2017          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                             MRS. FARooq bi (1)
                  mr. khawaja muhammad shabir tabassum (2)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     entry clearance office - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mrs. S Kauser, Solicitor, Kausers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Lodge and  Parkes  promulgated  on  19th  July  2016.   The  underlying
    decisions that were the subject of the appeals  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were the decisions of the respondent dated 23rd December  2015
    to refuse the appellants entry clearance to the UK.


 2. The appellants are husband and wife.  They applied for entry  clearance
    in December 2015 to spend time with Mr. Abdul Majid, the father of  the
    second appellant and the father-in-law of the first appellant, who  was
    at the time suffering from ill  health.   The  applications  for  entry
    clearance were refused because the  entry  clearance  officer  was  not
    satisfied that the appellants are genuine visitors and would leave  the
    United Kingdom at the end of their visits. The applications for a visit
    visa were therefore refused under paragraphs  4.2(a)  and  (c)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


 3. I record at this juncture that Abdul Majid  passed  away  on  3rd  June
    2016.  The appellants appeal was heard on 22nd June 2016.  By the  time
    the appeal was heard, the focus of the visit  was,  understandably,  to
    enable the appellants to visit the United  Kingdom  to  be  with  their
    family and share in the sorrow and grief at the death of their  father.
    The appellants also wished to attend and  participate  in  a  religious
    ceremony that would take place 40 days after the date of death.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 4. The decision of the panel of First-tier Tribunal  Judges  sets  out  at
    paragraphs [4] to [10], the background to the appeal and  the  evidence
    before the Tribunal.  The Tribunal's consideration of the evidence  and
    its findings are set out at paragraphs [11] to [19]  of  the  decision.
    In particular, the Tribunal states:


         "13. The Respondent's position is that the  Appellant's  having  no
         employment in Pakistan, having  no  children  or  grandchildren  or
         siblings, having all their extended family living  in  the  UK  the
         Appellants are unlikely to return and that this application  is  in
         reality an application for Entry Clearance to settle in the UK.


         14.  The Sponsor in evidence said  that  his  parents  intended  to
         return and if they said that they would not go back he  would  make
         sure they did go back when their visa expired.


         15.  I have regard to Abbasi and Another.  Looking at  the  factual
         matrix. The first and second questions (paragraph  12  Abbasi)  are
         met.   The decision we find interferes with the family and  private
         life rights of the Appellants and other family members. We next  to
         consider the legitimate aim. Following Abbasi we recognise that  as
         the maintenance of a firm policy of immigration control; 117B(1) of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The fourth  and
         final question to address is therefore proportionality.    We  find
         that notwithstanding  that  the  interference  is  substantial  and
         profound  (it  is  on  all  fours  in  this  respect  with  Abbasi)
         nonetheless there are features of this  case  that  distinguish  it
         from Abbasi and which mean that in the balance, weighed against the
         maintenance of  firm  immigration  control,  the  decision  is  not
         disproportionate.


         16.   On  the  Appellant's  behalf  it  is  stated  that  all   the
         Appellant's children, grandchildren and?and siblings  are  resident
         in the UK lawfully. What is not stated is  that  the  deceased  was
         lawfully resident in the UK.  We cannot see how he can  have  been.
         He has only been in the UK two years prior to his death and  cannot
         have been a dependant of the grandchildren or  his  siblings  given
         that his son and daughter-in law (the Appellants) are in  Pakistan.
          On the balance of probabilities and  having  no  evidence  to  the
         contrary we find  that  he  was  here  in  the  UK  illegally  (and
         accessing medical care without entitlement).


         17.  On the Sponsor's evidence he last  saw  the  Appellants  three
         years ago in Pakistan. They have on  his  evidence  only  made  one
         visit to the UK some ten years ago. There is therefore  no  history
         of compliance with visit visas and in the absence of evidence  that
         there is we are unable to draw positive inferences.


         18.  The Appellants have little, or at least we have been presented
         with little, to tie them to Pakistan, a modest income which one can
         only presume will be accessible here in the UK  and  they  have  no
         close family in Pakistan, their entire extended family  is  in  the
         UK.


         19.  On the balance of the evidence  we  are  satisfied  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer was correct in reaching the conclusion  that  the
         Appellants do not intend to return to Pakistan.  We  do  not  find,
         pace Abbasi that the Appellants sojourn in the UK  will  be  for  a
         modest and finite period.  Balancing that  conclusion  against  the
         wish to visit their father's grave and participate in  a  religious
         ceremony we cannot find that the decision of  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer is disproportionate."


The grounds of appeal and the appeal before me


 5. The appellant's grounds of appeal are twofold.  First, the Judges erred
    in speculating at paragraph [16] of the decision, as to the immigration
    status of the appellants' father and  father-in-law.   In  fact,  Abdul
    Majid was a British Citizen who was registered  as  a  Citizen  of  the
    United Kingdom on 1st February  1974.   Contrary  to  what  the  Judges
    assumed, he was therefore in the UK lawfully and entitled to access the
    medical care that he received.  The appellants submit that this mistake
    of fact discloses an error of law and taints the remaining findings and
    conclusions reached by the  Tribunal.   Second,  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal discloses an inconsistency in  that  at  paragraph  [17],  the
    Tribunal Judges appear to accept that the  appellants  visited  the  UK
    some ten years ago, but the Tribunal then states "There is therefore no
    history of compliance with visit visas and in the absence  of  evidence
    that there is, we are unable to draw positive inferences.".


   6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Peart on
      7th November 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of a  material
      error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


 7. Ms Kauser submits that the First-tier Tribunal erroneously proceed upon
    an assumption that is plainly wrong.  That  in  itself  undermines  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and the  Judges'  consideration  of
    proportionality.  The consideration is vitiated  by  the  Judges'  view
    that the appellant's father and father-in-law, had been in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully. Having formed that view, it is reasonable to assume
    that the Judges' considered that the appellants would  also  remain  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully.   She  submits  that  the  Tribunal  has
    failed to set out its reasons as to why the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Abbasi can be distinguished.


 8. As to the conclusions at paragraphs [17] to [20] of the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal, Ms Kauser submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to have proper regard to the positive immigration  history  that
    weigh's in favour of the appellants  and  failed  to  have  any  proper
    regard to the actual purpose of  the  visit.    She  submits  that  the
    decision shows a lack of compassion.


 9. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response.   The  respondent  accepts
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  have  erred  in  relation  to  the
    nationality of the deceased.   However,  the  respondent  submits  that
    that mistake, does not undermine the findings at paragraphs 17  and  18
    of the decision, that are fact sensitive.


10. Before me, Mr Mills quite properly accepts that the First-tier Tribunal
    did speculate as to the immigration status of  the  appellants'  father
    and father-in-law, and it is now accepted that he was in fact a British
    citizen. He reminds me that although this is not an  appeal  under  the
    immigration rules, whether  or  not  the  appellants  can  satisfy  the
    requirements  of  the  rules,  is  relevant  to   the   assessment   of
    proportionality. Mr Mills submit that at paragraphs [17] to  [20],  the
    Judges' make findings and reach conclusions that were properly open  to
    them on the evidence. He submits that it is  obvious  why  the  Judges'
    reached those findings and  conclusions.  The  appellants  are  not  in
    employment and rely upon limited rental income. All of  their  children
    and family are now in the United Kingdom. When the appellants had  last
    visited the UK, Abdul Majid was still living  in  Pakistan.   That  tie
    that they previously had to Pakistan, in the form  of  the  appellants'
    father and father-in-law, who has now sadly passed away,  represents  a
    change in the appellants' circumstances such that it was properly  open
    to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  ultimately  conclude  that  the  entry
    clearance officer was correct  in  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellants do not intend to return to Pakistan and that the decision to
    refuse leave to enter, is therefore not disproportionate.


Discussion


11. The First-tier Tribunal was obliged to assess the  evidence  to  decide
    whether the appellants met the  substance  of  the  immigration  rules.
    Although that question did not  arise  directly  as  a  result  of  the
    limited ground of appeal available, it was the  context  in  which  the
    decision upon the Article 8 appeal was to be made; Mostafa  (Article  8
    in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 and Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8)
    [2015] UKUT 487.


12. In Abbasi and another (visits - bereavement - Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT
    00463 (IAC) a Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal  held  that  the
    refusal of a visit visa to foreign nationals seeking to  enter  the  UK
    for a finite period for the purpose of mourning  with  family  members,
    the recent death of a close  relative  and  visiting  the  grave  of  a
    deceased  person,  is  capable  of  constituting   a   disproportionate
    interference with the rights of the persons concerned under Article  8,
    and that the question is fact-sensitive.


13. In Abbasi, the two appellants were Pakistani nationals, aged 29 and  21
    respectively.  They applied for a visa to enter the UK for 4  weeks  to
    visit their grandfather's grave and mourn  with  family  members.   The
    First-tier Tribunal had found that whilst it is understandable that the
    appellants' may wish to visit family members in the UK during a  period
    of mourning for their grandfather, not being able to do  so,  does  not
    amount to a breach of right to family life under Article 8.  The  Upper
    Tribunal  held  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  that   the
    appellants appeal did not fall within  the  ambit  of  Article  8,  was
    unsustainable.  On the facts, the Upper  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    impugned decisions represented a disproportionate interference with the
    right to respect for both  private  and  family  life  enjoyed  by  the
    appellants and the other family members and relatives concerned.    The
    Upper Tribunal stressed that cases of this kind, will inevitably be the
    fact sensitive.


14. At paragraph [15] of its decision here, the First-tier Tribunal  found,
    in line with the authorities, that  the  decisions  of  the  respondent
    interfere with the family and private life rights  of  the  appellants'
    and other family members.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    legitimate aim is the maintenance  of  a  firm  policy  of  immigration
    control.  The Tribunal then turned to the question of  proportionality.
    The Tribunal found that the decision to refuse leave to  enter  is  not
    disproportionate  when  weighed  against  the  legitimate  aim  of  the
    maintenance  of  firm  immigration  control.   The  reasons  for   that
    conclusion are set out at paragraphs [16] to [19] of the decision.


15. Turning then to the reasons given by the Tribunal,  it  is  now  common
    ground that at paragraph [16] of its decision, the First-tier  Tribunal
    wrongly speculated that Abdul Majid was not lawfully in the UK, and was
    accessing medical care without entitlement.   That  was  undoubtedly  a
    mistake as to fact, but that in itself  cannot  assist  the  appellants
    unless that mistake  of  fact  amounts  to  a  material  error  of  law
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.  The question for me therefore  is
    whether, but for that mistake of fact, the Tribunal would have  reached
    the same decision and dismissed the appeal, for the reasons  identified
    at paragraphs [17] to [19] of the decision.


16. I reject the submission by Mrs  Kauser  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to have proper regard to the  appellants'  immigration  history.
    At paragraph  [17],  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  note  that  the
    sponsor's evidence that the appellants made a visit to the UK some  ten
    years ago.  In my judgment,  properly  read,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    noted that the appellants have previously visited the UK,  whilst  also
    noting that there is no history of regular compliance with visit  visas
    such that the Tribunal could draw positive  inferences.   As  Mr  Mills
    submits, the  position  when  the  appellants  visited  previously  was
    somewhat different, not least because they  were  younger  and  at  the
    time, the appellants father  and  father-in-law  was  still  living  in
    Pakistan.  They plainly had an incentive to return.  That incentive  is
    no longer there.


17. In my judgement, it was properly open to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    conclude, on the evidence, that the appellants have little to tie  them
    to Pakistan. They have a modest income that will be accessible here  in
    the UK, and they have  no  close  family  in  Pakistan.   Their  entire
    extended family, as the Tribunal notes, is  in  the  UK.   The  matters
    advanced on behalf of the appellants' in relation to  the  findings  at
    paragraphs [17] and [18] of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    amount to nothing more than a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    Judges.


18. It is now well established that what is required in a decision is  that
    the reasons provided must give sufficient detail to  show  the  parties
    and the  appellate  Tribunal,  the  principles  upon  which  the  lower
    tribunal has acted, and the reasons that led it  to  its  decision,  so
    that they are able to understand  why  it  reached  its  decision.  The
    reasons need not be elaborate, and need not deal  with  every  argument
    presented. The Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
    982 held that a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the
    grounds of perversity if it  was  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
    Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by  the  evidence.
    In my judgment, the findings at paragraphs [17] to [19] of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal were properly open to the Tribunal.


19. I accordingly find that, in finding Article 8  to  be  applicable,  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not err in law. The  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    proportionality followed  the  Razgar  paradigm,  was  structured,  and
    reasoned.  Whilst it erred in fact at paragraph [16] of  the  decision,
    that mistake as to fact was not material to the outcome of the  appeal.
    It was open to the Tribunal  to  conclude  that,  weighed  against  the
    maintenance  of  firm  immigration  control,  the   decision   is   not
    disproportionate for the reasons set out at paragraphs [17] to [19]  of
    the decision.


20. The appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


21. The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shall stand.


22. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and so there can be no fee award.


Signed

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

