
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02795/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields (Kings Court)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |On 10th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                               JUWAIRIYYAH [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammed instructed by Kingston Law PSB
                    regulated. (Newcastle)
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hands, who for reasons given in  her  decision  dated  25  April  2018,
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 3 January 2018 refusing  the  appellant's  human  rights
    claim.   She  had  sought  further  leave  to  remain  in  the   United
    Kingdombased on her private life (the "ten year route"  so  described).
    She is a national of India and was a minor at the  date  she  made  her
    application.  She had entered the United Kingdom in December 2009 as  a
    dependant on a Tier 4 Student, her mother.  The Secretary of State  had
    considered the appellant had not met all the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and  furthermore  there
    were no exceptional circumstances which justify the grant of leave. The
    judge concluded that the interference with the family and private  life
    of the  appellant  was  proportionate  with  reference  to  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control.


 2. On a renewed application for  permission  to  appeal,  in  addition  to
    observations on the refusal of permission by First-tier Tribunal Lever,
    the grounds seeking reconsideration are that:


   i) The judge had erred in determining that the appellant's parents  would
      be expected to leave the United Kingdom and accordingly the  appellant
      should return with them.


  ii) The judge erred in law in determining that  the  parents'  immigration
      status was determinative in deciding the appellant's appeal.


 iii) The judge erred in law in her consideration of the appellant's  appeal
      outside the Immigration Rules.


 3. In granting permission to appeal Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan
    considered that if the appellant had established that she had  a  right
    to remain when a minor, it was arguable that  her  attaining  adulthood
    subsequently should not have made a decisive difference.


 4. In a detailed decision the judge  set  out  her  understanding  of  the
    evidence before her, which included her understanding of not  only  the
    history of the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom, and  her
    studies, but also the circumstances and immigration status from time to
    time of her parents. It is not in dispute before  us  that  the  judge,
    correctly, accepted that the appellant's Article 8 rights were  engaged
    by the decision under appeal [30]. The focus of the hearing  before  us
    was upon  whether  the  judge's  decision  demonstrated  that  she  had
    misunderstood the true position, and thus  had  approached  the  issues
    raised  by  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  and  the  proportionality  balancing
    exercise upon the wrong basis.


 5. The judge began her findings upon the timing of the application and the
    appellant's parents' immigration status at that  date  at  [30],  which
    included  the  observation  that  the  question  was  whether  it   was
    reasonable for the appellant to return to India having  been  here  for
    seven years lawfully. She continued:


         "... Whilst her parents remained lawfully in this  country  because
         of an application  made  by  her  mother,  they  did  not  have  an
         immigration status in this country and therefore, would be expected
         to leave. As a child, the Appellant's best interests  is  [sic]  to
         remain  with  her  parents  and  therefore  given  the  Appellant's
         circumstances, it would be reasonable to expect her to  leave  with
         her parents."


 6. In respect of the appellant's proposals for the future,  including  her
    course of studies, the judge explained at [42]:


         "42.  The  Appellant  has  not  provided  sufficient   satisfactory
             evidence to establish that she could not continue  with  these
             plans if she were to leave the United Kingdom.  I accept  that
             it may be the case the continuation of her  education  may  be
             delayed by up to two years, although she is the author of  her
             own destiny in this regard as it  has  been  open  to  her  to
             explore education in India as well as in  the  United  Kingdom
             and she is unaware of whether or not her current exam  results
             would be sufficient to gain a place of study at university  in
             India, whether the education there  is  of  a  less  practical
             nature than in the United Kingdom or  not.   I  am  satisfied,
             therefore, that the Appellant's  education  will  be  able  to
             continue should she leave the United Kingdom and  if  it  does
             not, then that is choice she will personally have made and not
             because of the Respondent's decision."


 7. The judge then returned to the appellant's parents' status at [43]:


         "43. The Appellant's parents' status in the United Kingdom is  also
             precarious and therefore it cannot be relied upon.  They  will
             still be able to provide financial support for  the  Appellant
             in India and if they  are  not  willing  to  return  to  India
             themselves to be with her, they both have  family  there  that
             can provide her with accommodation and  emotional  support  if
             necessary."


 8. Before concluding at [44] and [45] as follows:


         "44. I am not persuaded by Mr. Mohammed's argument that  this  case
             is on all fours with PD and Others.  This Appellant has  spent
             more of her life in India than she has in the United  Kingdom.
             Her education began there.  She has extensive family ties  and
             has visited regularly.  She speaks the language.  Whilst it is
             accepted  she  has  continued  her  education  in  the  United
             Kingdom,  made  friends  and  partaken   in   extra-curricular
             activities, her age is such that she is on the cusp of  moving
             to a new phase in her life, when she  will  commence  tertiary
             education most likely outside her current home and this can be
             achieved as easily in India as it can in the  United  Kingdom.
             The Appellant's mother was able to attain sufficient  academic
             ability  in  India  to  successfully  apply  to  an  education
             establishment in the United Kingdom which is evidence  of  the
             availability of education as  required  by  the  Appellant  in
             India.  Further, her  wider  family  there  can  provide  such
             emotional support as she requires until she meets new  friends
             and forms her  own  social  network.   She  will  be  able  to
             maintain links with  her  United  Kingdom  friends  by  modern
             social media.  The dominant factors  referred  to  in  PD  are
             outweighed by these facts and those I found  in  paragraph  34
             above.  I find it would be reasonable to expect the  Appellant
             to leave the United Kingdom.


         45.   In  these  circumstances,  I  find  that,  on  a  balance  of
             probabilities, this interference in  the  family  and  private
             life of the Appellant by the decision not to allow  her  leave
             to remain in the United Kingdom is proportionate when  weighed
             against the legitimate  aim  of  immigration  control  by  the
             implementation of the Immigration Laws of the United Kingdom."


 9. Following some discussion, the parties were agreed before us  that  the
    most recent grant of leave to remain made  by  the  respondent  to  the
    appellant, and to her parents, had expired on 27 December 2016.  On  23
    December 2016 the appellant's parents applied to vary  their  grant  of
    leave to remain as entrepreneurs. On the same date the  appellant  made
    her own discrete application to vary her  leave.  Since  she  was  then
    still under the age of 18, her application was  based  on  seven  years
    presence in the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  Rule  276ADE(iv).  Thus
    contrary  to  the  judge's  understanding,  the  applications  by   the
    appellant and her parents to vary  their  leave  were  made  when  each
    member of the family had leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


10.  The  appellant's  father  has  throughout  been   a   dependant   upon
    applications made by his  wife.   She  had  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom with leave as a student and obtained extensions of  that  leave
    initially  as  a  post-study  work  migrant  but  subsequently  as   an
    entrepreneur.  The reason why her application was refused  in  November
    2017 was because the Secretary of State had not awarded all the  points
    required in relation to the investment provisions  in  Appendix  FM-SE.
    In a covering letter a human rights  claim  had  also  been  made,  but
    nevertheless the appellant's mother was not offered a right  of  appeal
    in the refusal letter. In the circumstances Mr Mohammed indicated  that
    the appellant's parents had an outstanding application  for  permission
    to appeal the adverse  decision  made  in  relation  to  their  renewed
    entrepreneur extension application in reliance on the decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Ashish Balajigari  v SSHD & Ors [2019] EWCA Civ 673.


11. Before us, Ms Petterson accepted that the judge  had  made  a  material
    error as to the immigration status of the appellant and her parents  at
    the date of the application, and that this error went to the  heart  of
    her consideration of the issue of reasonableness  raised  by  paragraph
    276ADE(iv).  In  turn,  the  same  error  went  to  the  heart  of  her
    consideration of where the public interest lay. She accepted  that  the
    decision could not  be  sustained.  In  our  judgment  we  consider  Ms
    Petterson was correct to concede the matter.


12. Both parties accepted that the decision should be set aside and remade,
    and that the appropriate forum for doing so is the First-tier Tribunal.
    Thus we remit the appeal  for  hearing  by  a  differently  constituted
    Tribunal. We make no observation on the merits of the  application  for
    permission to appeal by her parents, but simply  observe  that  if  the
    appellant's mother is successful in establishing a right of appeal that
    it would clearly be sensible for both appeals to be heard  together  in
    the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Having  heard  the  parties,  we  make  the
    following directions;


       i) The appeal is to be heard at the North Shields hearing centre.


      ii) No interpreter is required.


     iii) The appeal is not to be listed for hearing before 1 June 2019


Signed                                  Date 8 May 2019
UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
