

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/02971/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On Wednesday 10 April 2018                 |On Tuesday 01 May 2018         |
|                                           |                               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                            MOHAMMED SHAHIN MIAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Denholm, Counsel instructed by Reiss Edwards
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  O'Malley  promulgated  on  3  April  2017  ("the   Decision")
       dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  19
       January 2016 refusing his application  dated  7  October  2015.  The
       Appellant relies on his family life with his wife and  his  daughter
       who was born on 21 September 2015.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came to the UK  as  a
       student on 19 September 2009.  His leave was extended to 30  January
       2015 in that capacity.  On 24 July 2013 he married his wife.  She is
       a British citizen born in the UK.  He  was  granted  leave  in  that
       capacity from 26 September 2013 to 27 March 2016.


    3. On 22 November 2014, the Appellant was  returning  to  the  UK  from
       Bangladesh when he was stopped, was refused entry and his leave  was
       cancelled.  This was on the basis that he  had  previously  obtained
       leave using an English language certificate which had been  obtained
       by use of a proxy test taker.  This case therefore  involves  a  so-
       called "ETS" allegation of deception.


    4. The Appellant appealed against the refusal of entry and  his  appeal
       was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell.   He  dismissed  the
       appeal and challenges to that appeal decision failed. The  Appellant
       then made the application, refusal of which has led to this appeal.


    5. Judge O'Malley upheld  the  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  used
       deception in the  past.   Following  that  finding,  she  considered
       Article 8 ECHR.  She concluded that, although it was not  reasonable
       to expect the Appellant's child to return to  Bangladesh  with  him,
       the child could remain in the UK with the Appellant's wife.  On that
       basis, Judge O'Malley concluded that  the  decision  to  refuse  the
       Appellant leave was not disproportionate  and  did  not  breach  his
       human rights.


    6. The Appellant appealed on four grounds which I  expand  upon  below.
       Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foudy
       but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam in the following terms
       so far as relevant:
           ".. Having found a genuine and subsisting  relationship  between
           the appellant and the child and that it would not be  reasonable
           to expect the child to leave the UK (see [68] and [69]),  it  is
           arguable that the appeal should  have  been  allowed  on  art  8
           grounds."


    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.


    ERROR OF LAW DECISION


    8. I can deal very shortly with grounds two and three as set out in  Mr
       Denholm's skeleton argument.  Ground two which  appears  at  [9]  to
       [10] of the grounds is that, applying paragraph EX.1(b) of  Appendix
       FM to the Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), the Judge failed to  give
       adequate reasons for concluding that there  were  no  insurmountable
       obstacles to the Appellant's wife residing in Bangladesh.


    9. The Judge dealt with this issue at [65] to [67] of the  Decision  as
       follows:
           "[65] If I am wrong on the suitability point, I would move on to
           consider the application under EX1, that is  whether  there  are
           insurmountable obstacles to family life with his partner  and/or
           child continuing outside the UK.  I find that if he  is  removed
           his wife will remain in the UK.  I accept her evidence that  she
           would not wish to go to Bangladesh as she is unfamiliar with the
           country, having visited only once and that,  although  she  does
           understand Bengali she is not fluent in that language.  I accept
           that she has built a career which she continues, balancing those
           responsibilities with childcare.
            [66] I rely on and repeat the finding of the previous  Tribunal
           that the relationship is genuine and subsisting and  that  there
           is family life between them.
            [67] Having established that the relationship would continue at
           a distance, I find that there are not  insurmountable  obstacles
           to their family life  continuing  in  those  circumstances.   Ms
           Rahman and the appellant are in good health and Ms Rahman  would
           be able to visit the appellant in Bangladesh if he were removed.
            In addition, I  find  that  they  are  familiar  with  computer
           equipment, as Ms Begum [sic] works in  banking  in  back  office
           roles  including  auditing,  and  the  appellant  was   studying
           business administration.  I find  they  would  be  able  to  use
           technology to facilitate  communication.   I  find  that  if  Ms
           Rahman wished to relocate she would be free to do so as the wife
           of a Bangladeshi citizen and I find  that  the  appellant  would
           have family support and cultural familiarity  to  allow  him  to
           establish himself and support his family in Bangladesh.  I  find
           that his uncle and mother would be among those who would provide
           support and that his wife would provide support for  him  if  he
           [sic] remained in the UK.  I  find  that  his  wife  would  have
           support from her immediate and wider family in the UK to  assist
           her in coming to terms with his removal."


   10. If the Judge's reasoning in those paragraphs is to be read as  being
       that there would not be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
       continuing between the Appellant and his wife in Bangladesh  because
       she would not in fact go with him, then that is  an  error  of  law.
       However, it  is  implicit  in  the  Judge's  findings  that  if  the
       Appellant's wife did not go with him that would be  a  choice  which
       she makes and not one forced on her  by  circumstances  which  would
       render her return with the  Appellant  unreasonable.   Although  the
       Appellant's wife may well be unfamiliar with Bangladesh, she  speaks
       the language and, as the Supreme Court made  clear  in  Agyarko  and
       Ikuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  UKSC  11
       ("Agyarko"), the threshold is a high one  and  is  not  met  on  the
       evidence here.  The Appellant's wife may prefer not to accompany the
       Appellant if he is removed but there are no insurmountable obstacles
       to her doing so for the reasons given by the Judge.  If there is  an
       error of law disclosed by ground two, therefore, it is not material.




   11. There is similarly no error of law in relation to ground three which
       is at [11] to [12] of the grounds.  This ground concerns the Judge's
       finding that there  are  no  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
       Appellant's integration in Bangladesh.  The Judge's finding on  this
       issue is based on her reasoning at [73] to [74] of the  Decision  as
       follows:
            "[73]      If I am wrong on  the  finding  above,  I  would  be
           required  to  consider  whether  there  are   very   significant
           obstacles to his reintegration in Bangladesh.  I find that there
           are not.  He is an educated man, in good health with  family  in
           Bangladesh upon whom he can rely for support and  accommodation.
           I find that he would also be  able  to  rely  on  his  wife  for
           financial support on his return.  He has been out of  Bangladesh
           for 8 years, as an adult.  During his time  in  the  UK  he  has
           obtained useful skills for the workplace.  I find that he  would
           be able to reintegrate using his cultural and linguistic  skills
           relevant to Bangladesh without any significant  difficulty.   He
           has given no specific evidence of any private life in the UK and
           I find that any  friendships  or  connections  which  have  been
           established can be  maintained  by  remote  communication.   The
           appellant  does  not  work  and  has  no  private  life   around
           employment.
            [74] His evidence was that  he  has  not  made  any  effort  to
           consider employment options in Bangladesh.  I find support  from
           the decision of MA in reaching my conclusion that his failure to
           turn his mind to that is  not  something  which  weighs  in  his
           favour..."


   12. Again, although it appears to be part of the Judge's reasoning  that
       the Appellant could be financially supported by his wife  who  would
       remain in the UK, there  is  no  material  error.   Given  the  high
       threshold which applies in relation to the test of whether there are
       "very significant obstacles" to a person's integration in  his  home
       country, the  Judge's  finding  was  clearly  open  to  her  if  not
       inevitable on the facts and evidence here for the other reasons  the
       Judge gave.  I refer to what is said about that test by the Court of
       Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Kamara [2016]
       EWCA Civ 813.


   13. That brings me to the remaining grounds on which Mr  Denholm  relied
       at the hearing.  The first ground at [3] to [8] of  the  grounds  of
       appeal concerns the Judge's  findings  about  the  "ETS"  allegation
       ("the ETS issue").  The fourth ground at [13] to [18] of the grounds
       of  appeal  concerns  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to   the
       Appellant's daughter ("the Article 8 issue").


    The ETS issue

  14. The starting point in  relation  to  this  issue,  as  Judge  O'Malley
      recognised at [25] onwards is that the ETS issue was determined  in  a
      previous appeal involving the same parties.  As such, the "Devaseelan"
      principles (arising from the case of Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702)  apply.   Those  principles
      relate to second appeals involving  the  same  parties  and  apply  as
      follows (taken from [39] to [41] of the judgment in that case):

   1) The first Judge's determination should always be the starting-point.

   2) Facts happening since the first Judge's determination  can  always  be
      taken into account by the second Judge.

   3) Facts happening before the first Judge's determination but  having  no
      relevance to the issues before him can always be taken into account by
      the second Judge.

   4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought to the attention
      of the first Judge, although they were relevant to the  issues  before
      him,  should  be  treated  by  the  second  Judge  with  the  greatest
      circumspection.

   5) Evidence of other facts may not suffer from the same  concerns  as  to
      credibility, but should be treated with caution.

   6) If before the second Judge, the Appellant relies on facts that are not
      materially different from those put to  the  first  Judge  the  second
      Judge should regard  the  issues  as  settled  by  the  first  Judge's
      determination and make his findings in line with that determination.

   7) The force of the  reasoning  underlying  guidelines  (4)  and  (6)  is
      greatly reduced if there is some very good reason why the  Appellant's
      failure to adduce relevant evidence before the first Judge should  not
      be held against him.
       The Tribunal in Devaseelan made clear that those guidelines are  not
       intended to cover every eventuality.


   15. The Appellant submits that the Devaseelan principles should  not  be
       applied with full force  here  because  matters  have  moved  on  in
       relation to the reliance which can be  placed  on  the  Respondent's
       evidence about the ETS issue (the so-called "generic evidence") when
       considering  whether  an  appellant  has  exercised  deception.   Mr
       Denholm relied in his submissions on the Court of Appeal's  judgment
       in Majunder v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA
       Civ 1167 upholding the Tribunal's decision in SM and  Qadir  (ETS  -
       Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) ("SM and  Qadir").




   16. The starting point for my consideration  of  the  Decision  in  this
       regard is what was found by the previous Judge (Judge Manuell).   It
       is worthy of note in this regard that Judge Manuell had  before  him
       the report  of  Dr  Harrison  which  was  the  main  source  of  the
       Tribunal's concerns about the Respondent's evidence in SM and Qadir.
        Judge Manuell considered that report albeit observing that  it  was
       obtained for another case.   As  such,  Dr  Harrison  did  not  take
       account of the Appellant's own evidence.  At [20] to [23]  of  Judge
       Manuell's decision, he set out the Appellant's evidence as follows:
            "[20]      In the  tribunal's  judgment,  the  Appellant's  own
           evidence was unsatisfactory.  He was  apt  to  seek  to  justify
           himself instead of answering the questions in fact put  to  him,
           whatever their source.  He sought to persuade  the  tribunal  of
           his innocence in principle  rather  than  providing  a  coherent
           account of actual events.  His inability to produce any form  of
           receipt for his TOEIC test payment was  surprising,  given  that
           the test cost �170 and was a vital document.
            [21] At his  interview  the  Appellant  immediately  named  the
           college where he  said  he  sat  the  TOEIC  examination.   When
           challenged that the TOEIC certificate named a different college,
           the Appellant then said that he did not "actually remember".  It
           is disturbing that the Appellant changed his answer as  soon  as
           he was challenged, because it suggests that his first answer was
           untrue and that he was aware or did not care that it  was.   His
           inability on reflection to name the college where he said he sat
           the test or to recall any relevant details of the test was  even
           more surprising.  According to his  witness  statement,  he  had
           attended two colleges only in the course of his  United  Kingdom
           studies, so there was little scope for confusion  deriving  from
           attendance at many different colleges.   In  any  event,  it  is
           reasonable to consider that sitting an examination as a  student
           to whom the outcome is important is a memorable event, not least
           because of the preparation necessary and the need  to  establish
           the geographical location of the place  of  the  examination  if
           unfamiliar.  The Appellant provided no concrete  description  of
           any  relevant  matter  nor  of  the   conduct/content   of   the
           examination,  despite  the  often  peripheral  detail  of  other
           matters he chose to mention in his witness  statement,  such  as
           the place of his wedding reception.   Stating  that  there  were
           four modules merely recited what the certificate showed.
            [22] The Appellant now  seeks  to  claim  that  his  admittedly
           feeble performance when interviewed by the  Immigration  Officer
           at port was caused  by  a  combination  of  sorrow,  nerves  and
           fatigue.  It is not easy to see why the  Appellant  should  have
           been nervous to any significant degree, if he genuinely believed
           that all his immigration documents were in order.  The Appellant
           had several opportunities in the  course  of  the  interview  to
           explain any difficulties such  as  fatigue,  yet  said  nothing.
           Individuals vary, of course, but the Appellant is an  articulate
           and educated young man and  it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  his
           recollection failed so easily.   The  interview  was  of  modest
           length and the Appellant  was  given  every  chance  to  explain
           himself.
            [23] The Appellant asserted repeatedly that he had no  need  to
           falsify a test since he speaks good English.  The tribunal noted
           that the Appellant  did  indeed  speak  fluent  English  at  his
           hearing but no examples of the  Appellant's  written  work  were
           produced.  It is not in any event for the tribunal to attempt to
           judge matters which must be determined  by  accredited  experts,
           but the Appellant's apparent ability in spoken English does  not
           in itself mean that he might have wished to  spare  himself  the
           trouble of taking a test  in  person,  especially  a  test  with
           various components and where he might have lacked confidence  in
           the outcome."


       I pause to note that the Judge,  somewhat  presciently,  there  took
       into account precisely  the  sort  of  factors  in  the  appellant's
       evidence which the Tribunal in SM and Qadir advocated as  warranting
       consideration.


   17. Having considered the  Respondent's  and  the  Appellant's  evidence
       about the ETS test, Judge Manuell concluded at [25] of his  decision
       as follows:
            "[25]      The tribunal finds that there has  been  a  material
           change of circumstances.  It is  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
           probabilities that the Respondent has discharged the  burden  of
           proof of showing that the  TOEIC  certificate  produced  by  the
           Appellant to obtain an extension of stay was  validly  cancelled
           by ETS.  This means that the Appellant was  a  party  to  fraud.
           There can be no doubt that his Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant
           visa would not have been renewed had the Home Office been  aware
           that the TOEIC certificate was false.  The Appellant would  have
           been removed from the United Kingdom if he had failed to  depart
           voluntarily and he would have faced difficulties in the event of
           seeking to make an out of country entry clearance application as
           a  spouse.   The  Appellant  has  failed  to   demonstrate   any
           procedural error or unfairness on the Respondent's part.


   18. Although in the passages which I set out above Judge Manuell may not
       have gone through the  same  exercise  as  more  recent  authorities
       advocate of considering the  respective  evidential  burdens  before
       reaching that conclusion, it is clear from the  order  in  which  he
       considered the evidence - first the Respondent's and  then  that  of
       the Appellant - before concluding that the Respondent had  satisfied
       the legal burden, that  he  was,  in  essence,  following  the  same
       process.


   19. The findings of Judge Manuell were then the starting point for Judge
       O'Malley's consideration.  The Judge was referred to what  was  said
       in SM and Qadir.  However, as she observed at [29] of the  Decision,
       if she was to re-make the decision about the  ETS  issue,  then  the
       interview record would be an essential document  and  that  was  not
       produced nor sought.  As Mr Tufan also pointed out  to  me,  if  the
       Judge had gone on to reconsider this  issue  for  herself,  she  had
       before her the report of Professor French on  which  the  Respondent
       relies as rebuttal evidence to that of Dr Harrison.  SM and Qadir is
       very far from being the last word about the Respondent's evidence in
       ETS cases (see, by way of example,  MA  (ETS-TOEIC  testing)  [2016]
       UKUT 00450(IAC)).  As is also clear from SM and  Qadir  itself,  the
       Respondent's "generic  evidence"  is  accepted  as  discharging  the
       evidential burden on her with  the  consequence  that  what  becomes
       important is the Appellant's own evidence.  Further, as the Tribunal
       has noted in that and other cases, the question of whether a  person
       has engaged in fraud in an ETS case is fact sensitive.


   20. Based on the evidence which  was  before  Judge  O'Malley,  she  was
       entitled to reach the conclusion she did at  [28]  of  the  Decision
       based on what is said at [27] of the Decision as follows:
            "[27]      Mr Moore  accepted  that  there  were  some  changed
           circumstances here as the marriage continued and the  child  had
           been born but submitted that the  previous  decision  stands  in
           relation  to  the  ETS  certificate  and  in  relation  to   the
           credibility of the appellant as many of the findings  relate  to
           that  point.   He  submitted  that  the   inconsistencies   were
           identified and there was motive as the appellant had  failed  an
           English test weeks before this test was taken and the  appellant
           was aware that he had to obtain  the  certificate  to  make  his
           application.
            [28] I read the determination  and  concluded  that  Devaseelan
           applies in this case.  The decision of  Judge  Manuell  was  not
           overturned despite application both to the  First-tier  and  the
           Upper Tribunal for leave to appeal.   The  appellant  had  given
           evidence on the issues around the test at that time and in  this
           hearing I did not have all  that  evidence  before  me,  because
           neither party had included items such as the  witness  statement
           or interview of the appellant."


   21. For the reasons set out above, Judge O'Malley was entitled to  reach
       the  conclusion  she  did  that  there  were  no   changed   factual
       circumstances since  the  date  of  Judge  Manuell's  decision  and,
       accordingly, applying the "Devaseelan" principles, she should regard
       the ETS issue as settled  by  the  earlier  decision  and  make  her
       findings in line with that earlier decision.   The  grounds  do  not
       disclose any error of law in the Decision in  relation  to  the  ETS
       issue.


    The Article 8 issue


   22. That then leaves me with ground four which raises Article 8 ECHR, in
       particular in relation to the Appellant's child.  Since I have found
       no error of law in relation to the ETS issue, it  follows  that  the
       Appellant cannot succeed in his application within  the  Rules.   He
       fails  under  the  Rules  on  suitability  grounds  because  of  his
       character and conduct arising from the finding that he is party to a
       fraud.


   23. I have already explained also why there is no error of  law  in  the
       Judge's findings about the Appellant's wife's ability to relocate to
       Bangladesh with him if she  chooses  and  that  there  are  no  very
       significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration in  Bangladesh.
       For the reasons given by the Judge in relation to those issues,  the
       Appellant cannot succeed in his application outside the Rules  based
       on his family life with his wife or his private life.


   24. That then leaves the only remaining element of his family life which
       is the focus of ground four and that is the Appellant's relationship
       with his child who is  a  British  citizen.   The  Appellant  cannot
       succeed in that regard by reference to EX.1 of  Appendix  FM  within
       the Rules because of the suitability finding.  However, the position
       of  the  Appellant  as  parent  of  that  child   is   relevant   to
       consideration of the public interest when looking  at  section  117B
       (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("section
       117B (6)") which provides:
            "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal  where
           -
                  a) the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                     relationship with a qualifying child, and
                  b) it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
                     leave the United Kingdom"
       It is not disputed that, as a British citizen, the Appellant's child
       is a "qualifying children".  Nor is it disputed that  the  Appellant
       has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with   his
       daughter.


   25. The Judge dealt with this issue at [68] to [69] of the  Decision  as
       follows:
            "[68]      In relation to his daughter,  I  find  the  parental
           relationship genuine and subsisting.  I find that his  child  is
           under the age of 18 years, being only 18 months old.  She  is  a
           British Citizen living in the UK.  I find that she would  remain
           with her mother in the UK and therefore  would  not  be  removed
           with the appellant.  I have considered  the  guidance  helpfully
           provided by Mr Moore and accept that it would not be  reasonable
           to expect the child to leave the UK, however, that  is  not  the
           evidence before me.  The evidence of  Ms  Rahman  was  that  she
           would not want her daughter to grow up in Bangladesh as she does
           not know how the education or healthcare system works  and  does
           not feel they are up to the standards available to  her  in  the
           UK.
            [69] I find that it would not be reasonable to expect an infant
           British Citizen child of a British Citizen to leave  the  United
           Kingdom and it would not be in her best interests  but  that  in
           this situation the child would not be expected to do so  as  she
           has another parent on whom she is  dependent  who  can  continue
           care in the UK.  I am satisfied that it is in the best interests
           of the child taking into account that communication can continue
           by technological means, although  I  accept  this  will  be  the
           appellant speaking to her rather than her speaking to  him;  she
           can visit Bangladesh with her mother and that her needs will  be
           met by her mother and the remainder of  her  family  in  the  UK
           which the appellant  identifies  as  a  grandmother,  aunts  and
           uncles and  great  aunts  and  great  uncles.   The  appellant's
           witness statement sets out the effect of his removal is that his
           daughter would have to accompany him but I find that this is not
           the case and that she will remain in the UK with her mother."


   26. Although I observe that the above findings are made in  the  context
       of whether EX.1 of Appendix FM to the Rules would be satisfied based
       on the parental relationship if the adverse suitability finding were
       not upheld, EX.1. (a) is in analogous terms to section 117B (6)  and
       the same considerations apply.  The Judge goes on  at  [77]  of  the
       Decision to set out section 117B (6) and reaches her conclusions  in
       this regard as follows:
            "[79]      The statute sets out in the plainest terms that  the
           very proper public interest does not require removal where there
           is a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to  expect
           the child to leave the UK.  I rely on my  earlier  finding  that
           neither the appellant's wife nor his child would leave  the  UK.
           I also rely on FZ (China) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
           Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  550  where  the  Court  of  Appeal
           dismissed the appeal in circumstances where, if  the  Claimant's
           wife  was  herself  compelled  to  leave,  the  child  would  be
           compelled to go with her, but there was  no  compulsion  on  the
           wife and, in those circumstances, the child could not be said to
           be compelled either."


   27. I disagree with Mr Denholm's submission that the Judge has erred  in
       taking into account  the  Appellant's  deception  when  judging  the
       reasonableness of the child relocating to Bangladesh.  That she  was
       entitled to do so is clear from the Court of Appeal's judgment in MA
       (Pakistan) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
       [2016] EWCA Civ 705 ("MA (Pakistan)").


   28. However, the passages cited above suffer from two  other  errors  of
       law as follows.  First, when considering in the context  of  whether
       it would be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK,  the
       Judge should not have decided that issue on the basis that the child
       would not  do  in  fact  leave  because  the  Appellant's  wife  had
       indicated that she and her child would not return to  Bangladesh  if
       the Appellant were removed.  The  question  is  not  whether  it  is
       reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK or remain in  the  UK
       with the other parent but only whether it is  reasonable  to  expect
       the child to leave.  To that extent,  section  117B  (6)  is  to  be
       distinguished from section 117C (5) where the  question  is  whether
       "the effect" of a parent's deportation would be unduly harsh on  the
       child.


   29. The Judge may have been led into her error in  this  regard  by  the
       reliance placed on FZ (China) (cited at [79] of the Decision)  which
       concerns automatic deportation and not removal.


   30. It is also possible that  the  Judge  was  led  into  error  by  the
       Respondent's guidance cited at [68] of the Decision.   The  guidance
       in force now is different in material respects from  that  available
       at the date of the Decision and I therefore deal with it below  when
       re-making  the  decision.   However,  the  (now  clearer)   argument
       apparently made by the Respondent in her  guidance  in  relation  to
       whether it is reasonable to expect a child to leave the UK, is that,
       as a first step, a decision-maker must consider  whether  the  child
       will in fact be required to do so.  That  guidance  is  however  the
       Respondent's interpretation of what is required under  section  117B
       (6) and what matters is the wording of the legislation itself.


   31. Second, and in any event, the Judge has erred by not considering the
       impact on the best interests of the child  of  separation  from  her
       father.  It is fundamental to the  proportionality  assessment  that
       account  be  taken  of  the  impact  of  the  removal  on  both  the
       Appellant's family life and that of others with whom he shares  that
       family life, namely his wife and child.


   32. In summary, whilst, as I have already noted, there is  no  error  of
       law in the Judge's finding  that  family  life  could  be  continued
       between the Appellant and his wife in  Bangladesh,  her  finding  at
       [69] of the Decision that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
       Appellant's child to leave the UK should  have  led  her  either  to
       allow the Appellant's  appeal  or  to  conclude  that  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect the child to leave if, having balanced the best
       interests of the child against the other  public  interest  factors,
       she reached the view that it would not be disproportionate to remove
       the Appellant.  Even if she was entitled to factor into the equation
       at that point that the child would not  be  expected  to  leave,  in
       judging the proportionality of removal, she would then need to  take
       into account the  impact  on  the  Appellant's  wife  and  child  of
       separation from him.


   33. For the reasons given at [28] to [32] above,  I  conclude  that  the
       Appellant has shown that there is an  error  of  law  based  on  his
       fourth ground. For those reasons, I set aside the  Decision.   I  do
       so, however,  only  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in
       consideration of the Appellant's case outside the Rules relating  to
       his relationship with his British Citizen wife and child.  I include
       in that the Judge's consideration of  the  Appellant's  relationship
       with his wife simply because the Judge has not  reached  an  express
       finding as to whether there are "insurmountable obstacles" to  their
       family life continuing in Bangladesh and because such a finding  may
       have a bearing on whether it is reasonable to  expect  the  couple's
       child to leave the UK.


   34. For those reasons, I set aside the Decision but I  preserve  all  of
       the Judge's findings save for those which appear at [65] to [70] and
       [76] to [81].


      Re-making of the Decision


   35. At the end of  the  hearing,  both  parties  were  agreed  that  the
       Decision could be re-made in this Tribunal.  Further,  both  parties
       also agreed that if I found an error only on ground four, I could go
       on to re-make the Decision without further evidence or the need  for
       a further hearing.


   36. Following the hearing, however, I received a letter from Mr  Denholm
       directing my attention to  the  fact  that  the  Supreme  Court  had
       granted permission to appeal on the issue of how section 117B (6) is
       to be interpreted.  The Supreme  Court  has  before  it  four  cases
       involving consideration of a child's interests  in  the  context  of
       removal and criminal deportation.  Those cases were heard  on  17-19
       April 2018.  In light of this development, Mr Denholm asked  that  I
       consider either postponing my error of law  decision  or  proceeding
       with the error of law decision and postponing  the  re-making  until
       the Supreme Court has given judgment in those cases.


   37. I decline that invitation on both counts.   The  Court  of  Appeal's
       judgment in MA (Pakistan) will fall to be considered by the  Supreme
       Court in the appeals which it has just heard.  However, there is  no
       conflicting authority on the issue determined in  those  cases,  the
       judgment remains binding on me unless and until it is overruled  and
       I consider it is rightly decided.  Although the appeals  have  quite
       recently been heard by the Supreme Court, there is no indication  on
       the Court's website that judgment will be given  imminently  and  it
       could be quite some time before judgment is  handed  down.   I  hope
       also that it will be plain from what I say below, the basis on which
       I have reached my conclusions and, therefore, if the law is  changed
       by the Supreme Court's judgment, it should be evident to the parties
       what is the impact on this decision.


   38. I begin then  with  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  family  and
       private life application within the Rules.  I  can  deal  with  this
       very shortly.  In reliance on the  ETS  deception  which  was  found
       against the Appellant and on  which  I  have  concluded  that  Judge
       O'Malley was right to rely, I conclude  that  the  Appellant  cannot
       meet the Rules on suitability grounds, in particular S-LTR.1.6:


            "S-LTR.1.6.     The presence of the applicant in the UK is  not
           conducive to the public good because  their  conduct  (including
           convictions which do not fall  within  paragraphs  S-LR.1.3.  to
           1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
           undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK."


   39. The Appellant has been found to have exercised deception and to have
       been party to fraud.  I recognise that the Appellant himself was not
       the organiser of the fraud, that this was  a  widespread  fraud  and
       that many others in the position of the Appellant took advantage  of
       that fraudulent enterprise. It is nonetheless deception  perpetrated
       with a view to circumventing  the  requirements  of  the  Rules  and
       therefore undermining the system of immigration control.


   40. Since the Appellant fails on suitability grounds, paragraph EX.1. of
       Appendix FM to the Rules does not fall to be considered.   If  I  am
       wrong about that, though, EX.1. (a) is in analogous terms to section
       117B (6) which I consider below.  I need consider therefore only EX.
       1. (b) which provides (so far as relevant):


            "(b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
           with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen....and
           there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  with  that
           partner continuing outside the UK."

   41. There is no issue about the genuineness of the relationship  between
       the Appellant and his wife.  The relationship is subsisting.


   42. The Appellant's wife was born and educated in the UK.  She works for
       HSBC and has been promoted most recently (according to  her  initial
       statement) to the position of a Senior Branch Clerk.  She  earned  a
       good salary (�25,500) but reduced her hours to part  time  following
       the birth of the couple's  child.   The  Appellant's  wife  has  her
       family in the UK.  As she explains at [10] of her initial statement,
       however, "[t]he importance of family ties in South Asian culture  is
       an understanding that both me and the Appellant hold dearly".  It is
       evident from what is  there  said  that  the  Appellant's  wife  has
       retained at least cultural association with Bangladesh  through  her
       family.  I note however and accept, as  she  says  at  [11]  of  the
       statement that the  lifestyle  of  "British  Bangladeshis"  is  very
       different to that  of  Bangladeshis  living  in  Bangladesh.   As  a
       result, given her birth and upbringing in the UK, she may very  well
       have a "limited understanding of the Bengali culture".


   43. Against that, however, although the Appellant's wife  clearly  feels
       strongly that she should not be required to leave the  UK  and  that
       the Appellant should not therefore be removed, she has not explained
       what are the insurmountable obstacles  to  her  relocation  to  that
       country which she mentions at [12] of the statement.  As  she  notes
       at [14] of the statement, she has visited Bangladesh once  with  the
       Appellant to meet her mother-in-law.  She stayed three  weeks.   She
       says she found it "very hard" to adjust to things like the  climate,
       the insects and the food.  However, those do not come close  to  the
       sorts of obstacles which could be described as "insurmountable" when
       one looks at the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  Agyarko  (see  for
       example the factors referred to at [71] and  [73]  of  the  judgment
       which were held not to meet that test).


   44.  Furthermore,  the  Appellant  was  himself  born  and  grew  up  in
       Bangladesh.  He has been out of that country  since  September  2009
       and therefore less than nine years.  His mother (at least) continues
       to live there.  The  Appellant's  wife  would  therefore  have  some
       support in seeking to establish  herself  in  that  country  if  she
       chooses to accompany him on return, although I note the  Appellant's
       evidence that his mother  is  elderly  and  would  not  be  able  to
       accommodate and support the family.


   45. The Appellant would be able to work in Bangladesh.  The  Appellant's
       wife works in a bank and there is no reason why  she  would  not  be
       able to find similar work if she were to live there.   It  may  very
       well be the case  that  her  current  employer,  HSBC  Bank,  has  a
       presence in Bangladesh.  I note that the Appellant's wife says  that
       she speaks limited Bengali but, if she were to live  in  Bangladesh,
       she would no doubt learn  the  language  in  the  same  way  as  the
       Appellant had to learn English when he came to the UK.


   46. For those reasons, I am not persuaded on the evidence that there are
       "insurmountable obstacles" to the Appellant's wife accompanying  him
       to Bangladesh.  Family life between the couple could  reasonably  be
       expected to continue in that country.  That is relevant also to  the
       proportionality balance outside the Rules.  Before turning  to  deal
       with that balance, though, it is  necessary  to  consider  the  best
       interests of the couple's child.


   47. The Appellant's daughter, A, was born in  the  UK  on  21  September
       2015.  She is now aged under three years.  For that  reason,  it  is
       perhaps unsurprising that I have little evidence about her save  for
       her birth certificate and some photographs.  The Appellant's  wife's
       most recent statement states that A could not be expected to move to
       Bangladesh because "[her] basic needs would not even be met such  as
       clean water, safe housing,  sanitation,  medical  care,  education."
       However, since the Appellant's wife  has  not  lived  in  Bangladesh
       herself, her perceptions are to some extent  those  of  an  outsider
       from that country.  The Appellant does not deal with such matters in
       his statement.  Whilst there will obviously be  differences  between
       standards in the UK and in Bangladesh to which both the  Appellant's
       wife and A would have  to  adjust,  those  differences  are  not  in
       themselves sufficient to find that A's best interests  point  firmly
       in favour of remaining in the UK.   In  that  regard,  I  note,  for
       example,  that  the  Appellant  was  himself  educated  to  A  level
       equivalent in Bangladesh.  There would be little or no disruption to
       A's education in the UK at this stage in her life.   She  apparently
       attends nursery but is not in formal full-time education.

   48. The strongest factor in favour of A's best interests being to remain
       in the UK is her British citizenship.  That  is  a  factor  of  some
       significance.  The importance of British citizenship was  underlined
       in the speech of Lady Hale (as she then  was)  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
       Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]  UKSC  4  ("ZH
       (Tanzania)") in the following terms :-
               "30.    Although nationality is not a "trump card" it is of
                 particular importance in assessing the best interests of
                 any child .....
             31. ..... all of these considerations apply to the children in
                 this case. They are British children; they are British, not
                 just through the "accident" of being born here, but by
                 descent from a British parent; they have an unqualified
                 right of abode here; they have lived here all their lives;
                 they are being educated here; they have other social links
                 with the community here; they have a good relationship with
                 their father here. It is not enough to say that a young
                 child may readily adapt to life in another country. That
                 may well be so, particularly if she moves with both her
                 parents to a country which they know well and where they
                 can easily re-integrate in their own community .... But it
                 is very different in the case of children who have lived
                 here all their lives and are being expected to move to a
                 country which they do not know and will be separated from a
                 parent whom they also know well.
             32. Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship be
                 played down. As citizens these children have rights which
                 they will not be able to exercise if they move to another
                 country. They will lose the advantages of growing up and
                 being educated in their own country, their own culture and
                 their own language. They will have lost all this when they
                 come back as adults. ...."

   49. Of course, some of the factors which arose  in  that  case  are  not
       relevant here.  ZH was a case of  removal  where  the  parents  were
       estranged and the child would therefore be separated from one parent
       if the other were removed.  In this case, whether A and  her  mother
       relocate with the Appellant is a matter of choice for them.  Neither
       could be forcibly removed.  As I have already noted, the question is
       whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  them  to  move  on  the
       assumption that they would do so.

   50. Similarly, A is at a young age and may be capable of  adapting  more
       easily to a foreign country, particularly where she has not  entered
       formal education in the UK.  There are many families  with  children
       who move between countries in this global age.  Children can and  do
       adjust.  I accept though that when A does enter into education,  the
       standard of facilities in Bangladesh is likely to be lower and that,
       if she is expected to move to Bangladesh, she will  be  deprived  of
       the level of educational and other facilities which she could expect
       to enjoy as a British citizen child.  She will also be removed  from
       her mother's wider family.

   51. Based on her citizenship, and notwithstanding her young  age,  I  am
       satisfied that it is in the best interests of A to remain in the  UK
       rather than accompany her parents to Bangladesh.  Although it may be
       said that she is  young  and  therefore  more  able  to  adapt,  and
       although she is not yet of an age where relocation would disrupt her
       education, nonetheless, the loss of the benefits whilst  growing  up
       to which she is entitled as a British Citizen child is considerable.



   52. I also accept that it is strongly in A's best  interests  to  remain
       with both her parents.  Although I did not hear  evidence  from  the
       Appellant and his wife, it is  clear  from  the  written  and  other
       evidence that the Appellant and his wife and child are  a  committed
       and  contented  family  unit.   The  following  extract   from   the
       Appellant's recent statement is probably the clearest example of the
       depth of the Appellant's relationship with his family:

           "[8] ....I want to continue to be a loving husband  and  father.
           Since we got married, me and my wife are  living  together  with
           love and peace.  It's been four years and eight  months  of  our
           marriage during which time we have a daughter named [A]; She  is
           two years and six months old.  She goes to Old  Church  Nursery.
           She is my life and I can never imagine living without  her.   We
           have fun time together as my Daughter has now  started  talking.
           I can't explain how I feel when she called me Dad for the  first
           time and I can do anything for my daughter.

           [9]   She is always with me as her mum goes to work.  I take her
           nursery and take her back home, feed her, change her nappy, take
           her to the park.  I enjoy my time with my spouse  and  daughter.
           As a family we go out to eat together, we go shopping  together.
           We have a loving relationship where we can discuss our  emotion,
           feelings, problems with each other and try to help  each  other.
           Despite the fact that I am going through such  difficult  times,
           when I look at my daughter I find comfort."


   53. I accept that there would be  a  significant  impact  on  A  if  the
       Appellant were removed and she remains in the UK  with  her  mother.
       She will of course have no choice in the decision whether the family
       should relocate as a unit to  Bangladesh  or  whether  she  and  her
       mother should remain behind in the UK while her father is removed to
       Bangladesh.  Of course, if she remained behind with her mother,  she
       could retain contact via Skype and similar mediums of communication.
       Her mother also has a wider  family  living  in  the  UK  who  could
       support A and her mother if the Appellant  is  removed  without  his
       wife  and  child.  However,  whilst  those  options  may   alleviate
       practical difficulties, they do  not  make  up  for  the  day-to-day
       physical and emotional contact between father and child of  which  A
       would be deprived in such a scenario.


   54. For those reasons, the child's best interests are strongly to remain
       in the family unit with both parents and to remain in the UK.


   55. I turn then to consider whether the decision to remove the Appellant
       is disproportionate when looking at the case outside the Rules.


   56. The strongest factor in the Appellant's favour in this regard is his
       relationship with his child.  For that reason,  I  begin  with  that
       factor.  I have set out at [24] above, section 117B (6) and I do not
       repeat that.  It is not disputed that the Appellant is in a  genuine
       and subsisting relationship  with  a  qualifying  child.   The  only
       factor which remains to be considered in this context is whether  it
       is reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK if the  Appellant
       is removed.


   57. I have explained at [27] that  when  considering  reasonableness  in
       this context, I am required by the Court of Appeal's judgment in  MA
       (Pakistan) to take  into  account  public  interest  considerations.
       The issue then is the balance which should be struck between, on the
       one hand the best interests  of  A  and  on  the  other  the  public
       interest in removing the Appellant.


   58. In MA (Pakistan), the  Court  of  Appeal  was  concerned  only  with
       foreign national children who have lived in the UK for  seven  years
       or more.  None of those cases dealt with  the  position  of  British
       Citizen children.  That is not though a reason  to  distinguish  the
       case; if anything, the position of a British Citizen child is likely
       to be stronger than that of a foreign national child who  has  lived
       here for only part of their lives (and see [102] of the judgment  in
       MA (Pakistan).


   59. Although it is a conclusion which the Court of Appeal  reached  with
       some reticence, it was accepted in MA (Pakistan) that  the  question
       whether it is "reasonable  to  expect"  a  child  to  leave  the  UK
       incorporates  consideration  of  other  public   interest   factors.
       However, where the child is a "qualifying child", that is  a  factor
       leaning in favour of leave to remain being  granted.  That  approach
       appears from [45] of the judgment as follows:
            "[45]      However, the approach I favour is inconsistent  with
           the very recent decision of the Court of Appeal in  MM  (Uganda)
           where the court came down firmly in favour of the approach urged
           upon us by Ms Giovannetti, and I do not think we  should  depart
           from it.  In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the
           conduct of the applicant and any other matters relevant  to  the
           public interest when applying the "unduly harsh"  concept  under
           section 117C (5), so should it when considering the question  of
           reasonableness under section 117B (6) ....... the critical point
           is that  section  117C  (5)  is  in  substance  a  free-standing
           provision in the same way as section 117B (6), and even  so  the
           court  in  MM  (Uganda)  held   that   wider   public   interest
           considerations must be taken  into  account  when  applying  the
           "unduly harsh" criterion.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  must  be
           equally so with  respect  to  the  reasonableness  criterion  in
           section 117B (6).  It would not be  appropriate  to  distinguish
           that decision simply because I have reservations whether  it  is
           correct.  Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I
           will analyse the appeals on the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of
           State's submission on this point is correct and  that  the  only
           significance of section 117B (6) is that where  the  seven  year
           rule is satisfied, it is a factor  of  some  weight  leaning  in
           favour of leave to remain being granted."


   60. The submission of the Respondent in those cases with which the Court
       of Appeal there agreed is set out at [28] to [29] of the judgment as
       follows:
           "[28] ...The focus is not simply on the child but  must  embrace
           all aspects  of  the  public  interest.   She  submits  that  in
           substance the approach envisaged in  section  117B  (6)  is  not
           materially different to that which a court  will  adopt  in  any
           other article 8 exercise.  The decision maker must ask  whether,
           paying proper regard to the best interests of the child and  all
           other relevant considerations bearing upon the public  interest,
           including the conduct and immigration history of  the  applicant
           parent or parents, it is not reasonable to expect the  child  to
           leave.  The fact that the child  has  been  resident  for  seven
           years will be a factor which must be given significant weight in
           the balancing exercise, but it  does  not  otherwise  modify  or
           distort the usual article 8  proportionality  assessment.   That
           test requires that where the parents have no right to be in  the
           UK that is the basis on  which  the  article  8  proportionality
           assessment must be made...
            [29] Ms Giovannetti submits that essentially the same  approach
           should be adopted when  applying  the  reasonableness  test;  in
           essence, it is the usual proportionality test save that the fact
           that the child has resided in the UK for seven years will  be  a
           significant factor weighing in favour of the conclusion that  it
           would not be reasonable to require the child to leave."


   61. The Court of Appeal dealt with the weight which attaches to be given
       to the competing factors in section 117B (6) in the public  interest
       balance at [46] of the judgment as follows:
            "[46]      Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the
           fact that a child has been here for seven years  must  be  given
           significant  weight  when  carrying  out   the   proportionality
           exercise.  Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance  in
           August 2015 in the form of Immigration Directorate  Instructions
           entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and Private Life:
           10 Year Routes" in which it is expressly stated  that  once  the
           seven years' residence requirement is satisfied, there  need  to
           be "strong reasons" for refusing leave  (para.  11.2.4).   These
           instructions were not in force when the  cases  now  subject  to
           appeal were determined, but in my view, they merely confirm what
           is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature.  After  such  a
           period of time the child will have put down roots and  developed
           social, cultural and educational links in the UK such that it is
           likely to be highly disruptive if the child is required to leave
           the UK.  That may be less so when the children  are  very  young
           because the focus of their lives will be on their families,  but
           the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they   get   older.
           Moreover, in these cases there must be a very strong expectation
           that the child's best interests will be to remain in the UK with
           his parents as part of a family unit, and that must  rank  as  a
           primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

   62. The Court reinforced that  position  at  [49]  of  the  judgment  as
       follows:
           "[49] ...the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for  seven
           years  would  need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in   the
           proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because
           of its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of  the
           child's best interests; and second, because it establishes as  a
           starting point that leave should be  granted  unless  there  are
           powerful reasons to the contrary."


   63. That then brings me  on  to  the  Respondent's  guidance  which  has
       recently  been  revised  entitled  "Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM
       Section 1.0b" as published on 22 February 2018 ("the Guidance").


   64. In relation to the position of the parent of a qualifying  child,  I
       refer first to the section headed "EX.1. (a) - Reasonable to  expect
       (page 35 of the Guidance). That reads as follows:
           "First, the decision maker must assess whether  refusal  of  the
           application will mean that the child will have to leave  the  UK
           or is likely to have to do so.  Where the decision maker decides
           that the answer to this first stage is yes, then they must go on
           to consider secondly, whether, taking into  account  their  best
           interests as a primary consideration, it is reasonable to expect
           the child to leave the UK..."


   65. That interpretation of the provision whether  it  is  reasonable  to
       expect the child to  leave  also  appears  in  the  section  of  the
       Guidance which is headed "Reasonable to expect a child to leave  the
       UK?" and which appears at page 74  onwards.  That  begins  with  the
       following statement:
           "If the effect of the refusal of the application would be, or is
           likely to be, that the child would have to  leave  the  UK,  the
           decision maker must go  on  to  consider  whether  it  would  be
           reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK."

   66. The Guidance then goes on to say this ([p76]):


           "Where the child is a British citizen
           Where the child is a British citizen, it will not be  reasonable
           to expect them to leave the UK  with  the  applicant  parent  or
           primary carer facing removal.   Accordingly,  where  this  means
           that the child would  have  to  leave  to  the  UK  because,  in
           practice, the child will not, or is not likely  to  continue  to
           live in the UK with another parent or primary carer, EX.1(a)  is
           likely to apply.
           In particular circumstances it may be appropriate to  refuse  to
           grant leave to a parent or primary  carer  where  their  conduct
           gives rise to public interest considerations of such  weight  as
           to justify their removal, where the British citizen child  could
           remain in the UK with  another  parent  or  alternative  primary
           carer, who is a British citizen or settled in the UK or who  has
           or  is  being  granted  leave  to  remain.   The   circumstances
           envisaged include those in which to grant leave could  undermine
           our  immigration  controls,  for  example  the   applicant   has
           committed significant or persistent  criminal  offences  falling
           below the thresholds for deportation set out in paragraph 398 of
           the Immigration Rules or has a very  poor  immigration  history,
           having repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
           Rules."

   67. The Guidance appears to reflect in large part the Court of  Appeal's
       guidance in MA (Pakistan).  It accepts that  the  usual  presumption
       where a British Citizen child's rights are at issue is  that  it  is
       not reasonable to expect that child to leave and it  is  only  where
       there are strong reasons of  public  interest  for  removal  that  a
       parent in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  such  a  child
       should be removed.   In such circumstances, of course,  the  British
       Citizen parent and child cannot be forcibly removed and the Guidance
       suggests therefore that  the  public  interest  might  outweigh  the
       child's best interests in appropriate cases if the child can  remain
       with the parent who is entitled to be in the UK.

   68. It may be suggested by the Respondent that  this  appeal  is  to  be
       distinguished  from  the  position  in  MA  (Pakistan)  because,  in
       accordance with what is said in the Guidance (which was not in force
       at the time of the Court of Appeal's judgment in those cases), I  am
       required first to consider whether the Appellant's child will or  is
       likely to be required to leave the UK with  the  Appellant  and  her
       mother or whether it is more likely that A will remain here with her
       mother.  If that is what is intended by  the  Guidance,  I  disagree
       that this is what is required  by  Section  117B  (6).   As  I  have
       already noted at [28] above, section 117B (6) on its  face  requires
       only that there be a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
       with a qualifying child (which I have accepted applies here) and  an
       assessment whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the
       UK.

   69. By contrast, the consideration under section  117C  (5)  is  whether
       "the effect of [the parent's] deportation" is  unduly  harsh  which,
       read together with the relevant paragraph of  the  Rules  entails  a
       Judge considering whether it would be unduly harsh for  a  child  to
       leave with a foreign criminal parent or for the child to  remain  in
       the UK without that parent.  The consideration  under  Section  117B
       (6) is only whether it is reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
       the UK and not whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
       remain in the UK without one parent.  If the latter were the wording
       of the legislation, then I can  see  the  relevance  of  determining
       whether the child would in fact leave before one goes on to consider
       the effect on that child.  However, that is not what the legislation
       says.  As such, in my judgement, the Guidance in this regard imports
       words into the sub-section which do not there appear and/or puts  an
       impermissible gloss on the statutory language.

   70.  I have already concluded that A's best interests  are  strongly  to
       remain with both her parents in the UK.

   71. Returning then to what is said in MA  (Pakistan),  when  considering
       the  reasonableness  of  expecting  a  child  to   leave   the   UK,
       particularly strong reasons are required to refuse leave to a parent
       to whom section 117B (6) applies.  As the Guidance makes clear,  the
       presumption where a British Citizen child is concerned is that it is
       not reasonable to expect the child to leave but that it may still be
       appropriate to refuse leave to that child's parent in  circumstances
       where there are strong  public  interest  reasons  outweighing  that
       child's best interests.  In such circumstances, leave may be refused
       where the child could remain  in  the  UK  with  the  other  parent,
       leaving it to the parents to decide whether to relocate as a  family
       or for the parent being removed to return alone to his home country.
        Put another way, in such cases, the child is not being required  to
       leave but it may be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  when
       weighing  that  child's  interests  against  the   public   interest
       considerations.

   72. Here,  the  main  factor  weighing  against  the  Appellant  is  his
       deception in relying on an English language certificate to which  he
       was not entitled.  It might be argued that, but for that  deception,
       the Appellant's immigration history is  impeccable.   He  came  here
       legally and has not overstayed.  He has made applications which were
       not hopeless or outside the Rules.

   73. However, that is not  an  argument  which  is  sustainable  for  two
       reasons.  First, deception is a serious matter and, as I have  noted
       at [39] above, it is the more so in this case because it was part of
       a wider fraudulent enterprise  designed  to  circumvent  immigration
       control.

   74. Second, as appears from the bundle of  additional  ETS  evidence  to
       which Mr Tufan drew my attention, the ETS test  date  was  19  March
       2013.  Looking at the chronology  as  appears  in  the  Respondent's
       explanatory statement, the Appellant sought to  extend  his  student
       leave on 3 May 2013.  The date of the ETS test  coincides  therefore
       with that application.  As  such,  although  the  Appellant  entered
       legitimately with leave as a student and applied properly to  change
       colleges in 2011, thereafter his immigration history is  clouded  by
       the ETS deception.  If the fact of the ETS certificate  having  been
       obtained by deception had been discovered sooner, he would not  have
       been given further leave as a student and would not have been  in  a
       position to switch to his leave as a spouse.  His  relationship  was
       formed and established at a time when, if  the  deception  had  been
       discovered, he would not have been entitled to remain. In short, the
       deception infects all but the first few years of  his  residence  in
       the UK.

   75. The public interest factor weighing against the  Appellant  is  that
       his continued presence is contrary to the maintenance  of  effective
       immigration control.  That  is  both  as  a  direct  result  of  his
       deception and, indirectly, because that deception prevents him being
       able to satisfy the requirements in  the  Rules  from  which  he  is
       excluded on suitability grounds.

   76. I take into account in this regard that the Appellant has  not  been
       convicted of any criminal offence arising from his deception.   This
       is not a deportation case.   I  take  into  account  also  that  the
       Appellant is someone who, with many others, has taken advantage of a
       fraudulent enterprise organised by others and had  no  role  in  the
       organisation of the fraud.

   77. I accept that there are no other public  interest  factors  weighing
       against the Appellant  in  this  case.   He  apparently  now  speaks
       English.  The family  appear  to  be  financially  independent.  The
       Appellant's wife has a good job and the family are not supported  by
       benefits.  Nonetheless, for the reasons I have set out, as a  result
       of his  deception,  the  public  interest  in  the  removal  of  the
       Appellant is, in this case, a weighty factor.

   78. Equally, there are no factors other than the  position  of  A  which
       weigh strongly in favour of the Appellant.  I have already  set  out
       my reasons for finding that the Appellant's wife could accompany him
       to Bangladesh if she so chooses and that  the  Appellant  could  not
       succeed either on the basis of his family  life  with  his  wife  or
       based on interference with his own private life.

   79. The question whether it is  reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's
       child to leave the UK therefore comes down to a balance between that
       child's best interests which are strongly in favour of remaining  in
       the UK with both parents and the strong reasons of  public  interest
       favouring the Appellant's removal.

   80. In determining that balance, I have regard to the Guidance published
       by the Respondent which states in unequivocal terms that it  is  not
       reasonable to expect a British Citizen child to leave the UK.  As  I
       have also recognised, the best interests of A are strongly in favour
       of remaining with both her parents in the UK.  The Appellant's child
       and her parents form a genuine  and  subsisting  family  unit.   The
       Appellant is clearly committed to his child.  If  the  Appellant  is
       removed without her and her mother, not only will the  Appellant  be
       deprived of that close relationship with  his  daughter,  but,  more
       importantly, A will be deprived of the physical and emotional day-to-
       day contact with her father.  She  is  young  (under  three  years).
       However, if anything, the impact of separation from her father  will
       be the more acute due to her age because her family  will  currently
       be her main focus.

   81. I have regard to the fact that, in this case,  the  public  interest
       factors weighing against the Appellant are strong and, were  it  not
       for his relationship with a British Citizen child, would undoubtedly
       be sufficient to outweigh  the  relevant  family  and  private  life
       interests in the proportionality balance.

   82. However, balancing the interference with the  best  interests  of  a
       young British citizen child against the public interest in  removal,
       I  am  satisfied   that   the   interference   in   this   case   is
       disproportionate.    The  Respondent's  decision   to   refuse   the
       Appellant leave is therefore unlawful under section 6  Human  Rights
       Act 1998.


      DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley promulgated on  3  April
    2017 is set aside.
    I re-make the decision.  I allow the appeal.

    Signed                        Dated:  30 April 2018

    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
