
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02854/2017
                                                               HU/02856/2017
                                                               HU/02858/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st November 2018                          |On 3rd December 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   (1) H N
                                   (2) W N
                                  (3) M M K
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bashir, promulgated on 10th July  2018  following  a  hearing  in
    Bradford on 21st June 2018.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants  subsequently
    applied for, and  were  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family of a wife and  two  children  of  Mr  Naeem
    Ahmad, who is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom.   The  issue
    before the Entry Clearance Officer was whether there was a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the Appellant and his wife, and whether
    he could  demonstrate  that  she  met  the  financial  requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECP.3.3.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge, in a detailed and extensive  determination,  concluded  that
    the relationship between the First Appellant, and her  Sponsor  husband
    in the UK, was plainly genuine and subsisting.  In fact,  by  the  time
    that the appeal came before Judge Bashir, the Entry Clearance Manager's
    review had dropped the allegation that the relationship was not genuine
    and subsisting, and the judge confirmed that  it  was  plainly  so  (at
    paragraph 13).

 4. The outstanding issue, therefore, before Judge Bashir, was whether  the
    financial requirements could be met in this case.  The judge had regard
    to the invoices from Dubai Stores Limited for the requisite period that
    the Appellant's husband was working (see paragraph 16).

 5. On this basis the judge went on to say that, "I find  the  Sponsor  was
    genuinely employed by Dubai Stores Limited at the date of  application,
    however he was not employed at the time of the Enrichment Activity  and
    the decision in January 2017" (paragraph 16).

 6. At the end of the determination, the judge observed  that  the  Sponsor
    had ceased employment in January 2017.  The Sponsor maintained that  he
    had been in continuous employment since August 2017 earning  above  the
    income threshold.  That being so the judge concluded that "It  is  open
    for the Appellants to reapply for entry clearance with the  appropriate
    documentation" (paragraph 25).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  that,  having
    found that at the date of the application and the hearing  the  Sponsor
    met the minimum income requirements, that the only issue was whether it
    would be disproportionate to require  the  Appellants  to  reapply  for
    entry clearance. This was the case because in these circumstances,  the
    appeal should simply have been allowed.

 9. On 3rd August 2018, permission to appeal was granted.



Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 1st  November  2018,  there  was  agreement
    between Mr Tan, the Senior Home Office Presenting Officer and Mr Ahmed,
    that the judge having found that at the date of the application and the
    hearing the Sponsor met  the  minimum  income  requirements,  that  the
    appeal should really have been allowed.  That being so, this matter can
    be disposed of by allowing the appeal of the Appellant because  it  was
    plainly an error to suggest that, if the Appellants did comply with the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  then  it   would   not   be
    disproportionate to require them to apply again, with an additional fee
    being paid.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision of  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I set aside the decision.  I  do  so  for  the  reasons
    already given above.

Remaking the Decision

12. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that have been given.

Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is allowed.

14. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I make a fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 23rd November 2018
