
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02751/2016
                                                               HU/02755/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 December 2017                      |On 24 January 2018                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                        mr MIAH MOHAMMED ENEATH KABIR
                      mrs sharaban Tahura Bentee akber
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim, of Counsel instructed by Thamina
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants appeal with permissions against a decision of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Samimi who in a determination promulgated on 12
    May 2017 dismissed their appeals against a decision of the Secretary of
    State refusing them leave to remain on human grounds.

2.   The appellants argued that the judge  had  not  dealt  with  a  primary
    argument in their case which was  that  they  qualified  for  leave  to
    remain under the ten year lawful residence provisions of paragraph 276C
    and 276B(i)(a) which reads:-

         "He has had at least 10 years' continuous lawful residence  in  the
         United Kingdom."

3.   It appears that at the hearing  it  was  accepted  by  the  appellants'
    representative that they had not completed ten years' lawful  residence
    at the time of application.  The judge noted:-

         "At the hearing before me,  Mr  Chowdhury  has  accepted  that  the
         appellant does not meet the ten  year  lawful  residence  test  and
         cannot succeed on that basis."

    The judge went on to consider the criteria  necessary  to  qualify  for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds under the Rules and outside the
    Rules.  She concluded having taken into account the relevant  case  law
    and the provisions of Sections 117A- 17D  of  the  2002  Act  that  the
    appellants did not qualify for leave under the provisions of Article  8
    either within or outside the Rules.

4.   The appellants appealed referring to the appellants' history  here  and
    their various applications for leave to remain  and  appeals  following
    refusal,  stating that the judge had erred  because  consideration  had
    not been given to a Section 120 Notice  which  argued  that  they  were
    entitled to leave to remain under the long residence provisions as they
    had had  ten years' lawful residence.   It  was  argued  that  had  the
    notice been considered  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules would have meant that the appellants should have been
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  It was argued that the  appellants
    had arrived on 12 October 2006 and had 3C leave until 19 June 2017  and
    had then made a leave to remain  application  within  28  days  of  the
    expiry of that 3C leave and that application was  therefore  continuing
    until the determination of this  appeal.   Reference  was  made  to  an
    unreported determination of the Tribunal which  indicated  the  way  in
    which the 28 day period might  be calculated.

5.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr  Bramble  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State relied on a Rule 24 Notice which stated  that  there
    had been no need for  the  judge  to  consider  the  guidance  on  long
    residence as it had been conceded at the hearing that  that  could  not
    apply to these appellants.  Mr Karim stated that there was no  evidence
    that that concession had been made  but  there  is  no  affidavit  from
    Counsel who appeared before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  indicating
    that he had not made that concession.  Be that as it may the  issue  of
    whether or not the judge should have allowed the appeal under  the  ten
    year provisions was considered by me after  submissions  from  both  Mr
    Bramble and Mr Karim.  Mr Bramble  pointed out that since  the  refusal
    of this application an application for leave to remain  under  the  ten
    year provisions had been made and refused.  It appears  that  Mr  Karim
    had only been made aware of that just before the hearing.

6.   It is relevant to set out  the  appellant's  history  here.   Mr  Kabir
    entered Britain as a student on 12 October  2006,  thereafter  applying
    for leave to remain in that capacity.  He was granted leave  to  remain
    as a student until 21 June 2011.  He then  received  further  leave  to
    remain for post-study work until 14 March 2013.  On that  date  he  had
    applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur).   That
    application had been refused on 7 May 2013 with a right of appeal.   He
    exercised that right but the appeal was  dismissed  in  November  2013.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted but  the  appeal
    was dismissed on 14th March 2014.  On 29 June 2015 an  application  for
    permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  refused  and  the
    appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 19 June 2015.

7.   On 15 July the principal appellant applied for further leave to  remain
    on the basis of his family and private  life  rights.   That  had  been
    refused on 25 November 2015 having been certified as clearly unfounded.
     The application was reconsidered and on 19 January 2016 a decision  to
    refuse was again made but  a right of appeal was granted.   That  right
    of appeal led to the appeal which is now before me.

8.   On 19 November 2016 the appellant had applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of long residence  and  that  was  refused  in  the
    letter of refusal  dated  19  July  2017.   It  is  of  note  that  the
    provisions of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules were relied on by
    the Secretary of State when refusing the application.  The  letter  set
    out those Rules as follows:-

         "         Under  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
               requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite  leave
               to remain on the ground of  long  residence  in  the  United
               Kingdom are that:

               (i) (a)     he has had at least 10 years  continuous  lawful
                     residence in the United Kingdom.

               ...

               (v)    The applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                     immigration  laws,   except   that   any   period   of
                     overstaying for a period of 28 days or  less  will  be
                     disregarded as will any period of overstaying  between
                     periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to
                     remain of up to 28 days and any period of  overstaying
                     pending  the  determination  of  an  application  made
                     within that 28 day period.

         With regard to paragraph  276B(i)(a),  you  have  not  accrued  ten
         years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  As outlined in your
         immigration history above you entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  12
         October 2006.  Your lawful leave expired on 19 June 2017.  You have
         therefore accrued approximately eight years eight months as  lawful
         residence in the United Kingdom."

9.   It was argued before me by Mr Karim that not only was the  Section  120
    Notice material but that before the date of hearing the  appellant  had
    completed ten years' lawful residence.  It was  argued  the  judge  had
    erred in law by not engaging with this.  It is clear that that was  not
    argued before the judge and it was not a matter that was , on the  face
    of it, obvious. As I have stated above,  I do not consider  that  there
    is any error of law in the judge not considering a matter which was not
    argued before him.

10.  In any event Mr Karim argued that the central issue in  this  case  was
    the period between 19 June 2015 when the appellant became appeal rights
    exhausted on the first application and his making the application on 15
    July 2015, the refusal of which is what  is  appealed  before  me.   He
    stated that although the  Secretary  of  State  was  stating  that  the
    appellant's leave to remain came to an end in June 2015 it was unlawful
    for the Secretary of State to place weight on the period  of less  than
    28 days after the appellants become appeal rights exhausted and  before
    the principal appellant made the further application.  He  argued  that
    the appellant's leave under Section 3C had continued  until  he  became
    appeal  rights  exhausted  and  therefore  the  lawful  residence   had
    continued until the  hearing  of  the  appeal.   It  was  Mr  Bramble's
    contention that the leave to remain had ended when the appellant became
    appeal rights exhausted and that the 28 day provisions did not apply to
    a period after an appellant had  become  appeal  rights  exhausted  and
    before they made the further  application.   It  was,  in  effect,  not
    possible to restart the clock.

11.  Mr Karim countered that argument that it was for the  First-tier  Judge
    not only to consider that application but that he should have  regarded
    that period in accordance with the terms of the Rules.

12.  He argued that the 28 day period - the  period  between  the  appellant
    becoming appeal rights exhausted and making the further  application  -
    would have been  disregarded had the  appellant  been  granted  further
    leave and therefore the appellant was in a "chicken and egg"  situation
    in that he would have been entitled to indefinite leave to  remain  had
    the appeal been successful.

Discussion

13.  It is necessary to look at Rule 276B which I have set out above and  in
    particular to sub-paragraph (v) which states that an applicant must not
    be in the UK in breach of immigration laws except that  any  period  of
    overstaying for a period of 28 days or less would be disregarded.

14.  I have considered the terms of the Long  Residence  Guidance  published
    on 8 May 2017, document V13.0.  What it states at  page  28  of  54  is
    this:-

         "If an applicant submits an out of time application, they will have
         a gap in continuous lawful residence, from  the  date  their  leave
         expires until the date they are next granted leave,  regardless  of
         how long it takes for the decision to be made.

         For an example of this, see example 5 and related link: examples of
         continuous lawful residence.  The exception to this  is  where  the
         application is out of time for 28 days or less,  but  you  exercise
         discretion and count the residence as continuing.

         Both 3C and 3D leave count as existing leave to enter or remain  in
         the United Kingdom therefore is lawful residence for the purpose of
         the ten year long residence Rule.

         A person cannot make a fresh application for leave while  they  had
         3C or  3D  leave  pending  the  outcome  of  a  decision  on  their
         outstanding application.  This means that someone who  reaches  the
         ten year threshold during this leave cannot  apply  for  indefinite
         leave. This could  occur  in  the  following  two  situations:  the
         applicant completes ten years' continuous  lawful  residence  while
         awaiting a decision on an application for further  leave.   If  the
         application that has generated  the  3C  leave  has  not  yet  been
         decided, the applicant can vary the grounds of that application  to
         include a request for leave on the basis of long residence.   If  a
         long residence application would attract  a  higher  fee  than  the
         initial application, the applicant may pay the balance  before  the
         varied application can be considered.   For  more  information  see
         related links:

         .    05.0 - Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 (as amended)

         .    Specified application form.

         The applicant completes ten years continuous lawful residence while
         awaiting a decision of an appeal.   The  person  may  complete  ten
         years of continuous lawful residence whilst they are  awaiting  the
         outcome of an appeal and  submit  an  application  on  this  basis.
         Under Section 3C and  3D  it  is  not  possible  to  submit  a  new
         application while the appeal is outstanding.  However the applicant
         can submit further grounds to be  considered  at  appeal.   If  the
         applicant has an outstanding appeal against a  decision  to  refuse
         leave to remain or indefinite  leave  to  remain,  and  submits  an
         application for long residence he  must  void  the  long  residence
         application and refund the fee."

15.  The reality is that the Section 120 Notice which was submitted  by  the
    appellant, on which Mr Karim relied was dated 30 December 2016.  It was
    therefore dated after the appellant had become appeal rights  exhausted
    but pending the further appeal which  is  the  subject  of  the  appeal
    before me.  The 26 day period between  the  appellant  becoming  appeal
    rights exhausted in June 2015 and  the  appellant  making  the  further
    application was not in my view a period which is covered by the 28  day
    period to which reference is made in  Rule  276B(v)  and  therefore  it
    falls to be disregarded.  Such a period would in my view  be  a  period
    between two periods of lawful leave.  The appellant did not have lawful
    leave to remain after he became appeal  rights  exhausted.   He  cannot
    therefore claim that he benefits from the ten year provisions.

16.  I therefore consider that although I am of the view that the  judge  is
    correct not to deal with the issue raised in  the  Section  120  Notice
    which related to ten years' lawful residence as that had been  conceded
    before her that even if she were wrong not to consider that point it is
    not a material error of  law  because  the  appellant  could  not  have
    succeeded on that basis in any event.

17.  I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and I  therefore  find  that  her
    decision shall stand and this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   [pic]             Date: 18 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
