
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02585/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 September 2016                 |On 15 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this decision, I shall refer to the appellant  as  "the  respondent"
    and to the respondent as the "appellant" (as they respectively appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal). The appellant, AA, was  born  in  1989
    and is a citizen of Somalia.  He appealed against a  decision  dated  8
    July 2015 to make a deportation order against him under the  provisions
    of the UK Borders Act 2007.  The First-tier Tribunal, (Judge  Cruthers)
    in a decision promulgated on 7 December  2015  allowed  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds and human rights grounds (Article 8).  The Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The background to the appellant's appeal is set out in the decision  of
    Judge Cruthers at [14 - 20]:

         "14. The appellant and his mother arrived in the UK  on  10  August
         2000 (when the appellant was aged ten)  -  the  mother's  claim  to
         asylum (made on arrival) was granted on 4 October  2000.    As  the
         dependent of his mother,  the  appellant  was,  on  the  same  day,
         granted refugee status and indefinite leave to remain  in  the  UK.
         The appellant says that he has not left the UK since coming here in
         August 2000 (evidence at the hearing).

         15.  The appellant's mother had claimed that  she  was  a  minority
         clan member (Bajuni / Brava / Barawa).  She said that she  and  her
         family had suffered at the hands of the majority Hawiye clan during
         the Somali civil war from the 1990s. She had left  Koyama  in  July
         2000.

         16.  Between 18  January  2005  and  26  June  2013  the  appellant
         acquired 12 convictions for 19 different offences.  Those  offences
         consisted of one against the  person;  one  against  property;  one
         theft  and  kindred  offence;  eight  offences  relating   to   the
         police/courts/prisons; and eight drug related offences.

         17.  The appellant's mother had made an application on  his  behalf
         for British citizenship on 2 August 2005 but that  application  had
         been refused on 1 November 2005 - on  account  of  the  appellant's
         then criminal convictions. For a similar reason, the appellant  had
         an application for a travel document refused on 3 October 2013.

         18.   The  appellant's  index  conviction  was  acquired   in   the
         Manchester Crown Court on 17 January 2013 and / or  4  March  2013.
         He was then convicted of possessing a controlled drug  (Class  A  -
         MDMA) with intent to supply; possession of a controlled drug (Class
         B - cannabis/cannabis resin); and possession of a  controlled  drug
         (Class A - cocaine). The appellant was sentenced to a  total  of  2
         years and 8 months imprisonment.

         19.  On 31 October 2013 the appellant responded to a warning as  to
         possible deportation by raising article 8 of the ECHR.  On 6 August
         2014 he was notified again of his liability to deportation  but  on
         that occasion the  notice  included  reference  to  exclusion  from
         refugee protection pursuant to section 72  of  the  2002  Act.  The
         appellant's responses  to  this  section  72  notice,  and  to  the
         suggestion that he should be deported, were submitted to  the  Home
         Office on 16 August 2014.

         20.  The appellant's custodial sentence was completed on 24 October
         2014 (at which point he was transferred to immigration  detention).
         The appellant was released on bail on 8 April 2015 (with  a  weekly
         reporting condition)."

 3. There are five grounds  of  appeal.   First,  the  Secretary  of  State
    challenges the decision on the basis that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for refusing to uphold the Section 72 certificate (see
    Section 72 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002).   The
    judge considered Section 72 at [46]:

         "46. Clearly the appellant has  a  presumption  to  rebut  on  this
         "section 72 issue". But on the  totality  of  the  evidence,  I  am
         prepared  to  accept  that  the   appellant   has   rebutted   that
         presumption. It is common ground that the appellant  had  not  been
         sentenced to imprisonment before 2013. I am prepared to accept that
         the effects of imprisonment, particularly the separation  from  his
         wife and children, have had  the  desired  effect  of  putting  the
         appellant off the idea of further  offending.  The  appellant  also
         realises that he has put in jeopardy his  continuing  residence  in
         this country and, therefore, has put at risk the family  life  that
         he currently enjoys with his wife and children."

 4. He went on to say at [47]:

         "47. Specifically, I refer to the appellant's stated remorse in his
         relevant letter of 16 August 2014  (annex  I  in  the  respondent's
         bundle). I am prepared to accept (as  per  that  letter)  that  the
         appellant generally feels remorseful in respect of the damage  from
         his offending, and  intends  to  be  a  "morally  good  law-abiding
         citizen" (page I2).  I have no  reason  to  doubt  the  appellant's
         claim that he found himself work for the  whole  19  months  or  so
         whilst he was on bail prior to his sentence (page I2b cp  paragraph
         6 of his statement). Similar points  appear  from  the  appellant's
         letter of 4 December 2014 at annex L."

 5. The judge  was  careful  to  remind  himself  that  "in  accepting  the
    appellant's case as to his not constituting an ongoing  danger  to  the
    community, I am relying, to a significant degree on the  assertions  of
    someone who has been convicted of  significant  offences  since  2005."
    Not unreasonably, the judge then found that it would be  "difficult  to
    identify what other  types  of  evidence  someone  in  the  appellant's
    situation  here  could  reply  upon  especially  in  the   absence   of
    OASys/similar reports assessing the risk of reoffending."  The  grounds
    suggest that the judge placed excessive weight upon his belief that the
    appellant had shown remorse for his reoffending.  It is said  that  the
    judge could not have  accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  his  own
    remorse because he later concluded [51] that the  appellant  had  given
    untruthful evidence regarding the family living in Somalia.

 6. I do not find the ground has merit.  In a very  thorough  and  detailed
    decision, Judge Cruthers has, so far as I can  determine,  made  proper
    reference to and has weighed every aspect  of  the  relevant  evidence.
    He has reached an outcome plainly available to him on the evidence  and
    has supported that outcome by cogent reasoning; a different  judge  may
    have come to a different decision, but that  is  not  point.   Further,
    given the care with which he has approached the task  of  fact-finding,
    considering each item of evidence and giving detailed reasons  for  his
    findings, I do not accept that Judge Cruthers has committed  any  legal
    error by accepting much of the appellant's account whilst  specifically
    rejecting the appellant's evidence regarding  the  presence  of  family
    members in Somalia. The Secretary of State appears to assume  that,  if
    any item of an appellant's evidence is rejected by the  Tribunal,  then
    the judge has  no  option  but  to  find  the  entire  evidence  wholly
    unreliable. When reasoning is inadequate then there may be  some  merit
    in such an approach but not here for the reasons I have given above.

 7. The second ground of appeal concerns the decision of the judge  not  to
    uphold the cessation of the appellant's refugee status.

 8. The judge assessed the question of real risk on return to Mogadishu  at
    [67 - 69]:

         "67. Although the burden is on the appellant again here,  I  repeat
         that paragraph 47 of the RFDL accepts that the  appellant  has  "no
         nuclear family living in Mogadishu, and you may not have  any  clan
         support for a societal  reason  being  of  a  minor  clan".   Quite
         possibly the respondent's case here, largely based on the  findings
         in MOJ, would have some force  if  the  appellant  originated  from
         Mogadishu. But even on the "MOJ analysis" (see the extracts above -
         headnote (xii) of MOJ, for example) it would be difficult  to  find
         that someone from a minority  clan  who  does  not  originate  from
         Mogadishu would not face a real risk of serious harm on  relocating
         to Mogadishu - especially when there is no basis to think that  the
         appellant has a contact in Mogadishu, much less  patronage  from  a
         majority clan available to him in Mogadishu.

         68.  I have borne in mind that the  appellant's  English  language,
         and experience of working in the UK, might be of  some  benefit  to
         him in Mogadishu. There  is  also  the  possibility  of  supportive
         remittances from abroad. On  the  latter,  if  the  appellant  were
         deported it is unlikely that Ms Taylor  would  be  in  a  financial
         position to send substantive sums of money to him in  Somalia  (see
         her statement).  And since the appellant's mother is also dependent
         on benefits (evidence in chief) similar reasoning  applies  to  the
         possibility of remittances from her. It also seems to  me  that  in
         Mogadishu receiving monies from abroad  might  be  something  of  a
         double-edged sword. Unless one was in a position to provide oneself
         with very good security arrangements, being in  receipt  of  monies
         sent  from  Europe  might  well  render  one  more  vulnerable   to
         robbery/attack.

         69.  In my assessment the appellant's case  as  regards  him  being
         likely to be at risk in Mogadishu is  reinforced  by  the  extracts
         from his country evidence reproduced in his Key Passage Index. Here
         I refer particularly to the extracts which the  Key  Passage  Index
         cites from the pages of the reports found at  pages  101  and  117.
         Contrary to paragraph 54 of the RFDL, I do not think that a "return
         to" (sic) Mogadishu can properly  be  considered  to  be  a  viable
         option for this  appellant.   (Here  I  endorse  the  risk  factors
         relating to Mogadishu that Mr Schwenck sets out at paragraph 34  of
         his Argument)."

 9. The judge has made it clear that he relies on the country  guidance  of
    AMM (conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia  CG  [2011]
    UKUT 445 (IAC) and MOJ (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT
    00442 (IAC).  The Secretary of State submits that there will be no risk
    (in the light of MOJ) of an appellant (an "ordinary citizen") returning
    to  Mogadishu.   However,  the  grounds  overlook  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has to travel to Kismayo, his home area of Somalia.  Even the
    respondent's refusal letter acknowledges the  appellant  "could  be  at
    risk of harm travelling through Mogadishu and Kismayo  although  it  is
    not considered that [you would be] any more  at  risk  than  any  other
    traveller."   Not  unreasonably,  Judge  Cruthers  characterised   this
    statement as a rejection of the appellant's claim that he would  be  at
    real risk on return as "hardly overwhelming."  Indeed, the judge  noted
    that, when the appellant reached Kismayo he would have to travel on  to
    Koyama the place where he would be identified as  "westernised"  having
    no Somali language and a very limited  understanding  of  Bajumi.   The
    reference in the grounds (2(d)) dismissing the suggestion the appellant
    might "look a bit westernised" refers not to the judge's own assessment
    but that of a Danish Fact-Finding Mission in 2013 which indicated  that
    individuals  who  "look  a  bit  westernised"  are  more  at  risk   of
    death/serious harm  when  travelling  in  Southern  Somalia  than  "the
    average traveller".  The fact the appellant  may  have  characteristics
    which expose him to a greater risk than the average  traveller  appears
    to have been overlooked by  the  author  of  the  refusal  letter  (see
    above).  In any event, I find the analysis of the judge at [67 - 69] to
    be wholly supported by the background material and is both  cogent  and
    clearly expressed.  The grounds seek to point to a  number  of  factors
    which the Secretary of State  believes  might  enable  the  appellant's
    reintegration into Somali society but, considered against the wealth of
    detail in Judge Cruthers' analysis, the ground amounts to nothing  more
    than a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

10. The third ground of appeal concerns  the  Immigration  Rules/Article  8
    ECHR analysis.  It is contended  that  the  judge  failed  properly  to
    interpret "unduly harsh" as regard the effect which the removal of  the
    appellant would have upon his family.  I note [86] that  the  Secretary
    of State does not consider it  in  the  interests  of  the  appellant's
    children to "go and live and war torn Somalia."  The judge  found  that
    the appellant is entitled to succeed under paragraph 399A  of  HC  395.
    Having found that the judge's finding as regards to  the  risk  to  the
    appellant on return to Somalia is fair and accurate,  I  consider  that
    the judge's assessment that  the  "very  significant  obstacles"  which
    would be encountered by the appellant on return would also  impede  his
    integration into Somalia [82], [83 - 84] the judge wrote:

         "82. As far as (c) of 399A is concerned, my  findings  as  to  risk
         above  mean  (inevitably)  that  the  appellant  would  face   very
         significant obstacles as regards  integration  in  Somalia.   (This
         would apply even if the appellant is excluded from  the  protection
         of  the  refugee  convention   and   excluded   from   humanitarian
         protection).

         83.  That leaves (b)  of  399A.   Since  the  appellant  presumably
         attended UK schools  from  the  ages  of  about  10  to  13  or  14
         (paragraph 6 of his statement), and is married to a British citizen
         (with British children), it would be difficult to hold that  he  is
         not socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  UK.  Again,  the
         appellant's evidence (as to not having  engaged  with  any  "Somali
         community" in the UK) is convenient - but there is no proper  basis
         for rejecting that evidence

         84.  As I understand it, the reference on page 19 of  the  RFDL  to
         "previous  imprisonment  sentences"  is  wrong.  That  leaves   the
         respondent's argument on paragraph 399A dependent on asserting that
         the time in prison /detention served by  the  appellant  from  June
         2013 to 8 April 2015 means that he is not socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the UK. I do not think that  that  is  a  sustainable
         argument - taken in the context of the appellant  having  lived  in
         the UK for over 15 years, his ongoing  marriage  to  /  partnership
         with a British  citizen  and  his  ongoing  relationship  with  his
         British citizen children. It seems to me that the appellants'  case
         must succeed by reference paragraph 399A."

11. The grounds also assert [5] that the judge attached insufficient weight
    to the public interest concerned with the removal by deportation  of  a
    criminal convicted of supplying class A drugs. I  agree  with  what  is
    said in the Rule 24 statement submitted by the appellant's  solicitors;
    significantly, the judge has allowed the appeal under what he describes
    in his decision as "human rights grounds (by reference to the  'Article
    8 deportation Rules')".  As the Rule 24 statement asserts, the Rules in
    respect of deportation are intended to provide a complete  code,  fully
    reflecting  the  provisions  of  Article  8  and  relevant   associated
    jurisprudence.  Indeed, it is the application of this "code" which  led
    the judge to reject the appeal under paragraph 399(b) (the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner, Ms  T).   I  find  that  the  judge  has
    lawfully allowed the appeal under the "Article  8  deportation  Rules."
    It follows that the judge has, in  the  analysis  leading  up  to  that
    decision, properly taken  account  of  the  public  interest  which  is
    reflected throughout in the provisions of the Rules.  There was no need
    for the judge to make an assessment of the  public  interest  over  and
    above that provided for in HC 395 (as amended).

12. I am entirely satisfied that the judge has reached an outcome  in  this
    appeal which was available to him on the evidence.  I find that he  has
    not erred in law for the reasons asserted in the grounds of  appeal  or
    at all.  The appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

