
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02411/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2018                            |On 21 February 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                 Nirosha [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin of Counsel, instructed by Indra
Sebastian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  22  May  1972.   He
    arrived in this country on 6 May 2010 as a dependant of his  ex-partner
    and their daughter.  His ex-partner was in the UK on a Tier 4 (General)
    Student visa valid until 18 September 2012.  The appellant was  granted
    further leave to remain as a dependant until 29 February 2016.  However
    his leave was curtailed and expired on 19 December 2015.  The appellant
    applied on 8 December 2015 for leave to remain on the basis  of  family
    life as a parent and private life.  The application was refused as  the
    appellant's child was not a British citizen and was not settled in  the
    UK and had not lived in the UK continuously for at  least  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of the application.  There were no  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Sri Lanka and
    the appellant could not make out a case under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    In considering  exceptional  circumstances  the  respondent  took  into
    account the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children  in
    accordance with her duty under Section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  It  was  however  considered  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to leave the UK.  His daughter could  continue  to
    rely on the support of her mother.  She was not on a  direct  route  to
    settlement and could maintain contact by modern means of communication.
     The appellant could apply for  entry  clearance  as  a  visitor.   His
    daughter was a Sri Lankan national and  could  be  expected  to  reside
    there in the  future.   Although  the  appellant  claimed  to  wish  to
    continue to  support  his  wife  the  application  was  not  apparently
    supported by her and the couple on his account had "a domestic  issue".
    It was not accepted that the appellant was any longer in  a  subsisting
    relationship with his wife.  In addition  he  could  provide  financial
    assistance from Sri Lanka where he would be able  to  gain  employment.
    It was considered to be reasonable to expect him to return to Sri Lanka
    despite a degree of disruption that might be involved.  There  were  no
    exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case.  There would  be  no
    unjustifiably harsh consequences arising from the decision.

2.   The appellant appealed against the decision and his appeal came  before
    a First-tier Judge on 23 March 2017.  At  that  hearing  the  appellant
    filed a court order relating to the Family Court proceedings  that  had
    been issued by District Judge Capon dated 22 March 2017.

3.   The First-tier  Judge  noted  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  the
    appellant's immigration status in the order.

4.   The judge concluded that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  satisfy  the
    burden on him under the Immigration Rules and in relation to Article  8
    he found there was no evidence of family life with the appellant's  ex-
    partner and it was not disputed that he was estranged  from  her.   The
    determination concludes as follows:

         "36. There is evidence of limited family life with the child on the
             basis of the  order  which  grants  the  appellant  restricted
             access to the child.  However I note that there is no reliable
             evidence to demonstrate  that  the  appellant,  ex-partner  or
             child are entitled to reside in the UK.   To  the  appellant's
             current knowledge the ex-partner's leave has  been  curtailed.
             It is therefore follows that the child's leave has  also  been
             curtailed.

         37.  I do not accept that the family court has been made  aware  of
             the immigration status of interested parties.   The  appellant
             initially stated  that  the  family  court  is  aware  of  his
             immigration status.  He then amended this evidence as recorded
             above.  I also note that the family court made an  order  that
             the child was not to be  removed  from  the  UK.   It  is  not
             credible that the family  court  would  restrict  the  child's
             cross-border movement in these circumstances.

         38.  It is reasonable to conclude that the appellant's presence  in
             the UK is not required as the issues  surrounding  the  family
             ties  can  continue  in  Sri  Lanka.   I  do  not  accept  the
             appellant's assertion that he requires continued access to the
             UK labour market to maintain his financial contribution to the
             child.

         39.  The appellant's right to  access  the  UK  labour  market  was
             curtailed along with his visa.  There is no reliable  evidence
             to  demonstrate  why  the  appellant  should  be  entitled  to
             effectively  circumvent  the  Immigration  Rules  to  preserve
             access to the UK labour market.

         40.  The appellant's allegations of ex-partner's misconduct are  of
             no probative value.  The family court was satisfied  that  the
             ex-partner is suitable to maintain custody of the child.   The
             appellant's uncorroborated allegations serve no purpose  other
             than to demonstrate the continued animosity that the appellant
             holds towards the ex-partner.

         41.  I also note that the  order  places  significant  restrictions
             upon the  appellant.   The  appellant's  assertion  of  active
             participation in the child's welfare is unsustainable in these
             circumstances.

         42.  I do not accept the appellant's bank statement as evidence  of
             financial contributions  towards  the  child.   During  cross-
             examination,  when  asked  for  documentary  evidence  of  his
             financial contribution to the child,  the  appellant  spent  a
             considerable amount of time scrutinising  a  large  number  of
             bank statements.  His reliance  upon  a  credit  to  his  bank
             account dated 17 September 2016 does not assist in the appeal.



         43.  For these reasons there is no reliable evidence of exceptional
             circumstances.  As stated above there is no reliable  evidence
             to demonstrate that the  ex-partner  and  child  are  lawfully
             resident in the UK.  The appellant expressly  stated  that  he
             had no reason than access to the child to resist return to Sri
             Lanka.

         44.   It is reasonable to conclude that the  appellant,  ex-partner
             and child entered the UK as temporary migrants.  They have  no
             expectation of continued  residence  in  the  UK  without  the
             respondent's permission.   They  are  free  to  continue  with
             negotiations relating to their domestic issues upon return  to
             Sri Lanka.

         45.  There is no reliable evidence to demonstrate that the  child's
             best interests are served by remaining in the UK.   As  stated
             above the appellant, ex-partner and child are free  to  return
             to Sri Lanka.   The  child's  best  interests  are  served  by
             remaining with the ex-partner who is expected to return to Sri
             Lanka upon the available  evidence.   The  appellant  is  also
             expected to return to Sri Lanka.

         46.  The order leads to the reasonable conclusion that  the  family
             court has found the ex-partner to be  a  fit  and  appropriate
             guardian for the child.  There  is  no  reliable  evidence  to
             demonstrate why this arrangement cannot continue  upon  return
             to Sri Lanka.

         47.  For all the reasons stated it follows  that  any  interference
             with Article 8 ECHR is proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim
             pursued; economic well-being of the country when expressed  as
             effective immigration control."
5.   Grounds of appeal were settled against the decision on  11  April  2017
    but replacement grounds were filed on  12  June  2017,  settled  by  Mr
    Martin.  It was submitted that the previous representatives  had  erred
    in failing to challenge "the most obvious flaw  in  the  determination"
    because the appellant's wife and daughter in fact still  had  leave  to
    remain in the UK.  This  should  have  been  put  in  evidence  by  the
    previous  representatives  and  should  have  been  confirmed  by   the
    respondent.  It was submitted that the only reason the judge  dismissed
    the appeal was because he did not have evidence about  the  appellant's
    wife and daughter's position in the UK.  Had  they  had  permission  it
    would have been a breach of Article 8 to  remove  the  appellant.   The
    appellant had parental responsibility for his daughter.   The  previous
    representatives should have properly advanced  the  case  and  provided
    evidence of  the  appellant's  position  and  in  accordance  with  the
    decision of BT (Nepal) [2004] UKIAT 311 it was hoped to get a  response
    from them "about their mistake".  Permission to appeal was  granted  on
    13 December 2017 by the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   Mr Martin submitted that there was no  dispute  about  the  immigration
    history.  The appellant's leave had been curtailed but he had  made  an
    application in time on 8 December 2015.  Because  of  the  difficulties
    between  him  and  his  wife  he  had  been  disadvantaged  in  getting
    information about  her  immigration  status.   Reference  was  made  to
    paragraph 36 of the decision and there was no reason  to  suppose  that
    the position of the wife and child was not similar to  the  appellant's
    following the curtailment of leave  -  if  that  correctly  stated  the
    position.  The respondent could have confirmed the  immigration  status
    of the parties although it was for the appellant  to  prove  his  case.
    The parties had arrived in May 2010 and the child would  have  been  in
    the United Kingdom in May 2017.  There was a material error of  law  in
    view of the uncertainty about the position of the  wife  and  daughter.
    It was acknowledged that no further evidence on  the  matter  had  been
    adduced.

7.   Ms Ahmad referred to AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49  at  paragraph  30.   It
    was said that the judge should  have  sought  clarification  about  the
    status of the parties.  The appellant was represented  by  Counsel  and
    there had been discussion between the representatives as appeared  from
    paragraphs 13 to 14 of the determination.  It would have been  open  to
    Counsel to raise the issue of the status of the wife and child with the
    Presenting Officer.  The judge was fully entitled to proceed  with  the
    appeal upon the basis of the evidence before him.  The submissions made
    were essentially an expression of disagreement.   There  was  still  no
    evidence about the status of the appellant's wife and daughter and what
    the judge said in paragraph 36 of the decision was a  finding  open  to
    him.

8.   In reply Counsel submitted  that  while  the  judge  had  to  determine
    appeals on the evidence it was also incumbent on  him  to  use  general
    knowledge.  Reference was made to the appellant's witness statement  in
    which it was apparent that his wife had refused to make an  application
    along with the appellant  following  the  expiry  of  the  visa  on  19
    December 2015.  The judge had erred in paragraph 36 in simply referring
    to the curtailment of leave.

9.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I can  of
    course only interfere with the determination of the First-tier Judge if
    it was materially flawed in law.  Ms Ahmad submits that  there  was  no
    evidence of the status of the  parties  before  the  First-tier  Judge.
    This is not a case where the appellant was unrepresented at the hearing
    - Counsel appeared for him and as Mr Ahmad points out  there  was  some
    discussion between him and  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing.
    Furthermore there is still no evidence about the position.  Counsel  in
    the grounds at paragraph 10 stated it was hoped to get a response  from
    the previous representatives  "about  their  mistake"  in  not  lodging
    proper evidence of the appellant's position.  However  Mr  Martin  said
    there was no further evidence and indeed none has been lodged.  In  all
    the circumstances I cannot see that the judge  can  be  criticised  for
    determining matters as he did on what was put  before  him.  There  has
    been ample time since the judge's decision and  since  the  application
    for permission to appeal in June 2017 for enquiries to have been  made.
    No further evidence has been submitted on the issue.

10.  I accept the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  by
    Ms Ahmad. The grounds amount to a factual disagreement. They  raise  no
    material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Accordingly the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier
    Judge stands.

ANONYMITY ORDER

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 15 February 2018

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal
