
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02554/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 August 2017                     |On 17 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                              Hassan Alaidaros
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs S Ashraf, with Lee Dat & Baig, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                                    ORDER

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Yemen, appeals with permission against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse him further leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds based on ongoing proceedings  in
    the family courts.





Background

 2. The following facts and matters concerning the appellant's  immigration
    history and marital problems emerge  from  the  refusal  letter  of  11
    January 2017 and the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant last entered the United Kingdom on 3 September 2005.  His
    parents, siblings and other family members  remain  in  Yemen  and  the
    appellant is in constant telephone contact with them.

 4. The appellant still  requires  an  interpreter  when  giving  evidence,
    despite having been in the United Kingdom intermittently for 16  years,
    but speaks fluent Arabic.  All of the rest of his  family  are  in  the
    Yemen.   He has no health problems.

 5. The appellant first came to the United Kingdom in  2001  on  a  student
    visa and had valid leave as a student until 31 January 2009,  returning
    to the Yemen once during that period,  travelling  on  his  own  Yemeni
    passport.  While in the United Kingdom, he says that he has achieved  a
    Masters degree in Information Technology.   On  the  last  day  of  his
    student leave, 31 January 2009, the appellant made an  application  for
    post-study leave, which was unsuccessful.

 6. The appellant said his only criminal convictions  were  for  3  traffic
    offences, for each of which he had been fined, leading to his  choosing
    not to drive thereafter 'as I want to live legally':  he  knew  he  had
    done wrong.

 7. The appellant has a former partner in the United Kingdom.   It  is  not
    clear what is her nationality.  Their son was born on 16 July 2006  and
    is now 11 years old.  The appellant has not seen his son now for over 5
    years, since the boy was 6 years old.   The  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife broke down during  an  altercation  in  February
    2012 which led to the police  being  called.   The  appellant  was  not
    prosecuted.  However, the breakdown of the marriage was permanent.

 8. The appellant claimed asylum on 11 March 2012, saying that as a Wahabi,
    he and his family were at risk on  return  to  Yemen  from  terrorists,
    specifically from Al-Qaeda.  That application  was  unsuccessful.   The
    appellant did not appeal.  He told the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  that
    he did not renew his asylum claim because 'I did not want  to  have  to
    move from the Council house I was given and did not  want  to  lose  my
    jobseeker's allowance'.

 9. On 4 April 2012, the appellant was granted discretionary leave  on  the
    basis of family life and contact with his son, to expire  on  20  March
    2015.  In May 2012, he  told  Social  Services  that  his  wife  was  a
    potential danger to their son, resulting in Court proceedings  and  the
    end of the appellant's direct contact with his son.  The  Family  Court
    proceedings have continued, intermittently,  since  2012,  without  any
    favourable outcome for the appellant's contact with his son,  which  is
    presently 'postal only'.



Refusal letter

10. On 10 May 2014, the appellant made a human rights application based  on
    an application to the Barnet Family Court, in which he was  represented
    by Andrew  Jackson  &  Co,  solicitors.    In  those  proceedings,  the
    applicant sought contact with his son, his marriage having failed.  His
    son was living with the appellant's wife and the appellant had not seen
    him for 2 years by then.  The appellant has never  provided  any  court
    documents from those proceedings.

11. On 10 December 2015, the respondent wrote  to  the  appellant  and  his
    immigration solicitors, Christian Gottfried & Co, seeking  the  outcome
    of the Family Court proceedings.  No response was received.

Refusal letter

12. In her refusal letter of 11 January 2016, the respondent accepted  that
    the  appellant  met  the  suitability  requirements  of  paragraph   R-
    LTRPT.1.1.  of  Appendix  FM  but  not  that  he  met  the  eligibility
    requirements in paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4, as he could not show that he had
    sole responsibility for his son, that his son normally lived  with  the
    appellant, or that he had direct access in person to his  child.    The
    application under the Parent route failed.

13. The respondent considered private life under paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Rules but the appellant had spent only 10 years in the United  Kingdom,
    not 20 years as the Rules required, and she did not accept  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to the appellant's return to Yemen,  or
    that he had a family life in the United Kingdom.  The  respondent  also
    refused the application on  private life grounds.

14.  The  respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances for which she should consider granting  leave  to  remain
    outside the rules, but none had been raised  and  the  respondent  also
    refused to grant the appellant leave to remain outside the Rules.

15. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. The appellant was unrepresented at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  He
    did not seek an adjournment.  The judge took particular care to  ensure
    that that the appellant understood the proceedings.  The appellant gave
    oral evidence and made submissions.

17. The appellant's grounds of appeal were, first, that it was  unsafe  for
    him to return to Yemen because of the civil war and risk  of  terrorism
    there.   That  is  a  protection  claim,  but  the  appellant  had  not
    challenged the refusal of his previous asylum claim  or  made  any  new
    protection claim.

18. The appellant's second ground was that to remove him would  breach  his
    Article 6 ECHR rights with regard to his ongoing Court proceedings.  He
    told the Tribunal that there was a further hearing listed, described as
    a 'dispute resolution appointment' on 9  December  2016,  just  8  days
    after the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

19. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal on  the  basis  that
    there were no very significant obstacles to the appellant's  return  to
    Yemen, that he could continue his indirect postal contact with his  son
    from  there,  and  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  it  would   be
    disproportionate, or have an adverse effect on the child. Nor was there
    any evidence that the  child's  section  55  best  interests  would  be
    affected by the appellant's removal.  The appellant had not shown  that
    the child, or his mother, were British citizens.

20. Although the appellant's child was a qualifying  child  as  defined  in
    section 117D of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended), the evidence did not  establish  that  the  appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with the child, nor that,  even  if
    he had, as the child was not  British,  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect him to leave the United Kingdom if his father were removed.

21. As regards exceptional circumstances, the judge said this:

         "23. I am not persuaded on the evidence presented  that  there  are
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         Rules for granting leave to remain.  Even if the refusal prejudices
         private or family life of the appellant  and  others  in  a  manner
         sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the fundamental right
         protected by Article 8, I am also satisfied that  the  interference
         is in accordance with the law because the appellant  has  no  other
         right  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the  circumstances
         appertaining at the date of decision.  Furthermore I conclude that,
         given that a state has a right under international law  to  control
         the entry of non-nationals into its  territory,  in  this  case  on
         performing the necessary balancing exercise, any interference would
         not be disproportionate in achieving the maintenance of a fair  and
         just immigration policy  which  it  is  necessary  for  the  United
         Kingdom Government to maintain.

         24.  I therefore conclude that  refusing  the  appellant  leave  to
         remain in the United Kingdom would not place the United Kingdom  in
         breach of its obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR. "

22. The appeal was dismissed.

Permission to appeal

23. The appellant appealed. The appellant's case now, which  has  not  been
    put to the respondent or the First-tier Tribunal, is  that  his  former
    partner had a history of suicide attempts before they married, that she
    considered aborting their son when she became pregnant, but changed her
    mind, and that after his birth she neglected and abused the  child,  so
    that the appellant became his primary carer.  She also 'strangled  [the
    appellant] without any reason...to discharge her depression'.   CAFCASS
    reported that the child had missed 18 months of  schooling,  for  4  of
    which a place was available for him at a school.

24. The appellant says that the child's mother refused to get  involved  in
    his son's feeding or upbringing, and that  she  stayed  up  all  night,
    slept all day, and was either sick or out with friends.  After the  boy
    was 2 years old, both the child and his father  slept  in  a  different
    room and the appellant was the child's main carer.  The appellant  says
    the child speaks English, but his mother speaks only Arabic and  taught
    Arabic at a Saudi school for 2 years.

25. In March 2012, after the final altercation between the mother  and  the
    appellant, the appellant moved to Liverpool without his  child  or  the
    mother, but returned to stay with them 4-5 days a week, witnessing  the
    fights between them before school each morning.  During 'the last week'
    the child whispered to his father that his mother  had  tried  to  kill
    him.

26. On 9 May 2012, the child and his mother moved to a women's aid  refuge.
     The appellant says this was 'a deal with her case worker to  get  high
    priority in Council housing'.  The mother now lives in London with  the
    child, still in a women's aid refuge.

27. In the statement that accompanied his grounds of appeal, the  appellant
    stated that he had taken a 6-month self-employment course in Liverpool,
    which the Family Court recommended him to take, and was ready to  start
    work once he received indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
     His former partner had indefinite leave already and he was  reasonably
    sure that his son would have been granted leave in line.

28. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede,  who
    considered that there was  arguable  merit  in  the  assertion  in  the
    grounds of appeal that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  by  failing
    to undertake a more detailed assessment  of  the  appellant's  position
    with regard to  the  family  law  proceedings,  having  regard  to  the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in MS (Ivory Coast)  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 133, especially as the
    appellant had previously been given a period of discretionary leave  on
    the basis of his contact with his son. The appellant also relied in his
    grounds on JA (meaning of 'access  rights')  India  [2015]  UKUT  00225
    (IAC).

Rule 24 Reply

29. The respondent served a reply to the grant of permission, arguing that:

         "2.  In summary, the respondent will submit  inter  alia  that  the
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed [herself]  appropriately.
         The appellant had failed to furnish any evidence on the face of the
         determination to suggest that the  appellant  has  had  any  direct
         contact with his son  or  that  his  family  proceedings  would  be
         prejudiced by a dismissal, given he  has  only  ever  had  indirect
         contact.

         3.   However, it is accepted that the judge would have had to  have
         given consideration to the  family  proceedings  in  light  of  the
         appellant's imminent hearing  (MH  (pending  family  proceedings  -
         discretionary leave) Morocco [2010] UKUT 439 (IAC))."

30. That is the basis on which this appeal came before me for hearing.

Upper Tribunal hearing

31. For the appellant, Mrs Ashraf relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    argued that the First-tier Tribunal should have taken more  account  of
    the Family Court proceedings.  Her firm, Lee Dat & Baig, had  begun  to
    act only at the Upper Tribunal renewal stage.  She contended  that  the
    ongoing proceedings should have led to a grant of  discretionary  leave
    until the contact proceedings were concluded.  The appellant should not
    pay the price for failing to produce  the  family  proceedings  in  the
    immigration appeal.  Lee Dat & Baig had now written to the Family Court
    on 19 or 20 July 2017 seeking information on the  proceedings  but  had
    not yet had a response.

32. For the respondent, Mr Bates reminded the Tribunal that  the  appellant
    was represented by Christian Gottfried  solicitors  in  December  2016,
    when the refusal letter was written.  It was not clear  when  they  had
    ceased to act, but the appellant represented himself at the  First-tier
    Tribunal and there was no adjournment request.

33. The grant of discretionary leave was on the basis of a fact  set  which
    had changed very quickly thereafter.   The  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was in May 2017 and there had been ample time for  details  of
    the Family Court proceedings to be produced, or for the Tribunal to  be
    asked to use the Family Court Protocol to obtain  information  directly
    from the Court.  The First-tier Tribunal  decision  was  based  on  the
    evidence before it and was open to the judge, for the reasons he  gave.



34. Should the Family Court proceedings  be  resolved  in  the  appellant's
    favour it was open to him to make a new application, or indeed, to make
    further submissions based on a fuller disclosure of  the  Family  Court
    proceedings.

Discussion

35. I begin by considering the guidance given in  the  three  cases  relied
    upon by the appellant and respondent:  MS (Ivory Coast) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2007]  EWCA  Civ  133,  JA  (meaning  of
    'access rights') India [2015] UKUT 00225 (IAC) and MH  (pending  family
    proceedings - discretionary leave) Morocco [2010] UKUT 439 (IAC)

36. In MS (Ivory Coast), Lord Justice Scott-Baker, giving the  judgment  of
    the Court, considered the case  of  a  mother  who  had  not  seen  her
    children for four years, and who was actively seeking to renew  contact
    in Court proceedings. The Asylum and Immigration Tribunal had  accepted
    an undertaking from the Secretary of State that the appellant would not
    be removed and would be given temporary admission pending  the  outcome
    of the contact proceedings.  At [70]-[72], he said this:

         "70. In our judgment  the  AIT  did  not  decide  the  hypothetical
         question it was incumbent upon it to  decide,  namely  whether  the
         appellant's Article 8 rights would be violated by  a  removal  when
         the case was before  it  i.e.  when  the  contact  application  was
         outstanding. Time has moved on. It is now 9 months since the  AIT's
         decision. The circumstances will be different. The AIT will need to
         know what has happened in the contact proceedings. One can envisage
         arguments both ways. Mr Bourne points out that the facts  are  some
         way removed from those in Ciliz. The appellant has served a lengthy
         prison sentence for physical abuse of her children and, as  far  as
         we are aware, has not seen them for some time. The present views of
         the children and their father are unknown. If the AIT  had  decided
         the question it should have decided, and concluded that her Article
         8 rights would be violated by her removal, then the  next  question
         would have been the length of discretionary  leave  to  remain  and
         quite a short period might have been appropriate to cater  for  the
         outstanding contact proceedings;  it  could  of  course  always  be
         extended. The AIT had jurisdiction to decide this issue (see  s  87
         2002 Act).

         71.  Whilst it is  correct,  as  the  authorities  show,  that  the
         decision  maker  is,  to  an  extent,  required   to   consider   a
         hypothetical situation, it is neither required nor  appropriate  to
         speculate about the future. Thus questions about what  may  happen,
         for example, to the appellant's mental health in  circumstances  as
         yet unknown were irrelevant to the AIT's consideration.

         71.  The appellant was entitled to have determined whether  removal
         from the United Kingdom with  an  outstanding  contact  application
         would breach s 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  That  question  was
         capable  of  resolution  one  way  or  the  other.  What  was   not
         appropriate was  to  leave  her  in  this  country  in  limbo  with
         temporary admission and the promise not to  remove  her  until  her
         contact application has been concluded. Temporary admission is,  as
         we have explained, a status given to someone liable to be  detained
         pending removal. If the appellant had a valid  human  rights  claim
         she is not liable to be detained pending removal. And  if  she  has
         not, she ought to be removed. If she is entitled  to  discretionary
         leave to remain she ought to have it for the period  the  Secretary
         of State thinks appropriate, together with the advantages  that  it
         conveys; and if not she ought not to."

    The appeal was allowed and remitted to the AIT for remaking.

37. In JA (India), Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane held that  'access'  and
    'contact' are legally identical.   In the judicial headnote at [4], the
    Tribunal gave the following guidance:

         "4.       Having  satisfied  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-
         LTRPT.2.4 (a) (i), an appellant must still prove  that  he/she  "is
         taking and intend to continue to take an active role in the child's
         upbringing"(paragraph E-LTRPT.2.4 (a) (ii)). Whether he/she will be
         able to do so will depend upon the evidence rather than the  nature
         of the "access rights." However, it is likely to be unusual that  a
         person having only "indirect" access rights will be able to satisfy
         this provision. In some cases, Tribunals may need  to  examine  the
         reasons why the Family Court has  ordered  "indirect"  rather  then
         "direct" access."

38. Finally,  in  MH  (Morocco),  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jarvis  gave  the
    following guidance:

         "1.     In MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA Civ 133  it  was  accepted,
         following Ciliz v Netherlands  (Application  no.  29192/95)  [2000]
         ECHR 365; [2000] FLR 469, that a decision to remove an applicant in
         the process of seeking a contact order may violate Article 8  ECHR,
         in particular on the  basis  that  removal  of  a  parent/applicant
         during contact order  proceedings  would  be  unlawful  because  it
         prejudged  the  outcome  of  the  contact  proceedings  and,   more
         importantly, denied the applicant all possibility  of  any  further
         meaningful involvement in the proceedings which may breach  Article
         6 ECHR.

         2.     A refusal to adjourn proceedings  before  the  Tribunal  may
         have similar consequences.

         3.     It is the respondent's practice (consistent with  the  Human
         Rights Act 1998), not to remove or  deport  parent(s)/parties  when
         family or other court proceedings are current and  to  grant  short
         periods of discretionary leave, to extend temporary  admission,  or
         release a person pending the outcome of the family proceedings. The
         use of curtailment is discretionary in such circumstances (see Home
         Office Guidance re-issued in October 2010).

          4.     Where such a case arises before the Tribunal  it  is  usual
         for the appeal to be allowed pursuant to Article 8  ECHR  ,  rather
         than for the proceedings to remain within the Tribunal system to be
         adjourned, perhaps more than once.  The  respondent  will  normally
         then grant a short period of discretionary leave  bearing  in  mind
         any relevant facts found by,  or  observations  of  an  Immigration
         Judge. It is for the respondent to decide on the period of leave in
         each case.

         5.     Where an application for contact (or a residence  order,  or
         for other relief)  is  successful  then  a  parent/party  may  make
         application for further leave to remain in the UK. If unsuccessful,
         then it will be for the respondent to consider what steps  to  take
         in relation to that individual."

39. That is the legal background against  which  this  appeal  fell  to  be
    decided. I do not find that the decision in MH (Morocco) correctly  re-
    states the guidance in MS (Ivory Coast) or that it takes account of the
    guidance in JA (India) that the decision will always be  fact-specific.
    I am not greatly assisted by the remainder of the  MH  guidance,  which
    revisits Home Office guidance already considered and taken into account
    by the Court of Appeal in MS (Ivory Coast).

40. I extract the following principles from MS and MH:

    . The question for the Upper Tribunal is whether removal from the United
      Kingdom with an outstanding contact application would breach  s  6  of
      the Human Rights Act 1998, that is to say, applying MS (Ivory  Coast),
      whether there is a valid human rights claim.




    . If the grant of leave is appropriate, applying MS  (Ivory  Coast),  it
      should be discretionary leave not temporary admission.



    . If a parent can satisfy the requirement of  E-LTRPT  2.4  that  he  is
      taking and  will  continue  to  take  an  active  part  in  a  child's
      upbringing will be a question of fact in each case.  It is  likely  to
      be unusual that a person having only "indirect" access rights will  be
      able to satisfy this provision.



    . In some cases, Tribunals may need  to  examine  the  reasons  why  the
      Family Court has ordered "indirect" rather then "direct" access.

41. I apply those principles to the evidence which was  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, noting that the appellant's evidence  does  not  contain
    any indication of the factual  matrix  underpinning  the  Family  Court
    proceedings or include any of the evidence before or orders made by the
    Family Court.

42. I place little weight on the matters alleged in the latest  grounds  of
    appeal, which are  not  supported  by  Family  Court  documents  or  an
    application for the Family Court Protocol to obtain such documents.  It
    seems to me most unlikely that the appellant's wife would still be in a
    women's aid refuge miles away in London, 5 years after they  split  up,
    if she is the one who is a danger to the child.

43. The plain facts are that this appellant has  had  only  postal  contact
    with his son for half of that child's life, and has  not  provided  any
    external evidence to explain why, over 5 years after  the  end  of  the
    marital relationship, his wife and/or the Family Court refuse to  allow
    him to resume direct contact, or, indeed,  whether  that  is  what  the
    child himself wishes.   The appellant has had solicitors in the  Family
    Court proceedings, as well as for most of the time in  the  immigration
    proceedings and it would have been possible for that information to  be
    provided.  I am not satisfied on that evidence that the  appellant  had
    shown that his removal would breach the United Kingdom's  international
    obligations under Article 8 ECHR.

44. It is right that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by  applying  the
    middle, 'serious grounds' standard to this appeal.  However, the appeal
    failed, even at that more demanding standard.  It  also  fails  at  the
    basic level of protection.

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the  decision.   I  remake
the decision by dismissing this appeal.

Signed:      Judith A J C Gleeson                Date: 16 August 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

