
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02101/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2019                       |On 23 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     L S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ceallaigh, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  India  born  on  19  February  1983.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent on 21 January  2019  to
    refuse his human rights claim.  His appeal came  before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  L  Murray  ("the  FTTJ")  who,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 16 April 2019, dismissed his appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  in  the
    following terms:

         "... The  grounds  state  the  Judge  erred  in  not  treating  the
         interests of  the  Appellant's  two  minor  cousins  as  a  primary
         consideration: their father had died in 2016 and the  Appellant  is
         the central male figure in their lives and that the Judge  did  not
         address the Appellant's case that he should be  granted  a  further
         short period of leave to regularise his status  consequent  on  the
         disruption to his life in education resulting from the  allegations
         of fraud which the Judge had dismissed.


         The Judge's assessment of the interests of  the  Appellant's  minor
         cousins at paragraph 39 of her decision did not  reflect  that  the
         only brother of their mother had died in February 2019, reinforcing
         the claimed role of the appellant who  lives  with  them  in  their
         lives.  The Judge found at paragraph 39 of her decision that  there
         was no family life.  The threshold to establish family life is  not
         high. The issue which the Judge had to  consider  was  whether  the
         decision under appeal interfered with that family life and, if  so,
         whether the interference  was  sufficiently  grave  to  engage  the
         State's obligations under Article 8 of the European Convention  and
         then whether that interference would be disproportionate to any  of
         the legitimate public objectives identified by Article 8(2).  It is
         arguable that in an otherwise carefully  constructed  decision  the
         Judge erred in her treatment of the Article 8 claim."


 3. Hence the matter came before me.   At  the  outset  of  the  hearing  I
    indicated to  the  parties  that  I  had  read  the  FTTJ's  record  of
    proceedings  which  referred  to  Mr  O'Ceallaigh  having   made   oral
    submissions to the FTTJ to the effect that the appellant's role  within
    the family engaged Article 8. He had also referred to  various  factors
    which rendered the appellant's circumstances unusual  and  exceptional.
    He had made reference in those submissions to the two  children  having
    lost their father and uncle, the latter  earlier  this  year,  and  the
    appellant's own role within the family as a result: it was described as
    a "close family dynamic". I indicated that my preliminary view was that
    the FTTJ's finding at [39] that "it has not been argued that  the  ties
    he has amount to family life for the purposes of Article 8 ..." was  an
    error of law being a  failure  to  take  into  account  or  perhaps  to
    misinterpret the oral submissions made for the respondent.

 4. Ms Jones, for the respondent, noted the FTTJ's reference at [15] to the
    submissions for the appellant as regards the nature of the  appellant's
    role within the family and the existence  of  the  two  children.   She
    noted there had been no specific reference in the appellant's  skeleton
    argument to the existence of family life, merely to claimed exceptional
    factors.  She noted a 350 page bundle had been produced  and  yet  this
    did not include reference to the dynamics  of  the  family,  an  expert
    report, a social services report or anything from the school as regards
    the appellant's relationship with the children.  However, she  accepted
    that, if the record of proceedings referred to oral submissions for the
    appellant with reference to his claimed family life, there would be  an
    error of law.

 5. The appellant's skeleton argument in the FTT  refers  at  [40]  to  the
    requirement of the FTT to consider the Article  8  rights  of  everyone
    affected when deciding whether  or  not  a  decision  is  proportionate
    (Beoku Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).   The submissions in the skeleton,
    as regards the Article 8 claim, were extremely limited.  There  was  no
    specific reference to the existence  of  family  life.  However,  these
    submissions  were  supplemented  by  the  oral  submissions   for   the
    appellant. The record of proceedings makes it clear that it was claimed
    the appellant's circumstances were exceptional and highly unusual  "due
    to the role played within the family. He has lived with the family  for
    13 years and there are two children who have lost father and uncle in a
    short time and he played a role with school work and looking after them
    - close family dynamic."  While there is no specific reference  in  the
    record of proceedings as to whether the appeal was pursued on the basis
    Article 8 was engaged on grounds of family life, it was undoubtedly the
    fact that, given the appellant's claimed role within  the  family,  his
    removal could impact on the well-being of the  children  who  had  lost
    their father and uncle.  Thus the  best  interests  of  these  children
    should have been addressed by the FTTJ in her decision, pursuant to s55
    of the British Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 6. I indicated to the parties' representatives that, in the light  of  the
    FTTJ's record of the oral submissions for the appellant, I  would  find
    there was an error of law in her decision in that  she  had  failed  to
    identify and take into account the best interests of  the  children  in
    her decision.  Furthermore, those interests had not been factored  into
    the proportionality assessment pursuant to Article 8:  the FTTJ  stated
    "It has not been argued that the ties he has amount to family life  for
    the purposes of Article 8 and the evidence  before  me  does  not  show
    this". This is not an accurate reflection of the oral  submissions  for
    the appellant which specifically referred to the close  family  dynamic
    which included the appellant's role in the context of two children  who
    had lost both their father and, earlier this  year,  their  uncle.  The
    FTTJ had failed to have regard to that role  and  the  children's  best
    interests in concluding there was insufficient evidence to  demonstrate
    that Article 8 was engaged in respect of family life.

 7. In Azimi-Moayed & Ors (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the Tribunal held that duties to have regard as a
    primary consideration to the best interests of  a  child  are  so  well
    established that a judge should take the point for him or herself as an
    obvious point to be considered, where the issue arises on the evidence,
    irrespective of whether the appellants or the advocates have  done  so.
    In NN (South  Africa)  &  Anor  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWCA Civ 653 it was said that whether or not  "family
    life" is established, it is a question of fact in each case whether  it
    is appropriate to focus on family life rather than "private  life"  but
    in practice  the  factors  to  be  examined  in  order  to  assess  the
    proportionality of the removal  are  the  same  regardless  of  whether
    family or private life is engaged.   The FTTJ's analysis was  therefore
    flawed.

 8. I indicated to the representatives that I would find the FTTJ had  made
    an error of law in failing to identify the best interests  of  the  two
    children and to make them a primary consideration in the assessment  of
    proportionality. I invited them to make submissions on the  materiality
    of that error of law.

 9. Ms Jones submitted there was a paucity of evidence before the  FTTJ  as
    regards the children and the appellant's relationship  with  them;  she
    noted the  appellant's  350  page  bundle  which  contained  little  of
    relevance, on her submission. She drew my attention to  paragraphs  35,
    39 and 41 of the FTTJ's decision.  She  identified  references  to  the
    children's best interests at paragraph 38.

10. Mr O'Ceallaigh submitted there was no analysis of the  children's  best
    interests;  he  agreed  that  there  had  been  no  mention  of   these
    specifically in his skeleton argument before the FTTJ but  he  observed
    there had been extensive oral evidence,  as  noted  in  the  record  of
    proceedings, on the issue. He submitted the FTTJ  had  failed  to  take
    into account the exceptionality of the  appellant's  circumstances:  he
    had lived in the same household for 13 years; the children had suffered
    bereavement. The appellant's role in their life was  exceptional.  This
    could  have  made  a  difference  to  the  outcome.   Furthermore,  the
    appellant had become an overstayer as a result of a series of bad luck.
    He submitted the interests of the children should have been  considered
    in the context of the accusation made against the appellant:  his  life
    had been on hold for three years; he should have been granted  a  short
    period of leave to regulate his status; even 60 days  would  have  been
    sufficient to enable him to rectify his student status; there  were  no
    difficulties with finances. This should have gone into the mix.



Discussion

11. I do not accept Ms Jones' submission that the FTTJ referred to the best
    interests of the children  and  their  impact  in  the  decision-making
    process. The focus of  the  FTTJ's  decision  was  on  the  appellant's
    private life, the FTTJ having apparently decided that the appellant did
    not pursue a family life and that there was  insufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate the existence of one [39]. My attention was drawn  to  [38]
    in  which  the  FTTJ  made   reference   to   Kaur   (children's   best
    interests/public interest interface) [2017]  UKUT  14  (IAC)  but  this
    reference is in the context of the "little weight provisions in Part 5A
    of the 2002 Act [which] do not entail an absolute, rigid measurement or
    concept..."  The reference to this authority was not in the context  of
    identifying or taking into account the best interests of the  children.
    It is clear from the previous sentence in [38] that  the  FTTJ's  focus
    was the appellant's private life.

12. The findings at [39] simply do not go far enough.  The  mother  of  the
    two children, whose deceased husband was the appellant's  cousin,  says
    in her statement

         "He is the only member of my family my children have in the  United
         Kingdom (after their grandparents, as their dad is no longer alive.
         ... He has always played the role of a brother in my life and plays
         an active role as an uncle to my children.  After my husband passed
         away in 2016, [the appellant] has played in [sic] important role in
         my children's lives as their only male figure in the  family.  [The
         appellant] not only helps me with caring for my  mother-in-law  and
         father-in-law, but also  helps  me  with  children;  such  as  with
         homework as he is extremely skilled in  Maths  and  Art.   ....  He
         helps out significantly with household chores as well  as  with  my
         children and he is one of the only person I would trust  around  my
         young children (as they are ten and twelve). ... My children and  I
         have lot of respect for [the appellant], as he is the  only  member
         of family we now have after the  death  of  my  husband.  ...  [The
         appellant] not only has helped out significantly  during  the  time
         that my husband died, but recently  (16/02/2019)  my  only  brother
         also passed away, and [the appellant] has also been  a  significant
         help during this very difficult time, and he is a  great  asset  to
         our family. ... My children and I would all be devastated  if  [the
         appellant] was to return  to  India,  as  we  have  built  a  great
         relationship with him."


13. The FTTJ does not criticise the evidence of this  witness.  It  is  not
    rejected by the FTTJ. Indeed it is implicit from paragraph 38 that  the
    FTTJ  accepts  it:  she  refers  to  "the  Appellant  [having]  a  good
    relationship with his cousin's family, their children and his aunt  and
    uncle with whom he lives."  The FTTJ goes on to  state  she  "accept[s]
    that life cannot have been easy for the  family  when  the  Appellant's
    cousin died young in 2016 and that he helps with the children  aged  10
    and 12. [She] further accept[ed] that they would find it  difficult  if
    he returned to India."  This is not  the  evidence  of  the  children's
    mother which is that they would be "devastated" if he were to return to
    India.  There is  a  significant  difference  between  devastation  and
    difficulty, particularly for two young children in such  circumstances.
    At paragraph 41 the FTTJ states "Within the spectrum of 'little' weight
    I give some weight to his private life  given  the  relationships  with
    family". She concluded that his private life "does not have  a  special
    and compelling character".

14. As was said by Keene LJ in IA (Somalia) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 323:

         "... in public law cases, an error of law will be regarded as
         material unless the decision-maker must have reached the same
         conclusion without the error ... [A]n error of law is material if
         the Adjudicator might have come to a different conclusion ... "


15. I accept that, had the FTTJ identified and taken  into  account,  as  a
    primary consideration  in  the  proportionality  assessment,  the  best
    interests of the children, as she was required to do pursuant  to  s55,
    she might have reached a different conclusion.   Her  findings  outside
    the Immigration Rules, pursuant to the Article 8,  cannot  stand  as  a
    result of the material error of law in failing  to  identify  and  take
    into account the best interests of these children.

16. It was submitted by the parties that, in the  event  of  my  finding  a
    material error of law, I should remake the decision. I  agree  and  re-
    assess the proportionality of the interference with the appellant's and
    the children's protected rights as against the public interest.

17. In accordance with the guidance in Kaur, cited above,  I  identify  the
    best interests of these two children at the outset and in isolation.

18. These two children lost their father in 2016. While it is not suggested
    in the evidence that the appellant has a genuine parental  relationship
    with these children, he has a role in their care. The evidence  of  the
    children's  mother  makes  it  clear  that  he  is  involved  in  their
    upbringing in that he cares for them, he is  trusted  by  her  to  look
    after them and  he  supervises  them  with  their  homework  and  other
    activities.  He is the children's "only  male  figure  in  the  family"
    according to the children's mother. This is a close family  dynamic  in
    which the appellant has a closer relationship with  the  children  than
    would have been the case if their father had been alive.  I  adopt  the
    evidence of their mother and find that they would be devastated if  the
    appellant were to return to India.   These  children  have  lost  their
    father; they have also lost an uncle who died earlier this year and the
    appellant would be the third close male relative to leave the household
    were he to be removed to India.  His  removal  must  be  seen  in  that
    context.  It is in the best interests of these children to continue  to
    live within the current household with  the  appellant  living  in  the
    household and  continuing  to  support  the  children  emotionally  and
    practically following the deaths of their  father  and  their  maternal
    uncle.

19. I have regard to the submissions of Ms Jones that there is no expert or
    other independent evidence as to the impact of the appellant's  removal
    on these  children.  However,  it  is  axiomatic  that  young  bereaved
    children, such as these, have suffered and are suffering as a result of
    those bereavements. It is not  fanciful  that  the  appellant  in  such
    circumstances has stepped, in a practical and emotional sense, if not a
    parental sense, into the  shoes  of  the  children's  deceased  father.
    Irrespective of the specific biological nature of his relationship with
    each individual child, it is clear that his departure from  the  family
    home where he has lived for the last thirteen  years,  and  before  the
    children were born, would cause these children  significant  upset  and
    detriment.  They would, in the words of their mother, be devastated  by
    his departure; they have known him all their lives  and  come  to  rely
    upon him emotionally and practically since their father's demise.

20. It is not  in  dispute  that  Article  8  is  engaged  insofar  as  the
    appellant's  private  life  is  concerned.  The  proposition  that  the
    impugned  decisions  of  the  Secretary  of   State   interfere   with,
    substantially so, the private lives of the appellant and  the  children
    of the family, to whom he is close, is  incontestable.  It  is  not  in
    dispute  that  there  are  not  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
    integration into India on return (paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)).  The  issue
    is whether the appellant's circumstances are such that  the  degree  of
    interference with his protected right is such as to outweigh the public
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration controls (s117B(1)
    of the 2002 Act).

21. The threshold for the  engagement  of  Article  8  is  a  low  one:  AG
    (Eritrea)  v  SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  801.   Given   the   appellant's
    circumstances, the deaths of the children's father in  2016  and  their
    uncle in 2019, and the children's and their mother's  reliance  on  the
    appellant for practical and emotional support, I find that Article 8 is
    engaged in this case not only on the grounds of his  private  life  but
    also on grounds  of  the  appellant's  and  the  children's  and  their
    mother's family lives.

22. The appellant's relationship with the children was  formed  at  a  time
    when he had lawful status here: he entered the UK  in  June  2006  with
    leave to enter as a student and that was extended to 31  January  2010.
     At that time the children's father was still alive but  the  appellant
    was living  in  the  family  household  and  would  have  had  a  close
    relationship with the children  nonetheless,  at  least  sufficient  to
    engage Article 8 on private life grounds, from their  birth.  They  are
    now aged 10 and 12.  That relationship has strengthened since the death
    of the children's father in 2016 such that it  now  amounts  to  family
    life.

23. The appellant's immigration history is relevant to  the  assessment  of
    the public interest.  On 11 January  2010  the  appellant  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 general student.  That  application
    was refused on 2 February 2010. The application was refused  because  a
    page was missing from the application form.  Despite  the  respondent's
    policy the appellant was not given the chance to remedy it.

24. On 10 February 2010, within  28  days  of  his  previous  refusal,  the
    Appellant applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  general
    student. That application was refused on  12  March  2010  because  his
    application now included a bank statement which was out of date.  There
    is no suggestion in the  evidence  that  the  respondent  notified  the
    appellant of this discrepancy notwithstanding it must have  been  clear
    to the respondent that it was merely an error.

25. On 31 March 2010 the appellant sought reconsideration but there was  no
    response until 9 March 2011.  Following pre-action  correspondence  the
    appellant was given a right of appeal but it proceeded  on  the  papers
    and the appellant's  previous  representatives  failed  to  inform  the
    tribunal that the appellant had the  correct  funds  for  the  relevant
    period and failed to  include  his  bank  statement.   The  appellant's
    appeal rights were exhausted on 14 November 2012.  On 12 December  2012
    the appellant applied for further leave to remain as a Tier  4  general
    student.  He sat a test  of  English  for  International  Communication
    ("TOEIC") at Premier Language Training Centre.  This was  refused  with
    no right of appeal.  The appellant made human rights representations in
    June 2014; this was refused and  certified  in  November  2016.  On  18
    October 2017 the appellant made a human rights application on the basis
    of his family life with his partner and his private life.  It  is  that
    application which was refused and led to the appeal to the  FTTJ.   The
    respondent concluded inter alia that the appellant had cheated  in  the
    TOEIC test and that he had not paid litigation  costs  awarded  to  the
    Home Office; he did not therefore meet  the  suitability  criteria.  He
    also concluded the appellant did not meet the relationship requirements
    of the Rules because he and his partner were not married  and  did  not
    cohabit. The respondent  concluded  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    exemption criteria in the Rules (section EX.1) and that there were  not
    very significant obstacles to  his  integration  on  return  (paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)).  He  also   concluded   there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances (paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM) in that it  would  not
    result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the  appellant,  a
    relevant child  or  another  family  member.  It  was  noted  that  the
    appellant had remained in the UK in breach of Immigration  laws  for  a
    period in excess of 7 years.

26. I turn to the issue of  proportionality.    It  is  submitted  for  the
    appellant that the failure of his applications for leave to remain as a
    student, and on appeal, were through no fault of his own, rather  those
    of his representatives at the time.  This is  relevant  to  the  extent
    that he did not flagrantly abuse the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is  also
    highly relevant that he did not, as the FTTJ found, cheat in the  TOEIC
    test.  It is nonetheless a fact that he  did  not  demonstrate  at  the
    material times, that he met the criteria in the Immigration  Rules  for
    the grant of leave to remain as a student or indeed on the basis of his
    private or family life at the time.

27. The appellant speaks English. He is not financially  dependent  on  the
    state (Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58).  There are sufficient funds within the
    family unit for him to return to his studies and  thereafter  he  could
    work. He  would  not  be  a  burden  on  the  state  from  a  financial
    perspective.  He has integrated into British society.

28. Pursuant to section 117B(5) "little weight should be given to a private
    life established by a person at a time when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious".  That is the case for the appellant between June
    2006 and January 2010.  The children were born in this period  and  his
    relationship with them was formed at that time.  The appellant does not
    have a parental relationship with the two  children,  albeit  they  are
    emotionally and practically dependent on  him  to  some  extent.   That
    dependence was established in 2016 with the death of their father.  The
    appellant was in the UK unlawfully at the time.

29. Pursuant to s117B(4) "little weight should be given to a  private  life
    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully". That is the case for the appellant from 31 January 2010.

30. In Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A - compelling  circumstances
    test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) it was held that the Parliamentary intention
    underlying Part 5A of the 2002 Act is to give proper effect to  Article
    8. That was a case involving a father who  had  primary  care  for  the
    children of the family. In that  case  the  family  were  supported  by
    public funds. The headnote to that authority is helpful:

         "(I)     Where the case of a foreign national who is not an
         offender does not satisfy the requirements of the Article 8 ECHR
         regime of the Immigration Rules, the test to be applied is that of
         compelling circumstances.


         (II)     The Parliamentary intention underlying Part 5A of NIAA
         2002 is to give proper effect to Article 8 ECHR. Thus a private
         life developed or established during periods of unlawful or
         precarious residence might conceivably qualify to be accorded more
         than little weight and s 117B (4) and (5) are to be construed and
         applied accordingly.


         (III)    Mere hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere
         upheaval and mere inconvenience, even where multiplied, are
         unlikely to satisfy the test of "very significant hurdles" in
         paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules."


31. At [45] the Upper Tribunal said this, with Kaur in mind, on  the  issue
    of "little weight" pursuant to s117B:

         "Kaur reasons that this produces the result that in  some  cases  a
         private life developed during a period of  unlawful  or  precarious
         leave in the United Kingdom may qualify for  virtually  no  weight,
         whereas in others the quantity of weight to be attributed may verge
         on the  notionally  moderate  where  the  assessment  is  that  the
         particular case, with  its  individual  traits  and  circumstances,
         belongs to the upper end of the "little weight" spectrum.

32. At [47] the Upper Tribunal give this guidance:

         "...these  Appellants  must  demonstrate  a  compelling  (not  very
         compelling)  case  in  order  to  displace  the  public   interests
         inclining  towards  their  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom.  In
         formulating this principle, we do  not  overlook  the  question  of
         whether the adverb "very" in truth adds anything to  the  adjective
         "compelling",  given  that  the  latter  partakes  of  an  absolute
         flavour. It seems to us that  the  judicially  formulated  test  of
         "very compelling circumstances" has  been  driven  by  the  aim  of
         placing emphasis on the especially elevated threshold which must be
         overcome  by  foreign  national   offenders,   particularly   those
         convicted of the more serious crimes,  who  seek  to  displace  the
         potent public interests favouring their deportation.  In  contrast,
         immigrants such  as  these  Appellants  confront  a  less  daunting
         threshold."

33. To use the format in Treebowhan, I give effect to section 117B of the
    2002 Act in the following way:

         (a)      The starting point is that the maintenance of effective
         immigration controls is in the public interest.

         (b)      There is no dispute about the English language ability of
         the appellant.

         (c)      The appellant is financially independent and capable of
         working in the UK. He is not financially dependent on the state and
         is unlikely to become so.

         (d)      The appellant is integrated into British society.

         (e)      Given the nature of his status in the United Kingdom
         throughout his stay, the family and private life which he has
         established and developed qualifies for the attribution of little
         weight only.  That said the case has been made that his family and
         private life is of a special and compelling character encompassing
         as it does the close family dynamic resulting from the death of the
         children's father in 2016 and, more recently, their uncle and the
         appellant's role in their day to day lives, providing them with
         emotional and practical support.  The children's protected rights
         are engaged by the appellant's removal because they would lose that
         support (Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).  These are compelling
         circumstances.

34. The best interests of the two children are served  by  their  remaining
    within the stable family unit with the appellant continuing to  provide
    support. The appellant's removal would sever that day-to-day supportive
    relationship  and  the  family  dynamic  which  is  important  to   the
    children's emotional stability, well-being and welfare.   These  are  a
    primary consideration albeit not the only consideration.

35. This is an unusual set of  circumstances:  the  appellant  has  a  role
    within the family unit, not as a parent but as a male figure  providing
    close support to  two  dependent  (albeit  not  currently  financially)
    children in compelling circumstances where their father  (and  latterly
    their uncle) have died, leaving them in the sole care of their  mother,
    a widow.  Mr O'Ceallaigh was  frank  in  submitting  that  he  had  not
    appreciated  the  nature  of  the  family  dynamic  until  meeting  the
    appellant and his family on the morning of the hearing in the FTT. This
    explains the paucity of the documentary evidence before  the  FTTJ  but
    that paucity was addressed in oral evidence  and  there  is  sufficient
    such evidence to demonstrate the positive  impact  of  the  appellant's
    presence in the family  home,  providing  as  it  does  a  stable  home
    environment for the two bereaved children.  It is perhaps to the credit
    of the appellant and his family that they did not overplay this  aspect
    in their evidence.

36. I balance the salient features of the appellant's case with the  public
    interest, as identified above, and conclude that the public interest is
    just outweighed by the degree of interference with the appellant's and,
    more particularly, the children's  protected  Article  8  rights  to  a
    family  and  private  life   notwithstanding   the   appellant's   poor
    immigration history.  I am satisfied that  the  appellant's  case  just
    overcomes the threshold  necessary  to  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with the protected rights of the  two  children  who  have
    suffered the loss of their father in 2016 and  an  uncle  earlier  this
    year. To them, at their young ages, the removal of the appellant  would
    amount to yet another bereavement.  These are compelling circumstances:
    such an upheaval in their lives so soon after the deaths of  two  close
    relatives would undoubtedly cause further suffering.

37. This appeal therefore succeeds.

Decision

38. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved material
    errors on points of law.  The FTTJ's decision outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, pursuant to the Article 8 jurisdiction, is set aside.  I  remake
    the decision and allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

39. Given my references to the children and their  personal  circumstances,
    the appellant is entitled to anonymity in these proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019


