
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02963/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2019                          |On 01 March 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                             MD Mahbubur rahman
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Basith, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Rahman against the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    Secretary of State on 9 January 2018 of an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom.   The  central  point  was  the  English
    language test which he took in July 2012,  in  which  it  was  said  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State was one where  there  was  significant
    evidence to conclude that his certificate was fraudulently obtained  by
    the use of a proxy test taker.

2.   The judge considered the evidence on this and concluded  that  she  was
    satisfied that it was likely  the  appellant  did  not  take  the  test
    himself and the respondent was entitled to invalidate the test and as a
    consequence therefore he could not meet the suitability requirements of
    the Rules and the appeal was dismissed.

3.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal against  this
    decision on the basis essentially of a lack of  proper  reasoning.   It
    was argued that though the judge had considered the evidential  burden,
    the initial burden on the Secretary of State, which  it  was  concluded
    was  discharged,  there  had  not  been  a  proper  assessment  of  the
    evidential burden on the appellant, bearing in  mind  such  matters  as
    were pointed out as his passing the IELTS test in November 2008 and the
    detailed description he provided of taking the test on the day.

4.   The  matter  is  summed  up  rather  well  I  think  in  the  grant  of
    permission.  The IELTS is a test that is an approved  one  for  the  UK
    immigration purposes.  The judge did not make a  clear  finding  as  to
    whether or not the appellant had provided a reasonable explanation.  It
    was unclear what of his evidence the judge accepted or rejected and was
    required to make a finding that the respondent had  or  had  not  shown
    that the reasonable explanation should be rejected and  the  judge  had
    essentially just relied on a number of invalid tests at the test centre
    and arguably as was said  at  that  stage,  did  not  engage  with  the
    appellant's evidence.

5.   I think Mr Avery is entirely right on consideration  to  conclude  that
    the challenge to the decision is made out in this case and I  have  not
    needed to hear from Mr Basith  as  a  consequence,  except  as  to  his
    agreement with that and with the proposed course of  action.   It  does
    seem to me that the decision is materially flawed by errors of law  and
    lack of proper reasoning in the manner identified, in particular in the
    grant of permission to appeal and as a consequence  the  decision  will
    have to be remade and I also agree with the representatives that in the
    circumstances the degree of remaking that would be  necessary  in  this
    case is such that it will have to go back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a full rehearing in Birmingham.

No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date 28 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
