
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02021/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 20 April 2018                       |On 04 May 2018                        |
|                                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                            Mr Padam Bahadur Ale
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel, instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Oxlade  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse his  application  for
    entry clearance to the UK as the adult son  of  his  mother,  Dhunisara
    Ale, the widow of an ex-Gurkha, Sabbahadur Ale, who died in Nepal on 29
    October 2005.

2.   The late Sabbahadur Ale was a member of the British  Armed  Forces  who
    served in the British Army.   According  to  the  sponsor,  namely  Mrs
    Dhunisara Ale, her husband returned from the British Army to  Nepal  in
    1971.  Had he had the chance to come to the UK, he would have done  so.
    The appellant was born on 9 July 1990 in Nepal.

3.   On 1  December  2015  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance to the UK to join his mother, the sponsor.  The  sponsor  was
    granted  settlement  in  the  UK  under  Chapter  15,  Section  2A   of
    Immigration Directorate Instructions published in May 2009 and  entered
    the UK on 4 June 2014.

4.   The ECO noted that there were no discretionary policy  instructions  to
    ECOs to deal with the children of ex-Gurkha widows, only  the  children
    of ex-Gurkhas.  Accordingly, the ECO applied  Chapter  15,  Section  2A
    13.2, which is the Secretary of State's policy for dependants over  the
    age of 18 of Foreign and Commonwealth.

5.   The appellant's appeal before the judge was limited to Article  8  ECHR
    family life.

6.   Mr Jaisri argued that the judge erred in her  approach  to  this  case.
    She dealt with the issue in respect of the time the appellant spent  in
    Qatar and not whether Article 8 family life was sustainable at the time
    of the sponsor's departure in 2014.

7.   He submitted that the judge's decision  at  paragraph  31  was  flawed.
    The appellant was seeking to join a Gurkha widow.  Mr Jaisri said  that
    Annex K was not applicable only to  Gurkhas  and  their  children.   He
    submitted that the decision in Limbu [2008]  EWHC  2261  (Admin)  deals
    with the family as  a  whole.   It  deals  with  the  totality  of  the
    injustice to the family as a whole.  He submitted that the  appellant's
    mother entered the UK as a Gurkha widow and therefore the judge had  to
    consider if the appellant was sufficiently prejudiced by  the  historic
    injustice.  However, at paragraph 31 the judge took the view  that  the
    appellant sought to stretch the category of those who may benefit  from
    the concessions, to include dependants of  dependants.   The  appellant
    had said this would cure a historic injustice, but the judge held  that
    inevitably there will be a limitation on who can be included.   In  the
    circumstances the judge was not satisfied that  there  was  a  historic
    injustice.  Mr Jaisri said this approach was erroneous.

8.    Mr  Bramble  conceded  that  the  judge's  approach  to  the  historic
    injustice issue at paragraph 31 was wrong.  However, he submitted  that
    whether the error is material will depend on the  judge's  approach  to
    family life and if that approach was incorrect.

9.   Mr Bramble submitted that the judge looked at the  credibility  of  the
    sponsor.  She did not believe that the sponsor gave an accurate account
    of the period the appellant spent in Qatar.  The judge  took  the  view
    that the appellant was getting on  with  his  life  as  an  independent
    person.  The judge was entitled to take this into account.

10.  Mr Jaisri in response agreed that the judge's findings  on  the  period
    the appellant spent in  Qatar  were  adverse  but  submitted  that  the
    judge's finding at  paragraph  27  that  the  mystery  surrounding  the
    appellant's trip to Qatar had the hallmarks of  a  separation  and  the
    appellant getting on with life without the sponsor was not a conclusion
    that should lead to the dismissal of this appeal.   The  judge  had  to
    consider what family life existed when the sponsor  left  in  2014  and
    weighing  up  that  evidence  with  other  evidence  and  coming  to  a
    conclusion as to whether that family life would  have  continued  after
    the sponsor's entry into the United Kingdom.   He  submitted  that  the
    balancing exercise  in  respect  of  the  Article  8  family  life  was
    incomplete and incompatible with the decision in Rai.

11.  I find that the judge erred in law in finding that family life in  this
    case was not engaged because the appellant himself was dependent on the
    dependant.  The question of historic injustice was not just limited  to
    the ex-Gurkha and his dependants.  It applied to  all  members  of  the
    family, including the widow of the Gurkha.  To that extent I find  that
    the judge's decision at paragraph 31 disclosed an error of law.

12.  I find that the judge also erred in her consideration of  family  life.
    The judge approached this issue by looking at the period in  2011  when
    it was said the appellant worked in  Qatar  for  about  eight  to  nine
    months.  There was  nothing  preventing  the  judge  from  taking  this
    evidence into account when conducting a balancing exercise  in  respect
    of Article 8.  The judge had to consider whether there was family  life
    between the appellant and the sponsor prior to the sponsor's  departure
    to the UK in 2014 and whether that family life has continued since  her
    arrival in the  United  Kingdom.   Indeed,  in  Jitendra  Rai  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320 Lord Justice  Lindblom
    held at paragraph 39:

         "But that, in my view, was not to confront  the  real  issue  under
         Article 8(1) in this case, which was whether, as a matter of  fact,
         the appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life  with  his
         parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle
         in the United Kingdom and had endured  beyond  it,  notwithstanding
         their having left Nepal when they did."


13.  It is obvious from the decision that the judge failed to consider  this
    critical question.  Her failure to look at  this  question  led  to  an
    incomplete balancing exercise by the judge.

14.  Accordingly, the judge's decision cannot stand.  It  is  set  aside  in
    order for it to be remade.

15.  The appellant's  appeal  is  remitted  to  be  heard  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge sitting at Hatton Cross other than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Oxlade.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for re-hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 1 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
