
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02090/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 25th June 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                  Amit [K]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


  This decision has been made without a hearing, pursuant to rule 34 of the
               Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the remaking component of the Upper Tribunal's decision in this
    appeal, following my conclusion (set out, with  reasons,  in  a  notice
    promulgated on 10 January 2020) that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred
    in law when dismissing the appellant's appeal against the  respondent's
    refusal of his human rights claim.  The error of law  component  of  my
    decision is appended to this notice.  In summary, I concluded that  the
    judge had failed to deal adequately with the two core  aspects  of  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim; his assertion that he is a  bisexual  man,
    with the difficult consequences this would have him if he  returned  to
    India; and his particular health condition, namely Type I diabetes with
    an episodic presentation known as Diabetic ketoacidosis ("DKA").   None
    of the judge's findings were preserved.



Procedural history

 2. A resumed hearing was originally listed for 20 March 2020.  For reasons
    entirely beyond her control, the designated Senior  Presenting  Officer
    was unable to attend  and  an  adjournment  was  sought.   In  all  the
    circumstances, including  the  emerging  highly  unusual  circumstances
    brought about by the Covid-19  pandemic,  I  granted  the  adjournment.
    This was with the intention that a further hearing could be  listed  in
    the near future.

 3. As matters have turned out, an expeditious re-listing for  this  appeal
    proved to be impossible.

 4. Directions to the parties were sent out on 27 April 2020  in  order  to
    progress the case.  By an email received by the Tribunal  on  27  April
    2020, the appellant stated his  wish  to  have  his  appeal  determined
    without a further hearing.  Amongst the reasons set out  for  this  was
    the suggestion that he did not have the appropriate technology order to
    participate in a remote hearing.  In order to clarify matters,  further
    directions were sent out on 28 April.  It was specifically put  to  the
    appellant that he could wait for a face-to-face hearing to be listed in
    due course.  The directions also asked him to confirm whether he wished
    his legal representatives (or counsel) to make any further  submissions
    on his behalf.  The following day, the appellant responded in an email,
    clearly confirming that he wished his appeal to be  finally  determined
    without  a  hearing  and  that  he  did  not   wish   for   his   legal
    representatives (or counsel) to make  any  further  submissions.   This
    response was forwarded by the Tribunal to the respondent.

 5. On 4 May 2020, another Note and Directions  notice  was  issued.   This
    confirmed the appellant's wish to have his  appeal  determined  without
    hearing.  In addition, it stated the following:

           "The Upper Tribunal is in  possession  of  the  case  file.  The
           evidence upon  which  the  appellant  seeks  to  rely  when  the
           remaking  decision  is  undertaken  is  contained  in  a  bundle
           received by the Upper Tribunal on 14 February 2020 (under  cover
           of letter dated 8 February 2020). This bundle ("the  appellant's
           bundle")  comprises   two   parts:   section   A   is   entitled
           "supplementary bundle" and is  paginated  i-129;  section  B  is
           entitled "First-tier Tribunal Appeal Bundle" and is paginated 1-
           137. This is the only evidence emanating from the appellant that
           the Upper Tribunal will consider when remaking the  decision  in
           this appeal.

           As to the scope of the remaking decision, the  following  issues
           are to be addressed:

              i. the appellant's overall  credibility,  specifically  as  at
                 relates to his claimed sexuality,  his  health  conditions,
                 and his personal circumstances in the United Kingdom and if
                 he returned to India;

             ii. the supporting documentary evidence relating to  the  above
                 matters;

            iii. the relevance of the above matters to the assessment of the
                 Article 8 claim, both within the context of the Immigration
                 Rules and without.

           Directions to the parties

              To the appellant:

              1) No later than 5 days after this notice  is  sent  out  (the
                 date of sending out will be stated on the covering email or
                 covering letter), the appellant  is  to  confirm  with  the
                 Upper Tribunal and the respondent whether  the  appellant's
                 bundle can be served on the respondent in  electronic  form
                 (specifically,  in  PDF  format  in   appropriately   sized
                 attachments to multiple emails);

              2) If such service is possible, the appellant's  bundle  shall
                 be served on the respondent in  electronic  form  no  later
                 than 5 days after this notice is sent out;

              3) Further and in any event, no later than 14 days after  this
                 notice is sent out, the appellant may, if so advised,  file
                 and serve by electronic means written submissions  relating
                 to the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  his  appeal.  Such
                 submissions  should  include  any  relevant  legal  points,
                 together with references to any relevant evidence contained
                 in the appellant's bundle;

              4) If  and  when  the  respondent  files  and  serves  written
                 submissions in compliance with the direction set out below,
                 the appellant  may,  if  so  advised,  file  and  serve  by
                 electronic means a reply no later  than  7  days  following
                 service of the respondents written submissions."

 6. On 7  May  2020,  the  appellant  responded  by  filing  a  handwritten
    statement, dated 6 May 2020.  This confirms that he  did  not  want  to
    have a face-to-face hearing.  No  submissions  were  received  at  that
    point.

 7. The appellant's handwritten statement was forwarded by the Tribunal  to
    the respondent.  There was uncertainty  as  to  whether  the  appellant
    representatives had in fact served the relevant bundle of  evidence  on
    the respondent.  I deemed it  appropriate  to  hold  a  telephone  case
    management hearing in order to assess the  situation  and  ensure  that
    both parties had had a fair opportunity to put forward their respective
    cases before I reached a final decision on the appeal.   It  transpired
    that the respondent had been served  with  the  appellant's  bundle  in
    electronic form (following a  delay  in  respect  of  which  I  do  not
    criticise the appellant's representatives) and was  in  a  position  to
    provide written submissions.

 8. On 9 June 2020, the respondent filed and served her written submissions
    (described as a skeleton argument).

 9. In order to afford the appellant every fair opportunity  of  presenting
    his case, I then directed that he could file and serve any reply to the
    respondent's submissions within 5 days of 10 June 2020.  I made it very
    clear that I would be making my decision  on  the  appeal  either  upon
    receipt of such a reply, or in default of the direction being  complied
    with.

10. 12 June 2020, written submissions drafted by Ms  Heybroek  of  Counsel,
    were filed and served.  In summary, they assert that, by  reference  to
    country information, the  appellant's  sexuality  would  make  him  the
    subject of significant discrimination in India.  This,  in  combination
    with his time away from that country and is lack of  a  social/familial
    support network, would go to show "very significant  obstacles"  and/or
    that the respondent's decision was disproportionate on a wider  Article
    8 basis.  I will address the points raised in more detail, below.

11. Having considered all the circumstances  in  this  case,  including  of
    course the express wishes of the appellant, I concluded  that  I  could
    and should determine the appeal without a hearing, pursuant to rule  34
    of the Procedure Rules.



The evidence

12.  Under  cover  of  letter  dated  8  February  2020,  the   appellant's
    representatives made an application under rule 15(2A) of the  Procedure
    Rules to rely on additional evidence that had not been before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  There has been no opposition to  this  application.   I
    formally grant the application and admit that evidence.

13. The respondent's skeleton argument also contains an application to rely
    on further evidence on  the  issues  of  sexuality  and  treatment  for
    diabetes in India.  This evidence is all in the public  domain  and  is
    relevant to the issues before me.  I formally  grant  that  application
    and admit the evidence referred to in the skeleton argument.

14. In remaking the decision in this appeal, I therefore have regard to the
    following sources of evidence:

              i. the appellant's combined  bundle,  under  cover  of  letter
                 dated 8 February 2020, comprising sections A and B;

             ii. the appellant's handwritten witness statement dated  6  May
                 2020;

            iii. the country information referred  to  in  the  respondent's
                 skeleton argument (which included relevant hyperlinks);

             iv. the country information  referred  to  in  the  appellant's
                 written submissions dated 12 June 2020;

              v. The respondent's original appeal bundle, under cover  of  a
                 front sheet dated 8 March 2019.



Additional materials

15. I have taken account of the submissions  set  out  in  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument, originally drafted by Ms Heybroek  of  Counsel,  and
    amended by Ms Allen of Counsel on 19  March  2020,  and  those  in  the
    latest written submissions dated 12  June  2020.   I  have  also  taken
    account of the submission set out in the respondent's skeleton argument
    and the reasons for refusal letter dated 14 January 2019.



The parties' respective cases

16. The appellant's case can be summarised as follows.  He came  to  United
    Kingdom in October 2003 as a student and has resided  in  this  country
    ever since.  He asserts that during this period  of  residence  he  has
    established strong ties, both in respect of family members and a  wider
    social circle.  He has lost ties with India.  He claims to be  bisexual
    and asserts that this will cause him significant problems on return  to
    India in light of societal discrimination.  In  addition,  his  medical
    condition is significant  and,  when  taken  together  with  all  other
    relevant matters,  goes  to  show  that  he  would  either  face  "very
    significant obstacles"  to  reintegration  into  Indian  society,  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules, or  that
    his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would   in   any   event   be
    disproportionate on a wider Article 8 assessment.

17. It is to be noted that the appellant has never made a protection claim,
    nor does he seek to rely on Article 3.

18. The respondent's reasons for refusal letter implicitly accepts that the
    appellant has established a private life in United  Kingdom.   However,
    it was said that in all the circumstances he  will  not  face  "a  very
    significant obstacles" to a reintegration  into  Indian  society.   The
    question of whether  there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the
    appellant's case is then considered.  It is accepted that the appellant
    has forged "strong bonds" with family members in  the  United  Kingdom.
    It is not accepted that these constitute family life for  the  purposes
    of Article 8.  The appellant's claim  to  be  bisexual  is  considered.
    Whilst this aspect of his case is not expressly rejected, there  is  no
    concession in his favour. The respondent effectively took the claim  at
    its highest for the purposes of the decision  being  made.  The  letter
    ends by noting that the appellant had not made a protection claim.

19. The  respondent's  skeleton  argument  confirms  that  the  appellant's
    claimed sexuality had not  been  previously  expressly  rejected.   The
    document also effectively takes this aspect of the appellant's case  at
    its  highest.   Reference  is  made  to  evidence  contained   in   the
    respondent's Country Policy Information Note ("the CPIN") and the  case
    of MD (same-sex oriented males: risk) India CG [2014] UKUT 00065 (IAC).
     It is said that the appellant had not provided evidence as to  whether
    he would wish to live discreetly in India simply because of the  social
    mores and/or family use, rather  than  out  of  a  fear  of  harm.   In
    addition, it is said that the appellant would be able  to  live  as  an
    openly bisexual man in a number  of  urban  centres  in  India  without
    facing any significant problems.

20. On the  issue  of  the  appellant's  medical  condition,  the  skeleton
    argument submits that he  is  well  aware  of  his  condition  and  the
    appropriate treatment.  It is  said  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellant would be unable to seek and find  employment
    in India.  This, together with  possible  support  from  family  and/or
    friends in the United Kingdom, would  allow  the  appellant  to  access
    available treatment in India.  It is submitted that this aspect of  his
    case did not disclose a breach of Article 8.



Findings of fact

21. It is common ground that the appellant arrived  in  United  Kingdom  10
    October 2003 as a student.  I find this to be the case.  I  also  find,
    again predicated upon the agreed position  of  the  parties,  that  the
    appellant had leave to remain as a student  until  30  June  2009.   An
    attempted in-time extension application was rejected and all subsequent
    applications for leave to remain have been refused.  Therefore, I  find
    that the appellant has been in this country  unlawfully  since  1  July
    2009.

22. Based on the evidence before me as a whole, I find that  the  appellant
    has in fact established good ties in the United Kingdom.  In respect of
    family members, I find that he has a sister  living  in  Bradford,  two
    maternal uncles, a maternal aunt,  maternal  uncles,  and  two  cousins
    residing in this country.  I find that his sister is  married  and  has
    two children.

23. Having regard to the appellant's three witness statements and those  of
    his sister and a cousin, and the numerous photographs  provided,  I  am
    satisfied that there is a good relationship between the various  family
    members.  Having said that, it is surprising that other family  members
    had not provided any  written  evidence.   I  accept  that  the  family
    members see each other on a relatively frequent basis.  I find that the
    appellant has not been residing with any of these  family  members,  at
    least in recent years.  I am willing to accept that the  appellant  has
    been financially dependent upon the family members  for  a  significant
    period of time.

24. Given the past  and  current  financial  support  provided  by  various
    individuals, it is highly likely that such support would be forthcoming
    were the appellant to return to India.  No family member has  suggested
    that they would simply cut the appellant off, as it were,  were  he  to
    leave the United Kingdom.  I also find that the gurdwara at  which  the
    appellant has acted as a volunteer over the course  of  time  would  be
    willing and able to provide additional support.

25. I am also prepared to accept that the appellant  has  established  good
    friendships whilst in this country.  Although there is only one  letter
    of support contained in the appellant's  bundle,  more  appear  in  the
    respondent's bundle.

26. The appellant has asserted that he no longer  has  any  family  members
    residing  in  India.   This  assertion  is  supported  by  the  witness
    statement from his sister.  In addition, translated death  certificates
    for the appellant's father, mother, and older sister, are contained  in
    the bundle.  I am satisfied that these documents  are  reliable  as  to
    their contents.  On balance, I am satisfied that these  family  members
    have indeed died, as claimed.  I find it to be  more  likely  than  not
    that the appellant no longer has any close relatives living  in  India.
    It may be that there are more distant family members there,  but  I  am
    willing to accept that he is not in contact with them and  is  unlikely
    to have the ability  to  discover  a  means  of  establishing  (or  re-
    establishing) contact with any such individuals.

27. I find that the appellant does not own property in India, nor  does  he
    have any other form of assets in that country.

28. The  appellant  claims  that  he  is  bisexual.   Aside  from  his  own
    assertions contained in the  two  witness  statements  and  the  letter
    setting out his human rights claim (which, it must be said,  have  been
    put in the barest of terms), there is no other supporting  evidence  on
    this important issue.  The appellant's sister and the  only  friend  to
    have provided a letter of support make no  mention  of  his  sexuality.
    This is despite the assertion in the human rights claim letter that the
    appellant's family members  in  the  United  Kingdom  were  "much  more
    accepting" in respect of sexuality than Indian society  It may be  that
    he has never in fact  wished  to  divulge  this  information  to  them.
    However, he has not said as much in his  witness  statements.   Indeed,
    the 2019 statement makes no reference to his sexuality at all.  From an
    evidential perspective, the position is very unsatisfactory.

29. There is no evidence from the claimed former partner, Mr  [Z],  despite
    the assertion made in the human rights claim letter of  May  2018  that
    although that relationship ended, they  remained  "very  close  and  in
    contact."  The lack of evidence from this individual and the absence of
    any explanation from the appellant as to why no such evidence has  been
    provided (or even sought) is not insignificant.

30.  Despite  being  expressly  informed  about  the  option  of  making  a
    protection claim, the  appellant  has  never  pursued  this  course  of
    action.  To that extent, he  has  avoided  the  scrutiny  that  such  a
    process would normally entail (including, for example,  an  interview).
    It is the case that he has  attended  hearings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal in order to give oral evidence,  and  I
    take that into account, although of course he  has  ultimately  decided
    not to take a further opportunity to provide such evidence.

31. Although I have not been provided with any materials  relating  to  the
    EEA application made in 2016, it appears as though at  that  time,  and
    when the human rights claim was made in May  2018,  the  appellant  was
    asserting that he was gay.  It is clear from  the  record  of  evidence
    provided before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant  was  then
    claiming to be bisexual.   This  is  repeated  in  the  second  witness
    statement contained in his bundle.  In the absence of any evidence that
    the appellant regarded being gay as  the  same  as  being  bisexual,  I
    regard this as an inconsistency.

32. As regards the respondent's position, it  is  right  that  his  claimed
    sexuality has not expressly been disputed.  Nor, though,  has  it  been
    expressly accepted: as confirmed in the respondent's skeleton argument,
    she had simply adopted the approach that this aspect of the claim would
    be taken at its highest.

33. Taking all of the above into account, I find  that  the  appellant  has
    failed to show that it is more likely than not that he is either gay or
    bisexual.

34. When setting out my conclusions, below, I will assess  the  appellant's
    case on this basis, but also on the  alternative  premise  that  he  is
    bisexual (that being the  most  recent  assertion  in  respect  of  his
    sexuality).

35. I turn now to the issue of the appellant's health.   There  is  a  fair
    amount of medical evidence contained in his bundle.  This consists of a
    patient record printout from his GP, covering the period November  2007
    to March 2014 in section A, together with hospital and  GP  letters  in
    section B (a large number of which are simply appointment letters).   A
    letter from Ealing Hospital, dated 26 October 2009  confirms  that  the
    appellant was  doing  "reasonably  well"  with  his  new  diagnosis  of
    diabetes.   It  confirms  that  he  had  been   prescribed   Metformin.
    Reference is made to his presentation with "mild ketosis and acidosis."
     Section B also contains  detailed  information  provided  to  patients
    relating to diabetes, including Diabetic ketoacidosis.  I am  satisfied
    that the appellant  has  been  well-aware  of  his  condition  and  its
    management from the outset of his diagnosis.

36. From the evidence before me, in particular the 2019 witness  statement,
    I find that the appellant has only been hospitalised on account of  his
    diabetes on one occasion, that being in 2009 at the time the  diagnosis
    was made.  I can see no evidence  to  indicate  that  there  have  been
    subsequent episodes of a failure to manage the condition or some  other
    form of resistance to relevant medication.  This  is  of  significance,
    given that DKA (as far as I can glean from the medical  evidence  as  a
    whole) is an episodic condition.

37. As the respondent's skeleton argument points out, there is  no  medical
    report from a relevant specialist doctor as to  the  current  (or  even
    relatively recent) treatment of the appellant's  condition  and/or  the
    possible consequences of either a change in  medication  or  any  other
    relevant matter.  There is no case-specific report as to treatment  for
    diabetes (in any of its forms) in India. There is no  medical  evidence
    of the appellant suffering from memory loss, and I do not  accept  that
    there is any such cognitive impairment.

38. I find as a fact that the appellant has, over the course of the last 10
    years or so, managed his condition adequately and without the need  for
    specialist intervention on an urgent basis.

39. It has not been suggested, and I do not accept in any event,  that  the
    appellant is at a greater level of risk than any other person with DKA.
    He does not fall within any of the "special patient groups" referred to
    in the information notes contained in section B  of  his  bundle.   Nor
    does he have any of the factors associated with an increased  mortality
    risk when in hospital, such as, for example, older  age,  psychological
    issues, neuropathy, cardiovascular disease, or excess  alcohol  intake.
    The research article referred to by the appellant  in  his  typed  2020
    witness statement does refer to a "substantial short-term risk of death
    associated with recurrent DKA admissions".  However, the appellant  has
    not experienced recurrent hospital admissions.   Further,  the  article
    quite obviously does not specifically relate to the appellant's case.

40. I now address other relevant matters.  I find  that  the  appellant  is
    well-educated, having obtained numerous qualifications  in  the  United
    Kingdom, including a degree.  I find that he has worked in the past  at
    a time when he had permission to  do  so.   There  is  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the cessation of work was due to  his  medical  condition.
    On his own evidence, his one and only hospital admission occurred after
    his previous leave to remain (and therefore  his  right  to  work)  had
    expired.

41. It has never been suggested that the appellant does  not  speak  either
    Punjabi and/or  Hindi.   I  find  that  he  does.   He  speaks  English
    fluently.

42. It is highly likely that the appellant went to school in India and that
    he worked in one form or another prior  to  his  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2003.



Conclusions on the Article 8 claim

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules

43. I begin with  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi).   The  relevant  date  for  the
    assessment is that of human rights claim, namely 4 May 2018.

44. Bearing in mind the relevant guidance  from  the  Court  of  Appeal,  I
    direct myself as follows. The "very significant obstacles" test sets  a
    high threshold.  The meaning of "integration" (or, more accurately, "re-
    integration") involves a broad  evaluative  judgment  of  all  relevant
    matters, both subjective and objective.  Ultimately, it is  a  question
    of whether the individual concerned will be enough  an  "insider"  such
    that, in all the circumstances, he will be able to develop and  lead  a
    reasonable life, bearing in mind the need to create social and economic
    ties in the country of origin.

45. On my findings of primary fact and in light of the matters discussed in
    the following paragraphs, I conclude that the appellant falls short  of
    satisfying paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

46. It is right that he has been away from India for a  significant  period
    of time now.  I have also found that the no longer has relevant  family
    members there.  These two factors certainly count in his favour.

47. He lived in India until the age of twenty-seven.  He  was  educated  in
    that country and was quite obviously fully conversant with  its  social
    and cultural mores.  It is unlikely in the extreme that he has  somehow
    lost any meaningful appreciation of how life is carried on in his  home
    country.  I have no hesitation in finding that this is not the case and
    that he  maintains  at  the  very  least  a  reasonable  knowledge  and
    understanding in that regard. He has relevant linguistic abilities.   I
    have found that the appellant  would  be  able  to  rely  on  at  least
    financial support from family members and others in the United Kingdom.
     This would provide meaningful assistance both in  respect  of  matters
    such  as  finding  accommodation,   the   acquisition   of   day-to-day
    necessities such as food, the ability to pay for access  to  utilities,
    and access to appropriate medication.  Beyond assistance  from  others,
    the appellant is educationally well-qualified  and  has  obtained  work
    experience whilst in the United Kingdom.  It is more  likely  than  not
    that the appellant would be able  to  seek  and  obtain  some  form  of
    reasonable employment, bearing in mind  my  finding  that  his  medical
    condition not prevented him from working in the past and the absence of
    any evidence to suggest that it would prevent  him  from  working  now.
    Whether by virtue of the income derived from employment  alone,  or  in
    combination with financial support from people in the  United  Kingdom,
    the appellant would be in a position to provide for himself.

48. On the issue of the health condition, there has been no evidence at all
    from the appellant to indicate that appropriate  medication  is  simply
    not available in India, even if on only a privately-funded basis.   The
    information contained in the respondent's skeleton argument shows  that
    diabetes is recognised and catered for in India.  It would be extremely
    surprising if this were not the case.  I have found that the  appellant
    has managed his diabetes  over  the  course  of  many  years,  has  not
    required urgent specialist intervention since 2009, and does  not  fall
    into a category of those particularly vulnerable to  the  more  serious
    consequences of DKA.  As mentioned previously, the appellant's  ability
    to find employment  and/or  the  financial  assistance  available  from
    people in the United Kingdom would enable adequate medical treatment to
    be accessed and maintained on a long-term basis.

49. I am prepared to find that the health issue represents an  obstacle  to
    respondent-integration. In and of itself, it does  not  extend  further
    than that.

50. For the avoidance of doubt, Article 3 has never been relied upon by the
    appellant.  In any event, and  even  taking  into  account  the  recent
    judgment of the Supreme Court in AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2020]  UKSC  17,  the
    appellant's claim comes nowhere near a  satisfaction  of  the  relevant
    test.

51. I have found that the appellant is not in fact bisexual.  There  is  no
    question of his sexuality representing an obstacle to reintegration.

52. Bringing the above matters together,  I  conclude  that  the  appellant
    would  undoubtedly  face  obstacles  to  re-integration.  Even   on   a
    cumulative basis, these would not be "significant".

53. I now turn to assess paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) on the  alternative  basis
    that the appellant is bisexual.

54. The country guidance decision in MD concluded that  gay  men  in  India
    were not at a general risk of persecution  (applying,  of  course,  the
    lower standard of proof).  The more recent country information does not
    show that all bisexual men are at risk of persecution.  In  any  event,
    the appellant had not made a protection claim, and Article 8 cannot  be
    used as a back-door route  to  seeking  international  protection.   Of
    significance is the subsequent judgment of the Indian Supreme Court  of
    6 September 2018, which held that consensual  homosexual  acts  between
    adults conducted in private were no longer an offence under section 377
    of the Indian Penal Code (see 3.2.3 of the CPIN).   It  is  right  that
    there is no provision in Indian law for civil partnerships or  for  the
    recognition of same-sex marriages.  However, the  appellant  has  never
    suggested that he had a wish to  enter  into  any  formalised  same-sex
    relationships.  The  country  information  does  not  show  that  other
    legislative and/or administrative restrictions are in place such as  to
    constitute,  either  alone  or  together  with  other  factors,  "very"
    significant obstacles to the appellant being able to live  a  safe  and
    reasonable life as a bisexual man.

55. The CPIN does indicate that there are still adverse societal  attitudes
    towards gay men (see, for example, 3.3.9 and  5.1.3).   Other  passages
    cite evidence from activists that the Supreme Court judgment was not  a
    panacea for the LGBT community in India.  I accept that to be the case.

56. 5.1.2 provides the results of the 2016 Global Attitudes Survey on LGBTI
    People.  50%  of  respondents  stated  that  they  either  somewhat  or
    strongly disagreed that being gay, lesbian, or  bisexual  should  be  a
    crime, whereas only 31% somewhat or strongly  agreed  that  it  should.
    This discloses a broadly positive overall picture.  Nonetheless,  other
    sources of evidence show  that  there  are  issues  of  discrimination,
    particularly emanating from certain religious and nationalistic groups.



57. There is reference in the evidence to India  being  a  "vast,  diverse,
    multicultural country".  Simply as a matter of common-sense, it must be
    the case that certain urban areas are highly likely to be more  diverse
    and more accepting and/or tolerant than rural areas.  That much is true
    in very many countries around the world.   The appellant is  not  bound
    by any particular circumstances in his case to live in a rural part  of
    India.

58. At 6.1.1 of the CPIN a report by the World Bank from 2012 states  that:
    "[Focus group interviews] show very clearly  that  the  LGBT  community
    prefers to stay away from the mainstream health services.   The  reason
    for staying away is the stigmatisation faced by the LGBT  community  in
    the hands of the health service providers."   This  evidence  does  not
    state that there is official discrimination in respect  of  healthcare.
    I do take account  of  what  might  be  a  sense  of  wariness  on  the
    appellant's part in approaching medical services.  However, he does not
    suffer from HIV,  which  is  a  specific  condition  that  the  country
    information suggests results in difficulty obtaining medical treatment.
     His condition is not one which might be (wrongly) perceived  as  being
    connected to sexuality.  In addition, he  will  have  funds  to  obtain
    treatment, including from private sources.  He  does  not  suffer  from
    mental health conditions, which might act as additional vulnerability.

59. 6.2.1 of the CPIN refers to "reports of homophobic  landlords  refusing
    to  rent  accommodation  to  LGBT  tenants"  and  the  lack  of  a  law
    effectively preventing such discrimination.   This  evidence  does  not
    indicate that such discrimination  is  widespread.   Indeed,  the  same
    paragraph refers to MD, which in turn concluded  that  this  particular
    issue was not "endemic or anywhere approaching it".

60. In respect of harassment and/or discrimination in the workplace,  6.3.2
    sites evidence that relevant policies were normally locally defined and
    many organisations (i.e. employers) were  "not  necessarily  inclusive,
    sensitised or protective towards LGBT persons."  As with other specific
    aspects of the CPIN evidence, I accept  that  discrimination  and  poor
    practices exist.  However, the evidence is not in my view show that the
    problems  are  so  serious  in  terms  of  prevalence,  severity,   and
    geographical reach, that the appellant would be effectively  forced  to
    conceal his bisexuality in order to have reasonable access to  relevant
    services and facilities.

61. The appellant's latest written submissions rely on a  report  from  the
    International Commission of  Jurists  entitled  "Living  with  Dignity:
    Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity-Based Human Rights Violations in
    Housing, Work and Public Spaces in India", dated June  2019.   Although
    this report was not before the First-tier Tribunal,  nor  had  it  been
    adduced in the Upper Tribunal previously, I have decided to admit it.

62. I have read the sections referred to in  paragraph  9  of  the  written
    submissions.  With  respect,  it  is  rather  unhelpful  that  specific
    aspects  of  sections   pertinent   to   the   appellant's   particular
    circumstances have not been quoted.  A relatively large  proportion  of
    the evidence relates to transgender people and is  thus  irrelevant  to
    the appellant's case.  A certain  amount  of  the  evidence  refers  to
    protection-related problems (including  violence  from  family  members
    and/or certain.  Once again,  I  emphasise  the  fact  that  I  am  not
    considering a protection claim in this  appeal,  and  paragraph  4  the
    written submissions expressly acknowledges that the  appellant  is  not
    claiming that he would be persecuted.

63. Whilst the report is based on anecdotal evidence, I accept  that  there
    is societal discrimination  in  respect  of  housing,  employment,  and
    accessing public spaces.  This is consistent with the  CPIN.   What  it
    does not show, when considered together with the CPIN, is  that  it  is
    more likely than not  that  such  discrimination  is  systemic  and  so
    prevalent as to lead me to conclude that  the  appellant  will,  if  he
    wished to  live  as  an  openly  bisexual  man  and  in  light  of  his
    circumstances as a whole, face "very significant obstacles" (whether as
    at the date of his human rights claim  or  now)  to  a  reasonable  re-
    integration into Indian society,  particularly  if  the  place  of  re-
    establishment is a major city.  I say this whether  the  discrimination
    issue is taken alone or in combination with the other  factors  I  have
    discussed previously.

64. My view on the overall position for the appellant is supported  by  the
    conclusions in MD (bearing in mind, as I do,  the  fact  that  the  ICJ
    report is from 2019).  Whilst MD was in the first instance  considering
    the risk of persecutory treatment, it also concluded that it would  not
    be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  an  openly  gay  man  to  relocate
    within a large urban area in India.  Without having to  conclude  there
    is  a  direct  equivalence  between  the  reasonableness/unduly   harsh
    assessment within a protection claim, and the issue  of  discrimination
    in an Article 8 claim such as the present, the former is  at  least  of
    relevance in the latter.

65. On the alternative scenario and taking a cumulative approach to all  of
    the relevant factors discussed above, there will be  obstacles  to  re-
    integration that can properly be described as "significant". I conclude
    that these will not, on the facts of this case, be "very"  significant.
    Put shortly, the appellant's previous  experience  of  life  in  India,
    support from the United Kingdom, the nature of  his  health  condition,
    and the country evidence on discrimination, combine  to  show  that  he
    will be able to develop and continue a reasonable private life in  that
    country without the disproportionate interference with  that  protected
    right envisaged by the test under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

66. It follows that the appellant cannot meet the  relevant  threshold  and
    cannot succeed in  his  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  by  virtue  of
    satisfaction of the Rules.

Article 8 on a wider basis

67. The appellant has clearly established a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom over the course of his lengthy residence in this country.  That
    private life encompasses his  relationships  with  family  members  and
    friends.

68. I do not accept that he has also established family life.   The  strong
    ties that he  has  with  certain  family  members  does  not  meet  the
    requisite threshold of showing more than the emotional ties  and  bonds
    to be expected between adult relatives.   The  appellant  is  obviously
    financially dependent upon family members, but this, in and of  itself,
    does not go to constitute  family  life.   He  is  not  dependent  upon
    relatives in respect of his health condition: he manages this himself.

69. Even if I were wrong in respect of the conclusion on family  life,  for
    reasons set out below, it would make  no  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of the appellant's appeal.

70. I move straight to the  issue  of  proportionality  (the  questions  of
    interference, accordance with the law, and legitimate  aim,  all  being
    uncontroversial).

71. I consider first the mandatory considerations set out in  section  117B
    NIAA 2002, as amended.

72. The public interest in maintaining  effective  immigration  control  is
    strong, mandated as it is by primary legislation.

73. The appellant speaks English, and I regard this as a neutral factor.

74. Whilst having no  income  of  his  own,  the  appellant  has  not  been
    dependent upon public funds in the sense  of  benefits.   However,  the
    evidence does indicate that he has had recourse to the NHS,  and  there
    is nothing to indicate that he has paid any amounts due  for  this.   I
    conclude that this does weigh against him.  At best, it  is  a  neutral
    factor.

75. The appellant has been in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since  2009.
    That is a significant majority of the time spent in this  country.   It
    is clear to me that a good deal of the substance of  the  relationships
    formed with other people during his residence has been  established  in
    the last 10 years or so.  With reference to section 117B(4), there  are
    no particularly compelling circumstances arising in his case  which  go
    to materially mitigate the reduction of weight to be  accorded  to  his
    private life.

76. Even when the appellant had leave to remain, it was only ever on a very
    precarious basis, namely as a student.  Thus, the lawful presence  here
    does not carry any significant weight in his favour.

77. Moving on to other factors, I would be prepared to  place  weight  upon
    relationships with other family members on the alternative  basis  that
    the appellant did enjoy family life with them.  Having said  that,  the
    weight attributable to this factor would be relatively  limited.   Such
    relationships were only formed during precarious  and  then  unlawfully
    status.  They have never involved particularly significant  dependency.
    There has been no  reliable  evidence  of  any  best  interests  issues
    relating to any children with whom the appellant has had  contact  over
    the years.

78. On my findings of fact, the appellant's health condition does not weigh
    very heavily in his favour.  In this regard I refer back to what I have
    said  in  the  section  of   my   decision   dealing   with   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  There have been  no  material  changes  to  his  health
    situation since he made his human rights claim in May 2018.

79. When considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), I have accepted that his  re-
    integration into Indian society would involve obstacles,  perhaps  even
    significant obstacles.  Again, bringing matters  up-to-date,  the  same
    considerations that I have discussed previously apply now.  The passage
    of time between the making of the human rights claim and June  2020  in
    no way materially affects my conclusion that the obstacles would not be
    "very" significant.  I do place weight upon the existence of obstacles,
    but, taken alone, or  in  combination  with  all  other  matters,  they
    clearly do not render the respondent's decision disproportionate.

80. I have discussed  the  appellant's  sexuality  in  detail,  above.   My
    conclusions in respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) effectively apply  to
    my proportionality assessment as well.  In the first instance,  I  have
    found that the appellant is not bisexual and therefore this issue  does
    not arise.  On the alternative scenario that he is, there have been  no
    material changes in his circumstances between  May  2018  and  now.  As
    regards the country situation, there has  been  the  important  Supreme
    Court judgment in September of that year.  That judgment was of  course
    favourable to the position of gay and bisexual men.   I  have  assessed
    the 2019 ICJ report.  It  does  not  indicate  that  matters  have  got
    materially worse since 2018. As with the health issue, the  appellant's
    sexuality, taken alone or on a cumulative basis, does not constitute  a
    feature of his case that tips the balance in his favour.

81. Having weighed up all  the  competing  factors,  for  and  against  the
    appellant, I have come to the conclusion that his return to India would
    not be a disproportionate interference with his Article 8  rights.   It
    follows that the respondent's refusal of this human rights claim is not
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Summary

82. Whether considered in the context of the Rules on a  wider  basis,  the
    appellant's  Article  8  claim  fails,  and  his  appeal  is  therefore
    dismissed.



Anonymity

83. No anonymity direction has previously  been  made  and  none  had  been
    requested at  this  stage.   In  all  circumstances,  I  make  no  such
    direction.



Notice of Decision

84. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of  law.   That  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

85. I re-make the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor             Date: 16 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor




TO THE RESPONDENT

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  16 June 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW COMPONENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL'S DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02090/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 January 2020                    |                                     |
|Extempore                            |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Mr Amit [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel, instructed by Harrow
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is the appeal of the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge M A Khan ("the judge"), promulgated on 11 July 2019, by
which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal
of his human rights claim.

The Appellant, a national of India, came to this country as long ago as
October 2003.  There is a fairly complex immigration history, suffice it to
say that he has remained in this country as an overstayer since July 2009.
His human rights claim was essentially as follows. He asserted that he had
established ties in the United Kingdom, that he no longer had any
meaningful ties in India, that he is bisexual, and that he suffers from
Type 1 diabetes (a particular complication of this form of diabetes known
as Diabetic ketoacidosis - "DKA").  The combination of these factors, it
was said, went to show that there would be very significant obstacles to
his reintegration into Indian society or that he should succeed on Article
8 on a wider basis.

The judge set out the essence of the Appellant's and the Respondent's
respective cases, the content of cross-examination, and then the
submissions made by the representatives to him.

The actual findings of fact are contained in [30] - [33].  It is right to
say that these findings are almost entirely unparticularised and are not
supported by any, or at the very least, any adequate, reasons.  There are
in [30] and [33] conclusions that the Appellant was a "evasive" and "vague"
witness, and had not told the truth "about anything".  The judge found that
the Appellant had always intended to remain in this country and had lied
about his decision to remain here despite an initial plan to return to
India.

Once these "findings" are set out, the remainder of the decision simply
recites the very well-known five-stage approach set out in Razgar, followed
by (in full) sections 117A - 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  [38] concludes as follows: "The Appellant does
not meet any of the requirements of Section 117B and his private life can
continue in India."

The grounds of appeal do raise the issues of the Appellant's sexuality and
medical condition in the context of his Article 8 claim.  However, they go
on to refer to Articles 3, 5 and 6 ECHR.  There was never in reality going
to be any merit to the Article 3 assertion and the Articles 5 and 6 points
should not have been raised at all.  The Appellant's representatives would
be well-advised to consider the contents of grounds rather more carefully
in future.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Grant-Hutchison on 19 November 2019.

At the hearing before me, and having indicated my preliminary view of this
matter, Ms Everett, with her customary fairness, accepted that the judge's
consideration of the evidence and findings thereon were simply inadequate.
Whilst the Appellant's case may not ultimately succeed, he was, she
accepted, entitled at the very least to a properly considered decision on
his appeal.

It is abundantly clear that the judge has materially erred in law.  The
findings, such as they are, are all too brief and are not supported by any
or any adequate reasons.  In addition, the judge has failed to make any
findings whatsoever on what would properly be considered as the two core
elements of the Appellant's case, namely his sexuality and his health
(evidence of which was before him).  There has been no balancing exercise
under Article 8 and no proper consideration of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of
the Immigration Rules.

The judge's decision is fundamentally flawed and must be set aside in its
entirety.

By way of disposal, I conclude that this matter should be retained in the
Upper Tribunal and set down for a resumed hearing in due course.  At that
hearing, documentary and oral evidence relating to the Appellant's
circumstances may be adduced subject to a Rule 15(2A) application.  Oral
evidence will only be permitted if an updated and comprehensive witness
statement is prepared and filed and served in accordance with directions
issued below.

I make no anonymity direction in this case.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

This appeal is adjourned for a resumed hearing to be held in due course.



Directions to the parties

   1)     The Appellant is to file and serve a consolidated  bundle  of  all
      evidence relied  on,  together  with  a  skeleton  argument.  Any  new
      evidence must be the subject of a rule 15(2A) application. The  bundle
      shall be filed and served no later than 14  days  before  the  resumed
      hearing;

   2)     Oral evidence from the Appellant will  only  be  permitted  if  an
      updated witness statement is provided no later than 10 days before the
      resumed hearing;

   3)     Any further evidence from the Respondent shall be filed and served
      no later than 14 days before the resumed hearing.


Signed   [pic]         Date: 7 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

