
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02455/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2017                    |On 27 October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               miss heena rana
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Naith, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Housego promulgated on 13 July 2017.  The appeal relates  to  Heena
         Rana, a female citizen of Nepal born in 1985.  The  refusal  letter
         in this case turned upon the  assessment  of  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer and, in particular, the application  of  Annex  K  and  the
         historic injustice in relation to the Nepalese members of the armed
         forces and their families.


      2. I have short circuited submissions in this  regard  partly  on  the
         basis  that  when  permission  was  granted  the  judge   commented
         adversely on the overall length of the decision,  with  substantial
         recitation of  jurisprudence,  when  set  against  the  comparative
         brevity of the findings of fact.


      3. For present purposes I need only rehearse paragraph 48 which  reads
         as follows:

             "The appellant does not meet Annex K given that she is over 30
             and there is more than two years since the  last  visit  until
             the date of application.  Nor  does  the  Secretary  of  State
             accept that there is emotional and financial dependence on the
             sponsor.  Annex K was required  because  people  such  as  the
             appellant did not fall within the Immigration Rules."

      4. The judge appears to  have  fallen  into  error  by  declaring  the
         appellant to be over 30 years of age when it is common ground  that
         as at the date of the application she was 29.  It is not  contested
         that the qualifying date is indeed the date of the application.


      5. Mr Naith who appears for the Secretary of State has  very  properly
         conceded that this is a  decision  which  cannot  withstand  proper
         scrutiny and which he does not seek to uphold.


      6. Given that that error goes to the heart of the assessment  made  by
         the judge, and given that the reasoning is otherwise so  deficient,
         an error of law is established. The only possible disposal  is  for
         the matter to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  re-
         hearing. It would be inappropriate for me to pass  any  comment  on
         the remainder of the points raised in the grounds of appeal  or  on
         the decision more generally.


Notice of Decision

   1) Having found a material error  of  law,  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal set aside.
   2) Matter to be remitted to be heard afresh by a Judge other  than  Judge
      Housego.
   3) No findings of fact preserved.
   4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Mark Hill                      Date         26 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

