

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/02835/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunal, Liverpool |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th September 2018                        |On 21st September 2018       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                               HIU FUNG CHEUNG
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Salam, of Salam & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1     The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of the  First-tier
      Tribunal Garrett dated 6 April 2018 dismissing the appellant's  appeal
      against the decision of the respondent dated 3 January  2018  refusing
      leave to remain and refusing the appellant's human rights  claim.  The
      appellant is a citizen  of  China,  from  the  Special  Administrative
      Region of Hong Kong. On 7 September 2017 he made  an  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain based on  10  years  long  residence  under
      paragraph 276B of the immigration rules. He had previously resided  in
      the United Kingdom with different periods of  leave  to  remain  as  a
      student.

2     The respondent  refused  the  application  on  the  grounds  that  the
      appellant had been absent from the United Kingdom for a period of  600
      days in the previous 10 years, and therefore his residence was treated
      as being broken, having spent  more  than  the  permitted  '540  days'
      outside the United Kingdom during that  period.  (In  fact,  paragraph
      276A(a)(v) refers to '18 months', but insofar as  18  months,  or  547
      days, differs from the 540 days referred to in the decision letter,  I
      do not find that this difference could be considered to be material to
      the outcome of the appeal and I make  no  ruling  as  to  whether  the
      respondent refers to the correct period.)

3     The respondent states as follows at  page  3  of  6  of  the  decision
      letter:

           "We have assessed whether there are any particularly  compelling
           circumstances which led to you breaching the absence  limit  but
           from the detailed information you have provided there is nothing
           to suggest you were  not in a position to have spent  less  time
           out of the UK. Although you were a child attending school in the
           UK and returning to Hong Kong between terms there was no barrier
           to you being present in the UK during these periods if there was
           an intention of you  meeting  the  long  residence  requirement.
           Furthermore,  with  regard  to  absences  of  121  and  98  days
           respectively in 2011 and 2012, for no other reason than you  not
           having cause to be in the UK, having completed your studies.  It
           is considered that these absences were  not  due  to  compelling
           reasons.

           We are not therefore willing to offer you  discretion  for  your
           excess absences and as such you fail to meet the requirements of
           part of 276B(i)(a) because you cannot demonstrate  10  years  of
           continuous lawful residence."

4     The appellant had also relied upon his relationship in United  Kingdom
      with his partner, Ms. BR, a British national, with whom he had been in
      a relationship since 2013. The respondent refused leave to  remain  on
      that ground on the basis that he had not provided adequate information
      regarding his partner and his relationship  with  her,  or  about  her
      immigration status, and in any event had not argued  that  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.

5     The appellant appealed, the appeal  coming  before  the  Judge  on  21
      March 2018. An  issue  in  the  appeal  was  the  application  of  the
      respondent's Immigration Directorate Instruction  on  Long  residence,
      Version 15.0, dated 3.4.17. That instruction, set out in  more  detail
      below, provides guidance about how an application should be decided if
      the applicant has been absent from the UK for more than  6  months  in
      one period or more than 18 months in total over 10  years,  but  where
      there are compelling or compassionate circumstances.

6     Before the Judge, the appellant and BR gave evidence. The  judge  held
      that the appellant failed to meet the immigration rules in relation to
      long residence. Further, although the judge accepted that  the  couple
      were in a genuine relationship, he found that the  appellant  did  not
      come within the immigration rules for family life, and that there were
      no compelling circumstances which could justify a grant  of  leave  to
      remain under article 8 ECHR outside of the immigration rules [32], and
      dismissed the appeal.

7     The appellant applied for permission to appeal  in  grounds  dated  20
      April 2018 arguing, in summary, that the judge erred in law in:

      (i)   failing, when finding that the  appellant  had  not  established
           that there were any compelling or compassionate circumstances in
           relation to his excess absences from the  UK,  to  give  reasons
           which were adequate in law for such a  finding;  (Grounds,  para
           5);

      (ii)  finding that the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
           paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) (18 or above and under 25 years  and  has
           spent at least half of his  life  'living  continuously  in  the
           UK'); the appellant's absences had been due  to  reasons  beyond
           his control (Grounds, para 6);

      (iii) requiring the appellant to leave the United Kingdom to  make  an
           application for  entry  clearance  under  Appendix  FM,  on  the
           grounds that such requirement was 'unjust' (Grounds, para 10);

      (iv)  misdirecting himself in law  in  assessing  whether  there  were
           insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  outside  the
           UK, in restricting in his assessment at [30] as to  whether  the
           appellant could temporarily leave the UK  for  the  purposes  of
           making an  application  for  entry  clearance,  whereas  Section
           Ex1(b)  requires  the  consideration  of   whether   there   are
           insurmountable obstacles faced by  the  couple  living  together
           outside of the UK (Grounds, para 11);

      (v)   erring in law in his assessment of insurmountable  obstacles  by
           failing to take into account that 'due to  the  partners  health
           problems, documented by her  GP  (page  63  of  the  appellant's
           bundle) she would not be able to cope should the appellant leave
           the country'.

8     Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Beach
      on a decision dated 14 July 2018.

9     I have heard submissions from the parties today.

      Discussion

      The long residence issue

10    It is appropriate to set out the terms of the relevant IDI:

           "If the applicant has been absent from the UK for  more  than  6
           months in one period or  more  than  18  months  in  total,  the
           application should normally  be  refused.  However,  it  may  be
           appropriate to  exercise  discretion  over  excess  absences  in
           compelling or compassionate circumstances, for example where the
           applicant  was  prevented  from  returning  to  the  UK  through
           unavoidable circumstances.

           This must be decided at senior  executive  officer  (SEO)  level
           with a grant of leave outside the Immigration  Rules  being  the
           appropriate outcome.

           Things to consider when assessing if the absence was  compelling
           or compassionate are:

           . for all cases -  you  must  consider  whether  the  individual
           returned to the UK within a reasonable time once they were  able
           to do so
           . for the single absence of over 180 days:
                 o you must consider how much of  the  absence  was  due  to
                 compelling circumstances and whether the applicant returned
                 to the UK as soon as they were able to do so
                 o you must also consider the reasons for the absence
           . for overall absences of 540 days in the 10 year period:
                 o you must consider whether the long absence (or  absences)
                 that pushed the applicant over the limit  happened  towards
                 the start or end of the 10 year residence period,  and  how
                 soon they will be able to meet that requirement
                 o if the absences were towards the start  of  that  period,
                 the person may be able to meet the requirements in the near
                 future, and so could be expected to apply  when  they  meet
                 the requirements
                 o however, if the absences were recent, the person will not
                 qualify for a long time, and so you must  consider  whether
                 there are particularly compelling circumstances

           All  of  these  factors  must  be   considered   together   when
           determining whether it is reasonable to exercise discretion."

11    In his  application  for  at  page  39,  the  appellant  sets  out  14
      different absences from United Kingdom. The longest  breaks  were  121
      days from 27 May 2011 to 25 September 2011; 98 days from 8  June  2012
      to 14 September 2012; 62 days from 2 July 2009 to 2 September 2009; 61
      days from 2 July 2010 until 1 September 2010 and 53 from 4  July  2008
      to 26 August 2008.In relation to the absence of 121 days in 2011,  the
      reason for absence on the application form is said to  be  'Completion
      of six form but had no Uni offers to had to return and continue search
      for uni'. In relation to the 98 day absence in 2012, the  explanations
      given was 'Graduation from foundation year and had to obtain a new CAS
      for visa for new uni.'  Several explanations for  absences  for  other
      periods were given  as  'End  of  term  boarding  house  closing'.  In
      relation to 2008, it was stated 'Too young to stay  in  the  UK  alone
      during out of term time'.

12    In his decision, the judge set out at [3] the reasons advanced by  the
      respondent in the decision letter of 3 January  2018  for  finding  no
      compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances   for   the   appellant's
      absences, the judge accurately summarising the respondent's case:  'In
      particular, although the appellant had been  a  child  when  attending
      school in the United Kingdom and returned to Hong Kong between  terms,
      there was no barrier to him being present in the United Kingdom during
      those periods if the eventual intention was to meet the long residence
      requirement. The respondent noted  that  there  had  been  periods  of
      absence of 121 and 98 days respectively in 2011 and 2012 for no reason
      other than the appellant had completed his studies."

13    The appellant's oral evidence on this issue was set out  at  [8],  and
      at [19] the judge set out the arguments advanced  on  the  appellant's
      behalf by Mr Salam: that the appellant's absences arose because he was
      dependent on his parents and  could  not  afford  to  stay  in  United
      Kingdom whilst trying to find a college, and  that  by  tradition  the
      appellant was tied to his Chinese parents.

14    The appellant complains that the judge has not given adequate  reasons
      for finding that the  immigration  rule  on  long  residence  was  not
      satisfied  and  that  there  were  not  compelling  or   compassionate
      circumstances such that the excess absences  from  the  UK  should  be
      excused, as per the relevant IDI.

15    Although the judge's reasoning on this point does not  appear  to  all
      in one place, the judge appears to make  findings  on  this  issue  as
      follows:

           "27 ... I am not satisfied that the  respondent's  rejection  of
           the appellant's application on long residence basis was wrong.
            ...
           31 Although I take into consideration that the main  application
           for long residence in this appeal failed because of an excess 60
           days, or  thereabouts,  outside  United  Kingdom  spent  by  the
           appellant, that does not, in my view, make this  a  'near  miss'
           case nor could any 'near miss' have any relevance to  the  human
           rights issue.
           ...
           Similarly,   there   are   no   compelling   or    compassionate
           circumstances of the kind referred to in Home Office guidance."

16    I find that it is clear from the  last  paragraph  of  [31]  that  the
      judge was aware of the relevant IDI, and was making a finding that the
      appellant's explanations did not amount to compelling or compassionate
      circumstances so as to engage the relevant policy. The judge  had  set
      out the appellant's case on compelling and compassionate circumstances
      adequately, earlier in the decision.

17    Although it could be said that the judge's actual reasoning as to  why
      the  explanations  did  not  amount  to  compelling  or  compassionate
      circumstances was slender, I find that it was adequate in law  in  all
      the circumstances of the case. This is because the appellants case  in
      this regard is manifestly weak.  The first example stated  within  the
      policy as to what amounts to compelling or compassionate circumstances
      is where an applicant is prevented from returning to  the  UK  through
      'unavoidable circumstances'. There is nothing within  the  appellant's
      explanations suggesting that he was prevented from returning to the UK
      at any given time through circumstances which were 'unavoidable'.  The
      guidance also sets out  matters  to  consider  when  assessing  if  an
      absence was compelling or compassionate, and in relation to all cases,
      the decision maker must consider whether the  individual  returned  to
      the UK within a reasonable time once they were 'able' to do so.

18    I find it is reasonably clear from the terms of the policy that it  is
      intended to assist persons who had  intended  to  be  present  in  the
      United Kingdom, but through circumstances outside  of  their  control,
      were prevented from re-entering. Examples of unavoidable circumstances
      which might prevent an individual from being able to return to the  UK
      might be illness of the applicant or possibly a relative,  loss  of  a
      passport,  or  natural  disaster.  The  policy  cannot   properly   be
      interpreted as meaning that a person who for some reason had  not  yet
      secured a university place and could therefore not  re-enter into  the
      UK to further his studies, could be said to be 'unable' to  return  to
      the UK  due  to  'unavoidable  circumstances'.  Perhaps  if  the  UCAS
      computer system crashed for prolonged period, this  might  engage  the
      policy, but the appellant does not advance  any  explanation  of  that
      sort. The appellant was unable to return to the UK  for  a  period  of
      time in 2011 not because of compelling or compassionate circumstances,
      but simply because he had not yet  secured  a  university  place,  and
      therefore did not yet meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules
      for entry clearance.

19    Further, even if there were cultural expectations that the  appellant,
      who has been an adult since December 2010, return to visit his parents
      during summer vacations, this could not properly be said to amount  to
      compelling or compassionate circumstances resulting in  the  appellant
      being unable to return to the UK.

20    Ultimately, it was clear that the appellant's excessive absences  from
      the  UK   resulted  from  his,  and  his  parents  ignorance  of   the
      requirements of  the  long  residence  rules.  Such  ignorance  cannot
      properly be described as  amounting  to  compelling  or  compassionate
      circumstances.

21    The appellant's case on  compelling  and  compassionate  circumstances
      was thus so manifestly weak, that the  judge's  reasoning  in  finding
      that there were  no  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  was
      adequate in law.

22    The appellant's argument that the judge also  failed  to  have  proper
      regard to the appellant's entitlement to leave to  remain  on  private
      life grounds under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) fails for the  same  reasons
      as set  out  above,  because  the  'living  continuously  in  the  UK'
      requirement in that paragraphs is, according to the  heading  of  para
      276A, and read with 276A(c), also subject to  the  provision  in  para
      276A(a)(v), that a period of continuous residence is treated as broken
      if an applicant has spent a total of more than 18 months  absent  from
      the United Kingdom during the period in question.

      Family life

23    I do however find that the judge erred in law in his consideration  of
      the appellant's case under paragraph Ex1(b) of Appendix FM. The  terms
      of  Ex1(b)  required  the  consideration   of   whether   there   were
      'insurmountable obstacles to family life with [BR] continuing  outside
      the UK'. I find that that expression  requires  consideration  of  the
      continuation of family life on an  indefinite,  not  temporary  basis,
      outside of the UK, and Mr Whitwell for  the  respondent  accepts  that
      that is the case.

24    The judge considers the existence of insurmountable obstacles at  [29]
      - [31]. It is clear that  the  judge  considers  whether  a  temporary
      separation between the appellant  and  his  partner  would  amount  to
      insurmountable obstacles. At [30] the judge refers to the  possibility
      that both parties will be distressed if they were forced to  separate,
      even if that was only for the appellant to return  to  Hong  Kong  and
      make a formal application to return. The  judge  also  refers  to  the
      appellant being able to return to live with his parents  and  that  he
      could be visited by his partner, as she had done in the past. At  [31]
      the judge refers to the fact that the  appellant's  relationship  with
      his partner can, even if only for the time being, continue by the  use
      of modern methods of communication and visits; and further at [31] the
      judge states that it may shorten  the  period  of  separation  if  the
      appellant made a prompt application to return to the UK. The scenarios
      considered by the judge therefore be appear to contemplate the parties
      being either apart, or with them making a  temporary  return/visit  to
      Hong Kong. This is not the question that is raised by Ex1(b).

25    However, I find that such error is not material to the outcome of  the
      appeal. I find that even if the judge had directed himself in  law  to
      consider  whether  there  were   insurmountable   obstacles   to   the
      appellant's family life with his partner continuing outside of the  UK
      on an indefinite basis, he would inevitably  have  come  to  the  same
      conclusion, that there were none.  This  is  because  there  was  very
      little evidence before  the  judge  as  to  what  such  insurmountable
      obstacles might be.

26    The appellant complains that the judge erred  in  law  in  failing  to
      have adequate regard to a GP letter at  page  63  of  the  appellant's
      bundle relating to BR. The judge  held  at  [30]  that  'There  is  no
      medical evidence to suggest that either party suffers from any medical
      condition which would seriously inhibit such  an  arrangement"  (where
      'such an arrangement' is, further to my finding above, to be deemed to
      represent a temporary separation between the couple). The  GP  letter,
      which is undated, provides as follows:

           "I write to confirm from our records that  this  patient  has  a
           long history of anxiety. She was  first  referred  to  CAHMS  in
           connection with persistent anxiety by a health visitor  in  2004
           [at which point BR would have been about 8- being born in 1996].
           However in March 2005 she was re-referred by  a  GP  because  of
           worsening of her anxiety such that she became almost  hysterical
           if her mother was not in sight. Thereafter there are a number of
           letters from CAHMS and the  child  psychology  service  which  I
           cannot currently access electronically.

           It is clear that she was treated with CBT between May  2012  and
           June 2013 [then aged 16-17] She was re-referred the  [sic]  that
           service by a GP in October 2013 as she could not  stop  worrying
           about her health.

           We have  a  letter  from  the  specialist  community  children's
           service CAHMS West on Area Health Trust from 2014  addressed  to
           [BR] [then aged about 18]  confirming  that  she  had  been  re-
           referred because of anxiety which by then seems to be related to
           anxiety about college work  which  was  being  which  was  being
           exacerbated by the lack of a  good  routine,  with  poor  eating
           routine and sleep hygiene. Appropriate  advice  and  information
           was supplied to [BR].

           She was reviewed by her previous GP  in  August  2016  [age  22]
           during her first summer holiday from University. She  was  again
           experiencing health-related anxiety &  it  was  noted  that  her
           father died when she was  three  weeks  old  and  that  she  had
           suffered a number of further bereavements at the age of  12.  It
           was  agreed  that  she  would  seek  help  through  the  student
           counselling service.

           I hope this information will serve to confirm her  diagnosis  of
           significant anxiety."

27    Although one must have every  sympathy  for  BR  and  her  history  of
      anxiety, the  evidence does not support the appellant's proposition as
      put forward in the grounds of appeal that 'due  BR's  health  problems
      documented by her GP ... she would not be  able  to  cope  should  the
      appellant leave the country'.  The appellant himself is  not  actually
      mentioned in the letter, and although BR's anxiety as  a  young  child
      aged 8-9 appeared to relate to anxiety caused by separation  from  her
      mother, there is no reference thereafter  to  separation  anxiety.  In
      2012 and 2013, she was worried about  her  health;  in  2014  she  had
      anxiety about college work; and in 2016 she again  had  health-related
      anxiety. The letter does not support the proposition that any of  BR's
      anxiety related problems would be exacerbated by the appellant leaving
      the United Kingdom  temporarily  to  make  an  application  for  entry
      clearance from abroad, or even both of them moving  to  live  in  Hong
      Kong.

28    I find that the judge did not, at [30], fail to take into account  the
      GP letter. The judge does not state that there was no medical evidence
      before him, rather that there was no medical evidence to suggest  that
      either party suffered from any medical condition which would seriously
      inhibit an arrangement involving a temporary separation.

29    Even if, contrary to my finding above, the judge did in fact  fail  to
      have regard to the GP letter, I find that such failure would have made
      no material difference  to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal;  there  was
      insufficient evidence advanced by the appellant to  demonstrate,  even
      taking the GP letter into account, that there would be  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life continuing abroad whether on a  temporary  or
      indefinite basis.

30    Further, the appellant's suggestion in the grounds of appeal  that  to
      require the appellant to leave the country and go  through  a  lengthy
      and clearance process as a partner was 'unjust',  is  unparticularised
      and demonstrates no material error of law. Further, insofar as  it  is
      suggested at paragraph 12 of the grounds of appeal that there has been
      an error of law by a misapplication of the principles in  Chikwamba  v
      SSHD [2008] UKHL 40,  this  argument  is  also  unparticularised.  The
      argument, such as it is, appears to be advanced on the basis that  'If
      it is to be accepted by the Home Office that the applicant could  meet
      all requirements for re-entry in future...' (then a  requirement  that
      he leave to make such an application would be  disproportionate).  The
      argument is therefore framed on the hypothetical basis that all of the
      requirements for entry  clearance  would  be  met  by  the  appellant.
      However, they were not. At the time of the hearing  before  judge,  BR
      had an offer of employment, but had not yet commenced it  (see  [32]),
      and ordinarily,  an  applicant  for  entry  clearance  would  need  to
      demonstrate six months' worth of payslips to meet the requirements  of
      Appendix FM-SE. There is nothing in the appellant's point here.

31    I find that the judge's decision discloses no material law.

32    The appellant submitted to this tribunal  an  application  under  Rule
      15(2A), Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  that  the
      tribunal consider a notice under section 120 NIAA 2002, to the  effect
      that at today's date, a recalculation of  the  10  year  period  under
      paragraph 276B would mean that  certain  of  the  appellant's  earlier
      absences from the UK now fell to be disregarded, and over the last  10
      years running up to the present  time,  the  appellant  had  not  been
      absent from the United Kingdom in excess of 540 days.  However,  as  I
      have found no material error in the judge's decision, this rule 15(2A)
      notice has no application. If the appellant wishes to make  a  further
      application for indefinitely to remain now, based on  a  different  10
      year period, he is free to make such an application.



      Decision

      The judge's decision did not involve the making of any material  error
      of law

      The appellant's appeal is dismissed

Signed:                                            Date: 18.9.18
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





