
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02587/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided without a hearing under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 27 November 2020                  |On 8 December 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 Sanjeev [S]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati instructed by Paramount Chambers
                    (written submissions only)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (written submissions only)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 18 July 1980.   The
    appellant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  5  September  2002  as  a
    student.  He was subsequently  granted  further  periods  of  leave  to
    remain as a student until 7 September  2013.   On  2  August  2013,  he
    applied for indefinite leave to remain which was granted on  16  August
    2013.

 2. On 11 December 2015, the appellant was convicted of conspiracy to steal
    and money laundering at the Warwickshire Crown Court and was  sentenced
    to two years and four months imprisonment.

 3. On 22 December 2015, the appellant was served with a notice of decision
    to deport him as a result of that conviction.  In response, submissions
    were made on his behalf on 1 February 2016 and 6 June 2016.

 4. On 25 January 2017, a deportation order was made against the  appellant
    under s.32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and his  human  rights  claim,
    made in the earlier submissions, was refused under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 25 November 2019, Judge James dismissed the appellant's appeal under
    Art 8 of the EHCR.

 6. The appellant had married his wife in India in 2009 and she had come to
    the UK in 2010 as his dependant.  On  31  December  2011,  their  first
    child, "D" was born in the UK and on  22  July  2014,  the  appellant's
    second child, "V" was  born  in  the  UK.   On  12  January  2016,  the
    appellant's wife was naturalised as a British citizen.

 7. Judge James rejected the appellant's contention  that  his  deportation
    would be "unduly harsh" on his two children and wife.  She  found  that
    Exception 2 in s.117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 (as amended) (the "NIA Act 2002") did not apply.     In  addition,
    the judge found that there were  not  "very  compelling  circumstances"
    such as to outweigh the public interest under s.117C(6) of the.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  He did so,  essentially,
    on two grounds.

 9. First, the judge had erred in  law  in  finding  that  the  appellant's
    deportation would not be "unduly harsh" on his two  children  and  wife
    under s.117C(5) of the NIA Act 2002 because he had taken into  account,
    and balanced against the impact of his deportation on his children  and
    wife, the risk, if any, of his re-offending, his lack  of  remorse  and
    the public interest in deporting  criminal  offenders.   That  was,  it
    contended, is contrary to the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  KO
    (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.  The assessment of  whether
    the impact upon a qualifying child or partner is "unduly harsh" focuses
    solely upon the consequences for, and impact upon, those family members
    irrespective of the seriousness of the offence or public interest.

10. Secondly, the judge erred in law in reaching certain  factual  findings
    concerning the risk of  the  appellant  re-offending  and  his  remorse
    without taking into account all the evidence.  It was further contended
    that it was procedurally unfair to  reach  adverse  findings  on  these
    matters when, at the outset of the  hearing,  the  factual  matrix  was
    accepted and no oral evidence was called by the appellant.  The hearing
    proceeded by way of oral submissions only.  The  appellant  was,  as  a
    result, deprived of the opportunity of dealing with matters upon  which
    the judge made adverse inferences.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Landes) on 27 January 2020.

12. On renewed application, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ McWilliams) granted the
    appellant  permission  to  appeal  on  6  March  2020.    In   granting
    permission, the judge said this:

         "It is arguable that the judge in the  32  page  decision  arguably
         erred in the assessment of unduly harsh.  It is  arguable  that  he
         took into account immaterial matters."

13. In the light of the COVID-19 crisis, the UT  (UTJ  Clive  Lane)  issued
    directions on 22 April 2020 expressing the provisional view that it was
    appropriate  for  the  issues  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved an error of law and, if  so,  whether  that  decision
    should be set aside to be decided without a hearing.  The parties  were
    invited to make submissions both on the merits of the appeal  and  also
    on the issue of whether, to the extent indicated, the appeal should  be
    determined without a hearing.

14.  In  response  to  those  directions,  the  Secretary  of  State  filed
    submissions dated 12 May 2020.  In those submissions she contended that
    the judge had not applied the wrong approach to the "unduly harsh" test
    in s.117C(5).  Further, the judge had given adequate  reasons  for  her
    finding that the appellant's deportation  would  not  have  an  "unduly
    harsh" impact upon his children and wife.  The respondent  invited  the
    Tribunal to uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The submissions
    did not raise any objection to the appeal being  determined  without  a
    hearing.

15. It appears that the directions as originally sent may not have  reached
    the appellant's legal representatives.  As a result, they were  re-sent
    on 7 September 2020.   In  response  to  the  re-sent  directions,  the
    appellant's legal representative made written  submissions  relying  on
    the two grounds - namely that the judge had misdirected herself on  the
    test to be applied in determining whether the impact of the appellant's
    deportation would be "unduly  harsh"  on  his  family  contrary  to  KO
    (Nigeria); and that the judge  had  failed  properly  to  consider  the
    evidence in making adverse inferences in relation  to  the  appellant's
    future risk of re-offending and whether he had shown  remorse.   It  is
    repeated that it was procedurally unfair for the judge to make  adverse
    inferences, in the absence of oral evidence, when  the  factual  matrix
    had been accepted at the outset of the appeal.  No objection is  raised
    to the appeal, at least at the error of  law  stage,  being  determined
    without a hearing.

16. In the light of the parties' submissions, and having regard to the fact
    that neither party raised any objection (despite being  invited  to  do
    so), and having regard to the overriding objective of  determining  the
    appeal justly and fairly and the nature of the legal issues  raised,  I
    am satisfied that it is in the interests of justice to  determine  this
    appeal without a hearing under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as  amended)  and  para  4  of  the
    Amended General Pilot Practice Directions: Contingency Arrangements  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal  (14  September  2020)
    issued by (then) Vice Senior President and (now)  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals, the Rt. Hon. Sir Keith Lindblom.  In reaching my  conclusion
    under rule 34 I have taken into account the judgment of  Fordham  J  in
    R(JCWI) v The President of UTIAC [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin).

Discussion

17. The appellant's first ground of appeal is that the judge erred  in  law
    in taking into account matters  such  as  the  risk,  if  any,  of  the
    appellant re-offending, his remorse and the public interest  raised  by
    his offending in assessing whether under s.117C(5)  the  appellant  has
    established that his deportation would have an  "unduly  harsh"  effect
    upon his wife and two children.

18. Section 117C(3) of the NIA Act 2002 states that:

         "In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of  four  years  or  more,  the  public
         interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2
         applies."

19. The appellant is  a  "foreign  criminal"  to  which  s.117C(3)  applies
    because  he  was  sentenced  to  a  term  of  2  years  and  4   months
    imprisonment.

20. If neither Exception 1 nor Exception 2 applies, then  s.117C(6)  states
    (and is relevant despite its terms to a "foreign criminal" sentenced to
    less than 4 years imprisonment: see NA (Pakistan) v  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 662)  that:

         "the public interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very
         compelling  circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described   in
         Exceptions 1 ad 2."

21.  The appellant relied upon Exception 2.  Section 117C(5) of the NIA Act
    2002 provides that:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or the child would be unduly harsh."

22. It is not in dispute in this appeal that the appellant's  wife  is  his
    partner with whom he has a "genuine and  subsisting  relationship"  and
    that both his children are "qualifying children" for  the  purposes  of
    s.117C(5).  It is also not in dispute that if the  appellant  satisfies
    the test in s.117C(5)  then  his  deportation  is  not  in  the  public
    interest.  The issue in this appeal, as was accepted before the  judge,
    is whether the appellant had established the "undue harsh" consequences
    for his wife and children if he were deported and, if not,  whether  he
    met the "very compelling circumstances" test in s.117C(6).

23. The logical approach, therefore, in considering whether the appellant's
    deportation would be a breach of Art 8 was: (i)  to  determine  whether
    Exception 1 applied because a deportation would be  "unduly  harsh"  on
    his wife and/or his children; and (ii)  if  not,  to  consider  whether
    there were "very compelling circumstances over and above" Exception  2,
    applying s.117C(6).

24. In KO (Nigeria), the Supreme Court, Lord Carnwath (with whom the  other
    Justices agreed) rejected the Secretary of State's submission that,  in
    determining whether the impact would be "unduly harsh" under s.117C(5),
    the Tribunal should carry out a balancing exercise taking into  account
    the general public interest in deporting a foreign  criminal  including
    the relative severity of the offence.  The Supreme Court held that  the
    focus  was  exclusively  upon  the  impact  of  deportation  upon   the
    individual's partner or child (see [32]).

25. In this appeal, the appellant contends that the judge fell  into  error
    in taking into account, contrary to KO (Nigeria), factors  relevant  to
    the public interest and the seriousness of the appellant's offending in
    reaching her finding that Exception 2 in s.117C(5) did not apply.

26. The judge's determination is a detailed and lengthy one running to over
    100 paragraphs.  The judge referred to KO (Nigeria) at para 19  of  her
    determination where, correctly, she stated that:

          "The  assessment  of  unduly  harsh  requires  evaluation  of  the
         consequences and impact of deportation solely on the family members
         concerned, and not to have regard to the seriousness of the offence
         committed in this context."

27. She then went on to cite the "elevated  threshold"  identified  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone)  [2015]  UKUT  223  and  MAB  (USA)
    [2015] UKUT 435.  At para 20, the judge then went on and  set  out  the
    test under s.117C(6).

28. Given those were correct self-directions, it might be supposed that the
    appellant's first  ground  of  appeal  has  no  realistic  prospect  of
    success. However, it is important to look at the judge's reasoning  for
    reaching her finding on Exception 2 in paras 99-101.

29. The judge, in some detail, considered the  appellant's  conviction  and
    his risk of re-offending (paras 38 -  60).   She  considered  then  the
    implications for his family and his private life (paras 61 - 97).

30. Then, at para 99, the judge referred to the Supreme Court's decision in
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and the Court of Appeal's decision  in
    OH (Serbia) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 694.  She continued:

         "I take all matters before me into account, including the issue  of
         the seriousness  of  the  offences,  and  the  public  interest  in
         deporting foreign criminals, regarding deterrence, prevention of re-
         offending and expression  of  societal  revulsion....  Despite  not
         being a persistent offender, and being of low risk of re-offending,
         the seriousness of the offence per se due to its protracted ongoing
         nature and the appellant's senior role particularly in  recruitment
         of others to this criminal gang enterprise, and the  strong  public
         interest in the appellant's deportation, I find there are  no  very
         compelling circumstances or exceptional in  this  particular  case,
         such that to render his expulsion a  disproportionate  interference
         with his private and family life under Article 8 ECHR.   This  also
         applies to the family and private  life  rights  (including  bodily
         integrity) of the children and the wife ..."

31. In itself, that passage does not reflect any misdirection providing  it
    is only taken into account and reflecting the  judge's  decision  under
    s.117C(6), namely whether there  are  "very  compelling  circumstances"
    over and above Exception 2 to outweigh the public  interest.   However,
    logically that issue only arises if the appellant cannot succeed  under
    Exception 2.  It would  not  be  profitable  to  set  out  the  judge's
    detailed assessment and conclusions  leading  up  to  para  97  of  her
    decision.  Suffice it to say, at no point leading up to  para  99  does
    the judge make any finding in relation to Exception 2.  Her findings in
    that regard are found  in  paras  100  and  101  of  her  determination
    immediately following the passage I have set  out  above  referring  to
    Hesham Ali and OH (Serbia).  In those paras the judge said this:

         "100.     In  all  the  circumstances  of  this  particular   case,
               including the  very  weighty  public  interest  in  deporting
               foreign  criminals,  the  appellant's  deportation  does  not
               amount to a disproportionate interference  with  his  private
               life and family life under  Article  8  ECHR,  and  does  not
               render his removal unduly harsh on  his  wife  and  children,
               should they remain in the UK without the  husband/father.   I
               also do  not  find  that  there  would  be  very  significant
               obstacles or  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
               return and reintegration to his home country in India.

         101. I therefore dismiss the appeal finding that it  would  not  be
               unduly harsh for the children to live in India  (although  as
               British children they would not be liable to  be  removed  by
               the Home Office) and it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  the
               children to remain in the UK  without  their  father,  taking
               into account and balancing  the  s.55  primary  consideration
               'best interests' of the children, balancing and  taking  into
               account other relevant factors, including the public interest
               in deporting criminals.  These considerations do not outweigh
               the public interest of deportation, which  is  proportionate.
               I also find that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  wife  to
               live in India (although as a British citizen she would not be
               liable to be removed by the Home Office) and it would not  be
               unduly harsh for the wife to remain in  the  UK  without  her
               husband.  In summary the exceptions in  Paragraph  399(a)  of
               the Immigration Rules  [the  equivalent  of  Exception  2  in
               s.117C(5)] is not made out based on all the  evidence  before
               me, and Section 3 of the UK Borders Act 2007.  I confirm that
               removal will not breach the ECHR as it applies in  regard  to
               Article 8 ECHR private and family life in this  family  unit,
               and the family life Exception under Immigration  Rule  398(b)
               and Section 117C(3), and 399 and Section 117C(5) is not  made
               out.  Even in the alternative, I do not find that  there  are
               exceptional or very compelling  circumstances  under  Section
               117C(6) of the 2002  Act  such  as  to  displace  the  public
               interest in the appellant's deportation (as per the  findings
               in Paragraph 111 of NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662.
                It is not accepted that the Appellant falls  within  any  of
               the exceptions of Section 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007."

32. Although the judge made some reference to relevant  paragraphs  in  the
    Immigration Rules, it is plain that she is considering the  application
    of Exception 2 in s.117C(5) and  the  "very  compelling  circumstances"
    test in s.117C(6) of the NIA Act 2002.   The  difficulty  is,  however,
    that the judge plainly  took  into  account  the  public  interest  and
    carried out a "balancing" exercise including  the  public  interest  in
    deporting  criminals  in  assessing  whether  the   impact   upon   the
    appellant's children and  his  wife  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    purposes  of  s.117C(5).   Despite  the  judge's  clear  self-direction
    earlier in her determination, there is no doubt that she did not  apply
    that correct self-direction in paras 100 and 101 of her  determination.
    She clearly referred to the public interest and the balancing that  she
    was undertaking in the first two-thirds of her reasons in para 101.  It
    is only in the final third, in  the  passage  beginning  "Even  in  the
    alternative", that she  turns  to  consider  whether  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances for s.117C(6) to apply.

33. In my judgment the judge plainly fell into error in her approach to the
    "unduly harsh" test in s.117C(5) in her reasons that  I  have  set  out
    above.

34. It is not directly contended in the Secretary  of  State's  submissions
    that if the judge fell into error  in  this  way,  her  error  was  not
    material.  In my judgment, this is not a case in which it can  be  said
    with confidence that, despite the judge's findings in relation  to  the
    impact upon the appellant's wife and children, it can be said that  the
    judge, if she had not taken  into  account  the  impermissible  matters
    following  KO  (Nigeria),  would  inevitably  have  reached  the   same
    assessment in relation to "unduly harsh".  I  have  well  in  mind  the
    recent decision of the Court of Appeal in HA (Iraq) and Another v  SSHD
    [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 especially at [50]-[58]  to  the  meaning  of  the
    "elevated" test of "unduly harsh" in s.117C(5) including  at  [55]  the
    relevance of a qualifying child's best interests.

35. Given the judge's clear misapplication of the "unduly harsh" test,  and
    in the absence of any focused submissions that, properly directed,  the
    judge would inevitably have reached the same conclusion, I have reached
    the view that the judge's error  was  material  to  her  decision  that
    Exception 2 in s.117C(5) did not apply.

36. For those reasons, Ground 1 is established  and  the  judge's  decision
    cannot stand and must be set aside and remade.

37. The appellant, in addition, raises under Ground 2 a number  of  matters
    which, it is said, demonstrate  that  the  judge  did  not  accept  the
    factual matrix which at the outset  of  the  hearing  was  said  to  be
    accepted (see para 29 of the determination).  This, it is said, led  to
    the hearing before the judge being dealt with  by  way  of  submissions
    only.  Yet, it is said, that in assessing the evidence, the judge  made
    a number of factual findings but  the  appellant  was  deprived  of  an
    opportunity to deal with  those  matters  through  his  oral  evidence.
    Reference is made to the judge's finding in relation to the appellant's
    risk of re-offending and that he had shown a lack of remorse.   In  the
    latter regard, it is said that the judge failed to have regard  to  the
    appellant's evidence in his witness statement, in particular paras 9  -
    12, setting out his regrets and by implication,  his  remorse.   It  is
    further contended that the judge drew a number  of  adverse  inferences
    from the lack of documentary evidence in relation to the appellant  and
    his wife's health, their finances and their  support  from  family  and
    friends in the UK.  In  addition,  the  judge,  it  is  said,  unfairly
    assumed, in the absence of passports from the children, that  they  had
    travelled to India in the past which was not the case and  also  relied
    upon a discrepancy as to whether they spoke Hindi.  These  matters  are
    helpfully set out in Ms Bayati's submissions at paras 14 - 21.

38. The respondent's submissions do not  directly  address  the  unfairness
    issue raised in Ground 2.  They contend, rather, that the reasoning  is
    adequate.

39. For the reasons I have already given, the decision must necessarily  be
    remade.  I see merit in the appellant's submissions that the judge  has
    made a  number  of  adverse  inferences  despite  it  apparently  being
    accepted that the factual matrix was not challenged by the  respondent.
    It would undoubtedly be more sensible for  a  judge,  on  remittal,  in
    reaching a fresh decision in this appeal, to consider the evidence  and
    make fresh findings  of  fact  relevant  the  "unduly  harsh"  test  in
    s.117C(5) and, if required, when considering whether there  were  "very
    compelling  circumstances"  under  s.117C(6).   As  I  have  said,  the
    respondent  does  not  directly  address,  and  seek  to  counter,  the
    unfairness  argument  raised  in  the  grounds   and   the   subsequent
    submissions made on behalf of the appellant.  In all the circumstances,
    I am persuaded that Ground 2 is made out given that the premise at  the
    outset of the hearing was that the factual matrix was not challenged by
    the respondent.  None of the judge's findings should, therefore, in  my
    view stand and none are preserved for the judge remaking the decision.

Decision

40. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Art 8 involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

41. None of the judge's findings are preserved.  In view of the nature  and
    extent of fact-finding required, and having regard to para 7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement, the appropriate disposal of this
    appeal is to remit  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge James.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            27 November 2020

