
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02800/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 5th July 2019                     |On 19th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                Mr JAKIR ALAM
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James, promulgated on 23rd October 2018, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 27th September 2018.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born on  10th
    March 1999.  He applied for leave to remain in the UK on the  basis  of
    his private life in the UK.  By a decision dated  21st  November  2017,
    the Secretary of State refused that application.  The Appellant appeals
    that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he claims to have  entered
    the UK on 11th March 2012 on a visit visa.  The visa was then  verified
    biometrically and the Appellant was found to be in the name of  Ifteyer
    Gazi, who was accompanied by Nilma Gazi, who claimed to  be  a  parent.
    The purpose of the entry was to visit a sister in Birmingham.  The visa
    application had stated that the Appellant was being  supported  by  his
    father who continued to work in Bangladesh.  The Appellant then applied
    for settlement in the UK claiming that both his parents were  dead  and
    that his father had been British.  The Appellant claimed  that  he  had
    been sent to the  UK  by  his  village  elders.   The  application  was
    refused.  No dates for the application and refusal were provided by the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State.   The   Respondent   considered   the
    application under paragraph 276ADE(1) and determined that the Appellant
    did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   In  particular,  the
    Appellant would not face insurmountable  obstacles  to  integration  on
    return to Bangladesh.  The Respondent also decided that there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a consideration of the Appellant's
    leave to remain outside the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge heard evidence from a Mr Javaid Iqbal, who identified himself
    as the Appellant's  foster  parent.   He  also  identified  his  signed
    statement dated 27th August 2018.  There was then also evidence from Mr
    Dong Thoi Long, who identified himself as well as  his  statement.   At
    the hearing, the Respondent also submitted that there was  evidence  to
    the effect that the Appellant had a sister living in  the  UK  although
    she has not been called to give evidence in support of  the  Appellant.
    The Appellant had a normal adult sibling relationship  with  her  only.
    He had been dishonest when he came to the  UK.   He  should  have  been
    honest when he applied for settlement in 2016.  At that time he was  in
    a safe and trusting relationship.  The fact now remained that he had  a
    family in Bangladesh to whom he could return.  He  had  spent  thirteen
    years of his life in that country after all.  The Appellant provided  a
    five page skeleton argument.  It was argued on his behalf that  he  was
    remorseful and had eventually told the truth.  He had come  to  the  UK
    with his mother who gave him his new identity.  He was a child  at  the
    time.  He had just followed his mother's instructions.  He had now been
    in the country for six years  and  was  an  intelligent  boy.   He  had
    obtained a place at Birmingham University to study economics.  He had a
    loan from his foster parent for this purpose.  He would not be able  to
    speak a national language or  a  dialect  if  he  was  returned  to  in
    Bangladesh.  He only spoke English.

 5. The judge held that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration if he were to be returned  to  Bangladesh.   He
    was clearly an intelligent and resourceful person.  Although he claimed
    to have lost contact with his family, the judge was satisfied  that  he
    had family members living in Bangladesh.   When  he  left  he  had  his
    parents and two brothers living there and he would be able  to  reunite
    with them.  The Appellant had spent thirteen years in Bangladesh and he
    would have spoken the local language  there.   He  was  an  intelligent
    person.   Moreover,  English  was  commonly   spoken   in   Bangladesh.
    (Paragraph 30).  The judge went on  to  apply  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules (see  paragraphs  31  to  35),  taking  into  account
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act and the  public  interest  requirement  to
    maintain effective immigration  controls.   The  judge  held  that  the
    public interest requirement meant that the Appellant could not succeed.
     (See paragraph 34 to 35).

 6. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The  grounds  of  application  raise  a  number  of  points.   However,
    permission to appeal was only given on the question whether the judge's
    failure to make findings in respect of the evidence of the  Appellant's
    foster carer, whose letter appeared  at  page  19  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, meant that the judge's decision with respect to proportionality
    was wrongly undertaken.  If this was so, then such an omission, in  the
    failure to consider relevant evidence, would have been a material error
    of law.

 8. On 21st November 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing  before  me,  Mr  Howard  relied  upon  the  grounds  of
    application.  He submitted that the one point upon which permission had
    been granted was that the judge  had  failed  to  actually  record  the
    foster parent's evidence, or to draw attention to the  letter  at  page
    19.  In short, if the foster parent's evidence had  not  been  factored
    into the proportionality exercise, then  this  had  to  be  a  material
    error, such that this matter should now be remitted back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, on the basis of an error of law by the judge below.

10. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that he would have to accept that  the
    evidence of the  foster  parent  had  been  neglected  in  the  judge's
    eventual assessment  under  Article  8.   However,  the  Appellant  had
    entered the UK as a child with  a  false  identity.   When  he  reached
    adulthood, he continued to maintain that falsity.  It was true  he  had
    done very well in this country.  He had secured good  GSCE  results  as
    well as A levels and was set to go  to  read  economics  at  Birmingham
    University.  Nevertheless, he had entered as a  visitor,  intending  to
    make a short term visit to see  a  sister.   The  public  interest  did
    require the maintenance of effective immigration control.   The  foster
    parent's letter (at page 19 of the bundle) does not say  anything  over
    and above that which would normally be said, such as that the Appellant
    is a nice boy who has done well in  his  exams,  and  had  developed  a
    family life with the foster parents.  There was, on the other hand,  no
    other distinctive factor which would have militated against the  public
    interest in the maintenance of immigration control.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, whereas it  is  true  that  the  judge  has  not  drawn  express
    reference to the foster  parent's  evidence,  and  nor  has  the  judge
    referred to the letter at page 19 of the Appellant's  bundle,  that  is
    not to say that the judge was oblivious of such evidence.  Indeed,  the
    judge records in the determination that "I received  evidence  from  Mr
    Javaid Iqbal who identified himself and his address" and  that  he  had
    identified a signed statement dated 27th August 2018.   That  reference
    to a signed statement is indeed the very  letter  at  page  19  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  Therefore, the evidence was plainly in the judge's
    contemplation.

13. Second, insofar as it is a case that  the  judge  is  not  seen  to  be
    actively placing this evidence of the foster parent  in  the  balancing
    exercise, when deciding under Article 8, whether or not the balance  of
    considerations fell in the Appellant's  favour,  the  error  is  not  a
    material one.  All that Mr Javaid Iqbal states is  that  the  Appellant
    was placed in foster care with them over four years ago and that he "is
    a very kind, considerate, trustworthy and polite young  person  and  is
    very much education focused, doing very well in his GCSEs and A levels.
     Our aim now is to get him into university to do a degree in  economics
    ...".  He goes on to say that the Appellant "has made a family life for
    himself here, doesn't know any better, sending him back  to  a  country
    which now is alien to him would be very unjust and  truly  damaging  to
    him ...".  It is not in dispute that the Appellant had formed a  family
    life, after living for a period of some half a  dozen  years  with  the
    foster parent.  The judge does not cast doubt on it.  It is  a  truism.
    The remaining question is that in relation  to  the  statement  by  the
    foster parent that the Appellant "doesn't know  any  better"  than  the
    life in the UK and that "sending him back to a  country  which  now  is
    alien to him would be very unjust".

14. However, the judge does engage with this argument in the determination.
     The judge is not satisfied that the Appellant, who had spent  thirteen
    years in Bangladesh and was in school until sixth grade, who  had  also
    spoken a local language at that time, and was  an  intelligent  person,
    would have difficulty in reviving his language  skills  (see  paragraph
    30).  Thereafter,  the  judge  spends  considerable  time  in  separate
    paragraphs looking at the "Razgar question" before concluding  that  in
    this case, the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  immigration
    control would take priority over the  Appellant's  private  and  family
    life rights.

15. As the judge also concluded,

         "In the light of the dishonesty  in  making  his  applications  for
         leave to remain in the UK it cannot be said that the Appellant  was
         in the UK lawfully when he  formed  his  private  life  and  little
         weight can be given to it.  Further,  his  immigration  status  was
         precarious" (paragraph 34).

16. The judge also recognised the fact that  the  Appellant  had  initially
    maintained a lie on account of what he had been  told  to  say  by  his
    parents but "he failed to  admit  the  truth  until  he  was  aged  20"
    (paragraph 35).  He also had no  significant  mental  or  other  health
    issues and "he will be able to integrate on his  return  to  Bangladesh
    and he will have the advantage of an education in  the  UK"  (paragraph
    35).  For all these reasons, the judge was  entitled  to  come  to  the
    conclusion that he did on the evidence before the Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

19. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 17th August 2019



