
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02265/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On : 7 April 2021                    |
|On : 22 March 2021                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             euloge morenho guei
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Pledger of Latitude Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face to
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all  issues
   could be determined in a remote hearing.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing Mr Guei's appeal
   against the decision to refuse  his  human  rights  claim  following  the
   making of a deportation order against  him.  For  the  purposes  of  this
   decision, I shall hereinafter refer to the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
   respondent and Mr Guei as the appellant, reflecting  their  positions  as
   they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born on 26 March  1994.  He
   entered the UK in 2009 after being issued  with  a  settlement  visa  and
   granted indefinite leave to  enter  to  join  his  parents,  following  a
   successful appeal against the refusal of entry clearance. He enrolled  in
   school on 13 May 2009. Between April 2015  and  September  2016,  he  was
   convicted nine times for 18 offences, which resulted in  short  sentences
   insufficient to justify deportation  action  but  leading  to  a  warning
   letter. On 24 July  2017  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  robbery  in
   relation to an offence committed on 13 September 2016 and  a  failure  to
   surrender to custody at the appointed time, for which he was sentenced on
   14 December 2017 to 12 months' imprisonment.

4. On 21 December  2017  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
   appellant pursuant to section 32(5)  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2007  and
   invited him to respond. He responded on 25 January 2018, relying  on  his
   Article 8 family life with his British partner and daughter, born  on  14
   October 2017, and his  lack  of  connections  to  the  Ivory  Coast.  The
   appellant was released on immigration bail on 25 April  2018.  On  2  May
   2018 he became the subject of a Deportation Order and on 4 May  2018  the
   respondent made a decision to refuse his human rights claim.

5. In that decision, the respondent accepted that the  appellant's  daughter
   was British, but did not accept that he  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship with her, as she was born whilst he was in custody  and  she
   was only 6 months old. The respondent accepted that the appellant  had  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship with his  partner,  as  she  was  his
   surety in his bail application. The respondent did  not  accept  that  it
   would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and daughter to live in
   the Ivory Coast with him and did not accept that it would be unduly harsh
   for them alternatively to  remain  in  the  UK  without  him  if  he  was
   deported.  The  respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  could  not,
   therefore, meet the requirements of  paragraph  399(a)  and  (b)  of  the
   immigration rules. As for the appellant's private  life,  the  respondent
   did not accept that he could meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  399A
   since it was not accepted that he had been lawfully resident  in  the  UK
   for most of his life and it was not accepted that  he  was  socially  and
   culturally integrated in the UK or that there would be  very  significant
   obstacles to his integration in the Ivory Coast.  The respondent did  not
   consider there  to  be  very  compelling  circumstances  outweighing  the
   appellant's deportation.

6. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Buckley on 21 September 2020. By that time  the
   appellant had a second child, born on 27 April 2019. The judge heard from
   the appellant, his partner, his partner's parents and his partner's aunt.
   The evidence before the judge was that the appellant had left  the  Ivory
   Coast shortly after the death of his mother when he was about three years
   old and then spent approximately ten years living  in  Belgium  with  his
   father and siblings, until he came to the UK in 2009 at the age of 14  or
   15. His behaviour deteriorated in 2014 as a result of drugs  and  alcohol
   and he committed several offences culminating in the robbery in September
   2016. The appellant met his partner in November 2016 at a time  when  she
   also had difficulties with drink and drugs. At the time of  the  hearing,
   the appellant had been out of custody for two and a half  years  and  had
   complied fully with reporting restrictions and had  committed  to  caring
   for his family. It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that  he  had
   been a daily presence in the lives of his  children  for  the  past  five
   months due to lockdown and he  had  a  close  family  unit.  He  had  not
   committed any serious drugs offences and there was no actual violence  in
   the offence leading to the deportation proceedings.

7. The judge considered, in regard to the proportionality  assessment,  that
   the appellant was a medium offender who had  placed  his  offending  into
   context, had shown remorse and had not re-offended for four years and had
   complied with all the requirements imposed on him.  With  regard  to  the
   exceptions to deportation, the judge found the evidence of the  witnesses
   to be compelling in support of the appellant's character and  his  family
   relationships.  He  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine   and
   subsisting  relationship  with  his  partner  and  two  children  and  he
   concluded that the impact of deportation would be devastating and that it
   would be unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK without him if he  was
   deported. The judge concluded that the second  exception  to  deportation
   was met and he allowed the appeal on that basis.

8. The respondent sought permission to appeal that  decision  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal on the basis that the family life as described by the judge  was
   not sufficient to meet the unduly harsh threshold and that the judge  had
   failed to have regard to the established  case  law  in  respect  to  the
   unduly harsh threshold and the public interest in deportation.

9.  Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal  on  27  October  2020
   and the matter then came before me. Both parties made submissions.

10. Mr Tan submitted that, whilst the judge referred to KO (Nigeria)  &  Ors
   v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC  53
   and HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2020]
   EWCA Civ 1176, it was not clear how he distinguished the appellant's case
   to show that the 'unduly harsh' test was met. The 'real  world'  scenario
   envisaged in KO was no different for deportees. There  were  no  specific
   factors identified by the judge which made deportation unduly harsh.  The
   'best interests' consideration at [73] was not an additional  factor  but
   had to be  considered  in  any  case;  the  vulnerable  position  of  the
   appellant and his partner was not relevant as it referred to the start of
   their relationship in 2016; and the consideration of the evidence "in the
   round" at [77] meant that the judge had taken into account the nature and
   seriousness  of  the  appellant's   offending   and   the   question   of
   rehabilitation, which were not relevant considerations  for  the  'unduly
   harsh' test. Mr Tan submitted that the judge erred further by failing  to
   consider the second "prong" to the unduly harsh test, namely  whether  it
   would be unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  partner  and  children  to
   relocate to the Ivory Coast with him, a matter which the  respondent  had
   relied on in the refusal letter and upon which  no  concession  had  been
   made at the hearing.

11. Ms Pledger submitted that the mere fact that the  judge  had  considered
   the appellant's family circumstances to be in his  favour  did  not  mean
   that he had erred in law. Ms Pledger relied on the case of KB (Jamaica) v
   Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1385  in
   submitting that there was no ordinary level of undue harshness. The judge
   had considered evidence from multiple witnesses and had made his decision
   on the basis of the particular circumstances of the appellant's case  and
   the devastating  effect  of  deportation  on  his  family.  Although  the
   severity of the appellant's offending was not  relevant  for  the  unduly
   harsh consideration, that was not material as it  was  usually  when  the
   situation was the other way around.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  was
   released on bail shortly after the end of his sentence was relevant.  The
   judge had considered everything. Nothing he  said  in  his  decision  was
   immaterial. As for the second prong of the unduly harsh  test,  that  was
   not materially determinative of the outcome as it was unlikely the  judge
   would have made a different decision given that there  were  two  British
   children.

Discussion and Findings

12. Dealing firstly with Mr Tan's last submission, that the judge  erred  by
   failing to consider the second  limb  of  the  'unduly  harsh'  test  and
   relocation of the family to the Ivory Coast, it is relevant to note  that
   that was not a ground of challenge in the grounds of appeal and therefore
   was not a basis upon which permission was granted. As such it is not open
   to Mr Tan to rely upon it now as a ground of appeal. In any event, it  is
   clear from Ms Pledger's submission before Judge Buckley, as  recorded  at
   [50(b)] of his decision, that the respondent did not make submissions on,
   or actively pursue that issue at the  hearing.  Other  than  the  passing
   reference to the refusal decision which did raise  the  matter,  and  the
   absence of any specific concession, the indication from  the  submissions
   recorded at [49] is indeed that that was not  a  matter  pursued  by  the
   respondent with any conviction. The focus was clearly on the question  of
   undue harshness  in  the  context  of  the  family  being  split  by  the
   appellant's deportation and clearly, given the appellant's evidence  that
   he had left the Ivory Coast at the age of three and had no connections to
   the country, there would have been little merit in an argument  that  his
   British wife and children could reasonably be  expected  to  relocate  to
   that country.

13. As for the main issue before the judge, namely  the  separation  of  the
   family, the grounds assert that the judge erred by  failing  to  identify
   any factors which  would  make  that  separation  unduly  harsh  and  had
   effectively found that the mere existence of the family life "in  and  of
   itself" was sufficient to meet the test. However, I do  not  accept  that
   that is the case. As Ms Pledger submitted in her skeleton argument at [8]
   and [14], the judge identified factors particular to the appellant's case
   which he considered were sufficient to meet the 'unduly harsh' threshold.
   His findings in that regard appear at [61], [65] to [67] and [74] to [77]
   and refer to the particularly close family  unit,  the  significant  role
   played by the appellant in  his  children's  upbringing,  the  impact  of
   coronavirus in terms of the close bond and  continuous  presence  of  the
   appellant in his children's lives and the mutual emotional and  practical
   support provided by the appellant  and  his  partner  to  each  other  as
   detailed at [62].

14. To the extent that the respondent challenges the judge's  reliance  upon
   those factors as being insufficient to meet the 'unduly harsh' threshold,
   it is important to distinguish between an error of law and a disagreement
   with what may be regard as a somewhat generous decision by the judge.  In
   that respect, Ms Pledger properly relied upon  the  recent  cases  of  AA
   (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ  1296  and  KB  (Jamaica),
   both of which raised similar issues and where, in the  latter,  at  [16],
   reference was made to the observations of Floyd LJ in UT (Sri  Lanka)  v
   Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1095  at
   paragraph 19:

      "19...Thus, the reasons given for considering there to be an error  of
      law really matter. Baroness Hale put it in this way in AH  (Sudan)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department at [30]:
      "Appellate courts should not rush to find  such  misdirections  simply
      because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts or
      expressed themselves differently."

15. Similarly, in AA (Nigeria), Popplewell LJ said at [38]:

    "The factors which the FTT Judge identified were capable of  supporting
    the conclusion that the effect on C and the children  of  remaining  in
    the UK without the appellant met the elevated unduly harsh  test.  That
    was an evaluative judgement for the FTT Judge on the basis of the  full
    evidence before her, including cross-examined  oral  evidence  and  the
    report from Ms Meeks, the nuances of which will not be apparent  to  an
    appellate tribunal. Her findings of fact are such that a conclusion  of
    undue harshness was open to her. Different tribunals might have reached
    a different conclusion, but it is inherent in the  evaluative  exercise
    involved in these fact sensitive decisions that there  is  a  range  of
    reasonable conclusions which a judge might reach, and the error of  law
    here under consideration is only made out if the FTT Judge's conclusion
    is outside that range. In my view it  was  within  the  range  in  this
    case."

16. In the appellant's case before me, it is undeniably the  case  that  the
   judge properly directed himself on the correct test for  'unduly  harsh',
   as set out in KO (Nigeria) and (HA) Iraq, that he was fully aware of  the
   high threshold  which  needed  to  be  met  and  that  he  applied  those
   principles when evaluating and assessing the evidence. As in the case  of
   AA (Nigeria), the judge had the benefit of  hearing  oral  evidence  from
   several witnesses and made an evaluative judgment from that evidence.  It
   was open to the judge to find that the evidence, taken as  a  whole,  met
   the high threshold.

17. Mr Tan challenged the judge's assessment of "all  the  evidence  in  the
   round", as stated at [77], as that thereby included  a  consideration  of
   the nature and seriousness of the appellant's offending, contrary to  the
   guidance in KO (Nigeria). Ms Pledger accepted that those were not factors
   relevant to the 'unduly harsh'  test.  However,  as  she  submitted,  the
   situation envisaged in KO was the other  way  around,  namely  where  the
   appellant's offending was considered as  undermining  the  weight  to  be
   given to other factors in the  appellant's  favour  in  relation  to  the
   public interest, rather than as positive features. In any event, it seems
   that that consideration by the judge  was  in  a  section  preceding  his
   assessment of the appellant's family life and to the extent that  it  may
   have been taken into account in the subsequent assessment of family life,
   the judge was entitled to have regard to the fact that the appellant  had
   devoted the extended period of time since his release from custody to his
   family, when considering the impact of  separation  on  his  partner  and
   children.

18. Accordingly, I find no merit in the assertion in the  grounds  that  the
   judge misdirected himself in law and failed to give  proper  reasons  for
   concluding that the appellant's deportation would be unduly harsh on  his
   family. It seems to me that, whilst the judge's decision  was  perhaps  a
   generous one and whilst  another  judge  may  have  reached  a  different
   decision, his decision to allow the appellant's appeal was one which  was
   open to him on the evidence available, that it  was  made  in  accordance
   with the relevant legislative framework and caselaw and that it  did  not
   involve any material errors of law.

DECISION

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law requiring the decision to be  set  aside.  The
   decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
   therefore stands.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Date: 23 March 2021
