
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/02238/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 5th July 2019                       |On: 16th July 2019                 |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            nicole april stinson
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Roberts of Cromwell Wilkes Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Australia born on 16  August  1990.  She
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge dismissing her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK.

   2. The appellant entered the UK on 20 October 2014 with leave to enter as
      a Tier 5 Migrant, valid until 28 October 2016. On  12  September  2016
      she applied for leave to remain on the basis of her family and private
      life, in particular on the basis of her relationship with her  partner
      Joseph John Cordle.

   3. The appellant's application was considered under the ten-year  partner
      route and refused on the basis that she did not meet  the  eligibility
      requirements of section E-LTRP of Appendix FM. She did  not  meet  the
      requirements of GEN.1.2 as she was not married to Joseph  John  Cordle
      and had not been living with him in a relationship  akin  to  marriage
      for at least two  years  prior  to  the  application.  The  respondent
      accepted that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
      with her British partner and noted her claim that she and her  partner
      were devout Christians who did not believe in residing together before
      marriage.  The  respondent  did   not   consider   that   there   were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside  the  UK
      and therefore considered that the requirements of EX.1.(b) of Appendix
      FM were not met. The respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant
      could meet the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of her
      private  life  and  considered  that   there   were   no   exceptional
      circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave  outside  the  immigration
      rules.

   4. The appellant appealed against the decision and her appeal  was  heard
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver  on  24  August  2018.  The  judge
      recorded the evidence that the appellant and her partner had been in a
      relationship since 25  March  2014  and  that  they  were  not  living
      together because of their religious beliefs. They considered that  the
      immigration rules amounted to indirect  discrimination  against  them.
      They had met on a Christian holiday in the United States.  She  was  a
      journalist and he was a primary school teacher. It was argued that  it
      would be difficult for Mr Cordle to enter Australia  as  an  unmarried
      partner because the same rules applied. They intended to  get  married
      and to spend the rest of their lives together but  could  only  do  so
      when they were spiritually ready. The judge heard from the  appellant,
      her partner and her partner's father and accepted that  they  had  all
      told  the  truth.  It  was  accepted  that  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules could not be met  but  the  case  was  being  argued
      outside the rules. The judge did not understand why  the  couple  were
      reluctant to get engaged and said  that  he  would  have  allowed  the
      appeal if they were engaged.  In the absence of an explanation  as  to
      why they had failed  to  take  that  step  he  considered  that  their
      relationship fell to be considered under private life and he dismissed
      the appeal in a decision promulgated on 11 October 2018.

   5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on the basis that the judge's comment, that he would  have  considered
      allowing the appeal if the couple  had  been  engaged,  did  not  take
      account of their Statements of Evidence confirming that they  regarded
      themselves as being in a state of religious betrothal. The  judge  had
      imported  a  secular  understanding  of   "engagement"   and   thereby
      unlawfully constrained himself from the allowing the appeal on  family
      life grounds.

   6. Permission was granted on 22 June 2018.

   7. Permission was refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
      Tribunal. However, in a "Cart" challenge to the Administrative  Court,
      the appellant  sought  to  judicially  review  the  refusal  to  grant
      permission. Permission was granted by Sr Ross Cranston  sitting  as  a
      High Court judge on the following basis:


    "As FTTJ Oliver observed this is a  highly  unusual  case.  Because  of
    their strongly held religious beliefs the applicant does not  meet  the
    definition of partner. The crucial factor for the judge was the lack of
    an engagement: if they  had  been  engaged  he  "would  seriously  have
    considered allowing the appeal  outside  the  rule  under  article  8".
    However the judge does not address the religious beliefs which have led
    the applicant and Mr Cordle not to become engaged. In my view  this  is
    one of those very exceptional Cart  cases  where  the  matter  requires
    further examination in the Upper Tribunal."

   8. In the absence of any request for a substantive hearing following  the
      grant of permission the Administrative Court quashed the  decision  of
      the Upper Tribunal refusing permission.  Permission  was  subsequently
      granted by Vice-President Ockelton in the Upper  Tribunal  on  29  May
      2019. Thus the matter came before me.

   9.  Mr  Roberts  submitted  that  the  appellant  and  her  partner  were
      Evangelical Christians. They did  not  recognise  a  secular  form  of
      relationship and  would  only  marry  when  their  spiritual  guidance
      dictated that they could. The judge questioned why the couple had  not
      become engaged, but their evidence was that they considered themselves
      as betrothed and  committed  and  they  would  marry  when  they  were
      spiritually ready to do so. The judge was wrong to find that the  case
      was restricted  to  Article  8  private  life.  There  was  a  genuine
      intention to marry which was sufficient to amount to family life.

  10. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge had properly looked at the  ambit
      of the relationship and considered it under private  life  not  family
      life. The judge had correctly applied the law as set out in Rhuppiah v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803 and  he
      had  properly  found  that  little  weight  could  be  given  to   the
      appellant's private life. There were no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
      integration in Australia. He appropriately found  that  he  could  not
      allow the appeal.

  11. Mr Roberts reiterated his previous submissions in response.

Consideration and findings

  12. It was  accepted  by  the  appellant  that  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(1) could not  be
      met, and rightly so. The appellant could  not  meet  the  criteria  in
      Appendix FM as a spouse or a partner within the definition in GEN.1.2.
      The case was pursued outside the immigration rules on the  basis  that
      the sole reason why the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
      the rules was that she and her partner  could  not  meet  the  secular
      meaning of a  partnership  because  of  their  religious  beliefs  but
      nevertheless had an enduring relationship which engaged Article 8.

  13. Permission was granted by the  Administrative  Court  by  way  of  the
      "Cart" appeal on the basis that the judge had failed  to  address  the
      religious beliefs that led the appellant and her partner not to become
      engaged, having considered the lack of an engagement to be  a  crucial
      factor.

  14. It seems to me, however, that the judge gave full consideration to the
      appellant's religious beliefs and to the reasons she provided for  not
      marrying her partner or living together with him and  was  sympathetic
      to her situation. In making the comments that he did  about  the  fact
      that the couple were not engaged, the judge was simply  assessing  the
      ambit of the relationship and drawing conclusions from that assessment
      as to whether or not he considered that the level of commitment of the
      parties amounted to family life which outweighed the  public  interest
      in the maintenance of immigration control.

  15. The judge had full regard to the appellant's evidence as  recorded  at
      [7], noting that the appellant's answer to the question as to  whether
      she and her partner had any firm plans to marry after  four  years  of
      relationship was that they were not engaged, that they saw each  other
      two or three times a week but sometimes did not meet in one  week  and
      that the Bible stated that marriage was for when they  felt  the  time
      was right and when they could say that they would stick by  the  other
      person for ever. The judge also recorded Mr  Cordle's  evidence,  that
      they were not yet spiritually ready for marriage and were waiting  for
      the right time to commit to spending the rest of their lives together.
      It is clear from his findings at [20] that the judge was not persuaded
      that the parties' religious beliefs alone were sufficient  to  explain
      why they were not prepared to make a commitment towards each other and
      that he considered there to be an absence of a proper  explanation  in
      that regard. It seems to me that he was fully entitled  to  have  such
      concerns and to consider that the appellant had not demonstrated  that
      the relationship she had with Mr Cordle was sufficient  to  amount  to
      family life for the purposes of Article 8 and was sufficiently weighty
      in the proportionality assessment.

  16. Having found that the relationship was an aspect  of  the  appellant's
      private life, the judge had regard to the relevant factors and  public
      interest  considerations  under  section  117B  of  the   Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the relevant caselaw and  balanced
      those interests accordingly. He reached a conclusion  that  was  fully
      and properly open to him on the evidence  before  him  and  which  was
      supported by full and cogent reasons. I cannot see that there were any
      errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the  case,   in   his
      consideration of the evidence and the explanations provided in  regard
      to the relationship or in his assessment of that evidence in line with
      the relevant legal principles and caselaw. Accordingly, I  uphold  the
      decision.

DECISION

  17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  10 July 2019
