
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02414/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2018                          |On 9 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Abraham [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State.  However, for
    convenience I will refer to the parties as they were referred to in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 12 April 1959 who entered
    the UK in 1995 and made an unsuccessful application for asylum.  In
    1996 he married and in 2002 was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 3. In February 2013 the appellant was convicted of conspiracy to do an act
    to facilitate the commission of a breach of UK immigration law by a non-
    EU person and of assisting unlawful immigration into an EU state and
    was given concurrent sentences of four years and twenty months'
    imprisonment.   A deportation order was signed on 8 January 2015.  The
    appellant submitted that deporting him would breach his right to
    respect to family life under Article 8 ECHR given his relationship to
    his wife and five children.  The respondent's reasons for refusing the
    appellant's human rights claim are set out in a letter dated 13 January
    2016.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Flynn (hereinafter "the
    judge") at Taylor House on 5 September 2016.  The judge allowed the
    appeal, concluding that there were very compelling circumstances over
    and above those set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration
    Rules which outweigh the public interest in the appellant's deportation
    from the UK.

 5. The respondent appealed and the matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge
    Freeman.  In a decision promogulated on 13 July 2017 Judge Freeman
    found that the judge had undertaken a comprehensive and careful
    analysis of the facts and that the judge's findings of fact should
    stand. However, he stated at paragraph 7:

         "The judge made findings of fact which it is not suggested would
         not have entitled her to come to the conclusion she did if that had
         been properly explained.  Equally I do not think it could
         reasonably have been suggested that this would have been the
         inevitable result of doing so.  None of the judge's findings of
         fact were unreasonable or irrelevant but the Secretary of State and
         the public were entitled to specific consideration of the over and
         above requirements."

 6. At paragraph 8 Judge Freeman concluded that:

         "There needs to be a reasoned conclusion about what was over and
         above [the unduly harsh effect of the appellant's deportation on
         his partner and family] on the basis set out in NA (Pakistan) for a
         lawful decision in a case of this kind."

 7. Judge Freeman remitted the appeal to the judge.  The appeal was heard
    for a second time by the judge on 9 March 2018.  In a decision
    promulgated on 10 April 2018 she allowed the appeal.  It is this
    decision (hereinafter "the decision") that is now being appealed by the
    Secretary of State.

The Decision of the First tier Tribunal

 8. At paragraph 15 of the decision the judge stated:

         "The Upper Tribunal preserved my findings that it would be unduly
         harsh for the appellant's children to leave the UK and also unduly
         harsh for his wife to leave the UK.  However it required me to
         provide more detailed reasons for my conclusion that their
         circumstances were very compelling, not merely that it would be
         unduly harsh for them to be separated from their father and
         husband."

 9. At paragraph 52 the judge concluded:

         "Looking at the evidence as a whole, I find that the appellant's
         family circumstances, particularly his genuine and subsisting
         relationships with his wife and four younger children, the physical
         and mental conditions that affect his wife and P [a child of the
         appellant who is 16 years old] cumulatively amount to very
         compelling circumstances."

10. The reasons the judge gave for finding "very compelling circumstances"
    include:

      a) Deportation of the appellant would be "very upsetting" for his
         children and would disrupt their education which is at a "critical
         stage for the elder children".  (paragraph 17)

      b) The appellant's incarceration has had a "highly detrimental impact
         in the children" and a "very negative impact on their mother".
         (paragraph 18)

      c) The appellant's wife has a diagnosis of anterior uveitis and joint
         symptoms dating from 2013 and 2014 but she has been less troubled
         by her symptoms since the appellant was released from prison.
         (paragraph 21)

      d) The presence of the appellant has led to significant improvements
         in his wife's health and that his absence would result in a
         relapse.  (paragraph 22)

      e) The appellant's eldest son had to postpone university studies to
         assist his mother and siblings.  (paragraph 22)

      f) One of the appellant's children (referred to by the First-tier
         Tribunal as P) was diagnosed with adjustment reaction, prolonged
         depressive reaction and moderate depressive episode which was
         precipitated by the appellant's imprisonment and the evidence of a
         psychotherapist is that P's symptoms improved with the prospect of
         the appellant's imminent release, and that the return of the
         appellant to the family has led to an improvement in all family
         members.  (paragraphs 23-25)

      g) A letter from a psychologist Dr Deborah Kemp confirmed that P had
         been referred again for family consultation in light of the
         appellant's impending deportation (paragraph 26) and a social
         worker report found that P could be at increased risk if the
         appellant were deported. (paragraph 27)

      h) All the children rely on the appellant and are close to him and he
         is a crucial part of the family and their support mechanisms.
         (paragraph 29)

      i) It is in the best interests of the children to have regular daily
         contact with their father and his deportation would have a strong
         negative impact on his wife's mental and physical health which in
         turn would affect each of the children adversely.  (paragraphs 31
         and 32)

      j) The children are "more vulnerable than most and would fail to
         thrive if they were to lose the direct daily support, assistance
         and encouragement from their father".  (paragraph 33)

      k) The family's "particular vulnerabilities would seriously jeopardise
         the welfare of the children".  (paragraph 34)

      l) The separation will cause the children serious distress and the
         family is likely to split "permanently and probably irreparably".
         (paragraph 37)

      m) None of the offences the appellant committed involved drugs, sex or
         violence (paragraph 45) and the appellant regrets his crimes and
         has "now learnt his lesson".  (paragraph 39)

Grounds of Appeal and Submission

11. In the grounds of appeal the Secretary of State makes a number of
    arguments.  Firstly, it is submitted that the outcome of the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal was predetermined.  This submission is made
    on the basis of the wording used by the judge at paragraph 15 of the
    decision, as quoted above at paragraph 8.

12. The remainder of the submissions in the grounds of appeal are
    essentially arguing that the reasons given by the judge are
    insufficient to justify the conclusion that there are "very compelling
    circumstances" outweighing the public interest in deportation "over and
    above" undue harshness and that the judge's findings fall far short of
    meeting the very high threshold required.

13. The grounds contrast the factual circumstances in this appeal to those
    of the appellant MY in NA (Pakistan) and submit that the level of
    dependency in MY, where the criminality was of a lower level, was far
    greater than that in this appeal.

14. Mr Deller reiterated the points made in the grounds.  He stressed that
    it is not sufficient to show that the appellant's removal would be
    unduly harsh for his wife and children and that there needed to be
    something more.  He argued that the reasoning given by the judge simply
    does not establish that there was this "something more".  He also
    submitted that the judge failed to have proper regard to recent case
    law which emphasises the strength of the public interest in deportation
    of a serious criminal.

15. Ms Allen's response was that, read as a whole, it is apparent that the
    decision was not predetermined and that the judge understood she was
    required to remake the decision and not simply explain a decision
    already made.  Ms Allen submitted that the judge had correctly
    identified the law, including the relevant and up-to-date case law, and
    had considered all of the material evidence, before reaching a
    conclusion that was open to her based on that evidence.  She maintained
    that the judge took into account a range of factors and that, taken
    together, it was open to the judge to treat these as amounting to
    compelling circumstances.

Analysis

16. Although the wording of paragraph 15 of the decision (as cited above)
    may give the impression that the judge saw her task as merely to
    provide reasons to justify a decision that she had already made, it is
    apparent from reviewing the decision as a whole that the judge, in
    accordance with the direction of Judge Flynn, has re-looked at the
    preserved findings of fact in order to determine whether there were
    "very compelling circumstances" to outweigh the public interest in
    deportation.  I therefore do not accept the Secretary of State's
    contention that the outcome of the appeal was "predetermined".

17. I also reject the submission that the decision is unsafe because of
    insufficient or inadequate reasons.  The judge, after correctly
    identifying the law and undertaking a thorough fact-finding, gave a
    range of reasons, as summarised above in paragraph 10, which explain
    why she reached the conclusion she did.  These reasons leave the reader
    of the decision in no doubt as to the approach the judge has taken and
    the factors she considered to be sufficient to outweigh the public
    interest in deportation.  The reasoning is therefore sufficient and
    does not give rise to an error of law.

18. Where Mr Deller is on stronger ground is in his contention that the
    judge's findings about the detriment to the appellant's family that
    would arise from his deportation are insufficient, on any legitimate
    view, to justify the conclusion that his deportation would be
    disproportionate.

19. The Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) [2016] UKSC 60 and the Court of
    Appeal in several cases (including, for example, NA (Pakistan)[2016]
    EWCA Civ 662) has been unequivocal that where a foreign criminal has
    received a sentence of over four years great weight should be given to
    the public interest in deportation, such that the public interest will
    almost always outweigh countervailing considerations of private and
    family life.

20. As summarised above at paragraph 10, the judge has given a range of
    reasons which she found, taken together, outweigh the public interest
    in deportation.  Given the weight that must be attached to the public
    interest in deportation, I have no doubt that many other judges,
    interpreting the same factual matrix, would not have concluded that the
    criteria in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules were met,
    let alone that there were very compelling circumstances over and above
    these.  However, the issue before me is whether the judge reached a
    decision that was open to her on the evidence, not whether I (or
    another judge) would have reached the same conclusion based on that
    evidence.

21. This is an appeal where it is clear that the judge understood and
    applied the correct legal test and appreciated the weight she was
    required to give to the public interest in deporting the appellant.  It
    is also clear that the judge has engaged in thorough and comprehensive
    fact finding where proper regard has been had to all relevant
    considerations.  The facts, as found by the judge, include that one of
    the appellant's children may face a serious risk to her mental health
    in the event of the appellant being deported.  Taking this together
    with the other (unchallenged) factual findings, including the funding
    that the impact on the other children would be "highly detrimental", I
    am satisfied that the judge's conclusion that the public interest in
    deportation is outweighed by the appellant's family circumstances,
    although one that many other judges would undoubtedly not have reached,
    was (just) open to her on the evidence.  I therefore dismiss the
    appeal.

Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain a material error
of law and shall stand.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 3 October 2018                |

