
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02474/2016
                                                               HU/02475/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2018                           |On 28 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mohamed Zouhir Martini
                                 Raja Alhaja
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
    decision of  Judge  Lucas  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    claimants' appeal on human rights grounds (private and family life).

 2. The claimants live in Syria and the oral and written evidence  in  this
    appeal is not in dispute.  The claimants are the parents of their adult
    daughter, who lives in the United Kingdom with their grandchildren  and
    manages a property which they own in Brighton.  Before the conflict  in
    Syria, the claimants were able to make regular  visits  to  the  United
    Kingdom to see the sponsor and their grandchildren, and the sponsor and
    her family also travelled often to Syria to see her parents.

 3. Until the beginning of the Syrian  conflict,  the  claimants'  daughter
    would send part of the Brighton property rental proceeds  back  to  her
    parents in Syria, keeping some  of  the  money  for  her  own  use,  by
    agreement with the  claimants.   The  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that transmission  of  funds  from  the  daughter  to  the
    claimants is no longer possible, and that the daughter and her children
    are no longer able to keep up the relationship with  the  claimants  by
    visiting them in Syria.

 4. The First-tier Judge found, on that evidence, that family life  existed
    between the claimants and their adult daughter and at [26] stated  that
    "it would be surprising if this were otherwise".  No authority is given
    for this proposition and the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  does  not
    engage with the Kugathas dependency test.



Submissions

 5. For the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Everett relied on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  I did not find it  necessary  to  call  on  him  to  elucidate
    further.

 6. For the claimants, Mr Muquit acknowledged the  normal  formulation  for
    family life as set out at [4] of Huang in the judgment of Lady Hale  as
    being the spouses, parents and minor children only.  I asked Mr  Muquit
    to address me  on  Kugathas  dependency,  but  he  could  only  advance
    evidence of financial arrangements around  the  property  in  Brighton,
    which the claimants own, and their daughter manages.

 7. Mr Muquit argued that Kugathas dependency  was  always  a  question  of
    fact.  That is right but the facts in this  appeal  do  not  support  a
    finding of such dependency.  The statement at [26] that there is family
    life between the claimants and their daughter is a plain error of  fact
    at the level of an error of law of the kind identified at [96]  in  the
    judgment of Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran) v Entry  Clearance  Officer
    for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  I am satisfied that  this
    error is one which would have made a material difference to the outcome
    of the appeal.

 8. Mr Muquit asserted that the First-tier Tribunal's reasoning on  private
    life was inadequate, but  accepted  that  this  would  not  assist  the
    claimants, since Article 8  ECHR  imposes  no  positive  obligation  to
    facilitate family reunion and had no territorial reach in this  respect
    (see [27] of the judgment of  Lord  Justice  Burnett,  with  whom  Lady
    Justice Gloster and the Senior President of Tribunals agreed, in  Abbas
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1393).

 9. The decision was set aside at the hearing and I proceed to  remake  it,
    there being no dispute as to the material facts.

Remaking the decision

10. It is not disputed that these claimants have returned to Syria  at  the
    end of previous visits, nor is it  disputed  that  their  daughter  can
    accommodate and maintain them during a visit  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    The Entry Clearance Officer refused entry clearance on the  basis  that
    the claimants although they had property in Syria also had property  in
    the United Kingdom and that the Entry Clearance Officer and indeed  the
    Entry Clearance Manager reviewing the decision were not satisfied  that
    they would return at the end of their visit.

11. The Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  is  rational  on  its  face.
    Although another Entry Clearance Officer might have  made  a  different
    decision I cannot find that this  decision  is  legally  erroneous  and
    therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    substitute the decision dismissing the appeals.



Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed:  Judith A J  C  Gleeson                     Date:          26  March
2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
