

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02482/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 19 June 2017                            |On 03 July 2017                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                WAQAR SAGHIR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr M. Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Rana & Co.
Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms K. Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    human rights claim within the context of an  application  to  vary  and
    extend leave to remain as the spouse of a British citizen.

2.    The Secretary of State refused the application because she  considered
    that the appellant did not meet the 'Suitability' criteria contained in
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules. The respondent alleged  that  the
    appellant used a fraudulently obtained English language certificate  in
    a previous application for leave to remain.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on  21  November  2016.  The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the evidence produced by the respondent  in  support  of
    the allegation of fraud was sufficient to discharge the burden of proof
    [14]. He went on to consider whether the appellant met the requirements
    of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM, but concluded that there would be  no
    'insurmountable obstacles' to the couple continuing their  family  life
    outside the UK [31].

4.    The appellant seeks to appeal the decision on the ground that,  having
    found the appellant met  the  'Suitability'  criteria,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in failing  to  consider  whether  he  met  the  primary
    requirements for leave to remain as a spouse contained in Appendix  FM.
    The provisions contained in paragraph EX.1 were only  relevant  if  the
    appellant did not meet those criteria.

5.     The  respondent  did  not  cross-appeal  the  First-tier   Tribunal's
    findings relating to the 'Suitability' criteria and the  allegation  of
    fraud.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having heard submissions from both parties I was satisfied  that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of  an  error  of
    law.

7.    The primary provisions of the immigration rules for  leave  to  remain
    as a spouse are contained in paragraphs E-LTRP 1-4 of  the  immigration
    rules. Those provisions  include  'Relationship',  'English  language',
    'Immigration status' and 'Financial' requirements.  Paragraph  EX.1  is
    only engaged if an appellant  cannot  meet  certain  aspects  of  those
    criteria: see Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding)  [2014]  UKUT
    63. Having decided in favour  of  the  appellant  in  relation  to  the
    'Suitability' criteria, the First-tier Tribunal should have  considered
    whether the appellant met the primary  provisions  of  the  immigration
    rules before moving on to consider the alternative provisions contained
    in  paragraph  EX.1.  The  Tribunal's  failure  to  consider   material
    provisions of the immigration rules amounts to an error of law.

8.    One reason why the judge may have been led to focus on paragraph  EX.1
    is because the structure of the decision letter follows that course. No
    clear findings  were  made  in  relation  to  the  primary  aspects  of
    paragraphs E-LTRP 1-4 in the decision  letter.  The  decision  focussed
    largely on refusing the application with reference to the 'Suitability'
    criteria. There is nothing in the judge's decision  or  the  record  of
    proceedings on file to suggest that those provisions were  the  subject
    of discussion at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

9.    Having indicated that I was satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of  an  error  of  law,  and  following  a
    discussion with both parties as to the best way to proceed, I  put  the
    case back in order to allow time  for  Ms  Pal  to  consider  what  the
    respondent's position was in relation to the  primary  aspects  of  the
    immigration rules given that the decision letter was  silent  on  those
    issues. When the hearing resumed Ms Pal said that  she  had  considered
    the Home  Office  records.  The  original  caseworker  appeared  to  be
    satisfied that the appellant met the core  requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a spouse including the 'Relationship', 'English language' and
    'Financial' requirements, but the application  was  refused  under  the
    'Suitability' criteria. The appellant was successful in appealing  that
    aspect of the decision and the respondent has  not  cross-appealed  the
    First-tier Tribunal's findings. In light of Ms  Pal's  concession  that
    the appellant otherwise met  the  requirements  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a spouse, it follows that the appeal should be allowed.

10.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error of law. The  decision  is  set
    aside. The decision is remade, and in light of the concession  made  by
    the  respondent,  is  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds  because  the
    appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM, which is said to reflect
    the respondent's position as to where a fair balance should  be  struck
    in relation to the right to family life under Article 8.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

The decision is remade and the appeal ALLOWED on human rights grounds



Signed   [pic]   Date   29 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








