

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/02872/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 July 2017                        |       On 15 November 2017           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                phurba tamang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S Jaisri, of Counsel, instructed by Sam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Entry  Clearance  Officer  (hereinafter  "the  ECO")  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Abebrese) who, in a decision promulgated on 27 March 2017, allowed  the
    Respondent's appeal against the decision of the ECO to refuse to  grant
    entry clearance to settle in the UK as the adult dependant relative  of
    his father, Mr Nar Bahadur Tamang, who is an ex-Gurkha soldier.

 2. Whilst the Appellant in these proceedings is the ECO, for the  sake  of
    convenience, I intend to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Background

 3.  The Appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK  as  the
    adult dependant relative of his father.

 4. The Respondent considered his application under the Home Office  policy
    outlined in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15, section 2A 13.2 as  amended  on  5
    January 2015, as well as under Article 8 of the  ECHR.  The  Respondent
    noted that the Appellant's father and mother  were  issued  with  entry
    clearance on 8 September 2009 and 24 March 2010, and had  been  settled
    in the UK since 23 February 2010 and 28 January 2012 respectively.

 5. The Respondent further noted, inter alia, that the Appellant  had  been
    living apart from his parents for more  than  two  years  as  a  direct
    result of their migration to the UK rather than  as  a  result  of  the
    Appellant  being  away  from  the  family  unit  as  a  consequence  of
    educational or other requirements. She also noted that  neither  parent
    had chosen to remain with the Appellant despite a previous  application
    for entry clearance being refused. In the light of that,  she  was  not
    satisfied that the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  under  Annex  K,
    Paragraph 9(8) of IDI Chapter 15 Section 2A 13.2.

 6. Further still, it was noted the Appellant applied for a  visa  two-days
    before his 28th Birthday, years after his parents migrated to  the  UK.
    There was no evidence that any care arrangements were in  place  before
    they migrated which suggested the Appellant, who was  living  alone  in
    rented accommodation away from the family home when his mother  was  in
    Nepal, could care for himself. It was noted the Appellant was  in  good
    health, engaged in degree level studies and  had  prospects  of  future
    employment in Nepal. There were also no reasons why  his  father  could
    not continue to financially support him in Nepal. Thus,  he  failed  to
    show that he satisfied paragraph 9(5) of Annex K of the revised policy.



 7. The Respondent  also  considered  and  refused  the  application  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR. She did not accept there was family life between
    the Appellant and his parents and, in  the  event  that  there  was  an
    interference, the ECO took into account the factors noted hitherto  and
    concluded that they outweighed the consideration of historic injustice.
    Accordingly,  she  concluded  that  the  refusal  was   justified   and
    proportionate.

 8. The Appellant exercised  his  right  to  appeal  that  decision  having
    submitted written grounds in support which expressly  referred  to  the
    Appellant circumstances, which were relevant to the application of  the
    revised policy. The appeal came before Judge Abebrese on 7 March  2017.
    He heard the oral evidence of the Appellant's  parents  and  considered
    the  documents  provided,  including  a  witness  statement  from   the
    Appellant, and allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 9. The ECO sought permission to appeal that decision. Essentially, it  was
    argued that the judge's approach to Article 8 was  flawed;  first,  the
    judge's finding that there was family life between  the  Appellant  and
    his parents failed to consider the issue of  dependency  in  accordance
    with the decision in Kugathas v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ  31;  second,  the
    judge failed to properly consider  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  and  third,  the
    approach taken to the  historic  injustice  argument  was  inadequately
    reasoned and did not of itself answer the proportionality question.

10. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 15 June 2017.

11. Thus, the matter came before the Upper Tribunal. Mr Clarke appeared  on
    behalf of the ECO and Mr Jaisri, who  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, represented the Appellant. I heard submissions from  each  of
    the parties which I will go on to consider when reaching a decision  on
    whether the judge erred in law.

12. The first ground, as set out in the  written  grounds,  is  essentially
    that the judge failed to properly apply the test in Kugathas. Mr Clarke
    referred to PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance  Officer,  Chennai  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 612 in support of his submission that there was no evidence of
    dependency going beyond normal emotional ties.

13. Mr Jaisri on behalf of the Appellant submitted that the ECO's challenge
    amounted to a disagreement  with  the  judge's  findings;  he  lawfully
    considered the issue of whether family life was engaged under Article 8
    (1) of the ECHR and made adequate findings of  fact  on  the  evidence,
    concerning financial dependency between the parties and also  emotional
    dependence based on ongoing communications between the  family  members
    concerned and family visits  that  had  taken  place  over  significant
    periods.

14. I  have  considered  the  submissions  in  the  light  of  the  judge's
    assessment of the factual circumstances of the Appellant and his family
    members. There does not seem to be any dispute about the  main  factual
    circumstances. The Appellant was born in 1987; he was aged 27 when  the
    policy to admit the adult children of former Gurkhas was introduced  on
    5 January 2015. His father was an ex-Gurkha who  had  served  with  the
    British Army Brigade  of  Gurkhas  for  18  years  and  117  days  with
    exemplary military conduct. He was deployed to serve in the  Falkland's
    War and awarded with a long service, Brunei and Silver  Jubilee  medal.
    He was discharged on 19  March  1987  at  the  rank  of  Sergeant.  The
    Appellant's father and mother moved to the United Kingdom  to  live  in
    2010 and  2012  respectively.  These  facts  were  uncontroversial  and
    unchallenged.

15. As to the circumstances prior to  his  parents  moving  to  the  United
    Kingdom, it was the Appellant's claim that whilst he was  living  alone
    in rented accommodation to complete his education when his mother  left
    Nepal, he has always lived with his parents as part of the family  unit
    and that he was and is both financially and emotionally dependent  upon
    them. The judge  comprehensively  recorded  the  Appellant's  claim  at
    paragraphs 13 - 20, including the oral evidence at paragraphs 19 -  20.
    It does not appear from the decision that the Appellant's parents  were
    subject to any significant cross-examination.

16. The Appellant had stated that he was a student and that he  was  living
    alone in rented accommodation after his parents left.  The  Appellant's
    parents  had  put  in  place  care  arrangements,  including  financial
    provision. The Appellant stated that he found it difficult to be  apart
    from his parents.  His father had visited him from 12 July 2010  to  24
    December 2011; 7 December 2012 to 1 March 2013 and 23 November 2014  to
    15 February 2015.  His mother visited from 7 December 2012 to  1  March
    2013; 5 November 2013 to 15 February 2014; 29 April 2014 to 15 February
    2015 and 7 March 2016 to 23 April 2016. Her last trip scheduled for  23
    November 2016 was cancelled due to her ill-health. The  judge  accepted
    the credibility of all the evidence.

17. The judge properly identified at [23]  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy Annex K in that he was not able to show that he  had  not  been
    apart from his father for a period of two years or less.

18. In recognition that this was a human rights appeal, the judge proceeded
    to consider the five-step approach set out in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL
    27. The judge noted at [23] that the Appellant had been apart from  his
    father for five years and his mother for over 3 years, but nevertheless
    found that the care arrangements put in place by the parents  indicated
    that  they  "still  continued  to  provide  him  [the  Appellant]  with
    effective and real family support by way of financial  and  emotional."
    (sic). The judge found the ECO's decision constituted  an  interference
    with family and private life. The judge considered the frequency of the
    visits made by the Appellant's parents and the Appellant's reliance  on
    them for his "total support".

19. In deciding whether the decision had consequences of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8, the judge  found  the
    Appellant's father  who  was  discharged  before  1997  was  denied  an
    opportunity to apply for settlement until 2004. With reference  to  the
    decisions in Limbu and Gurung the  judge  found  that  there  had  been
    historic injustice denying the Appellant a fair  opportunity  to  apply
    before he reached the age of majority and noted that he would have been
    permitted to enter the UK had the injustice not taken place. The  judge
    thus concluded that if the appeal was not allowed this would legitimise
    the continuation of the historic injustice.

20. The judge, as required, had regard to section 117B of the 2002 Act (the
    reference to the Immigration Act 2014 is  mistaken).  The  judge  noted
    there was no independent evidence of the Appellant's proficiency in the
    English language, but noted that he would have been settled in  the  UK
    shortly after his father had been discharged, but  for  the  injustice,
    and would by now be  a  fluent  English  speaker.  The  judge  did  not
    expressly find that the Appellant was not financially independent,  but
    found he would not be a burden to the taxpayer as his father  was  able
    to support him [27].

21. In his  omnibus  conclusion  the  judge  referred  to  the  Appellant's
    emotional and financial dependence on his  parents,  which  was  "real,
    effective and committed", a  continuation  of  family  life  maintained
    through visits and to the fact that the Appellant was  not  leading  an
    independent life. Accordingly,  the  judge  concluded  that  the  ECO's
    decision was disproportionate and allowed the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

22. It is within this context that the judge's conclusion that family  life
    was established  between  the  Appellant  and  his  parents  is  to  be
    assessed.

23. The law has been stated in a number of cases and most recently  in  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Rai v ECO New Delhi [2017] EWCA  Civ
    320 which was decided after the decision of Judge Abebrese.

24. In the case of Rai (as cited) the Court of Appeal  set  out  the  legal
    principles relevant to determining whether there is family life engaged
    in appeals such as this from paragraph 17 onwards. It observed that  in
    the case of Kugathas, Sedley  LJ  referred  to  dependency  as  "real",
    "committed" or "effective" support and  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had
    accepted in the case of Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy)
    [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC),  that  the  judgement  in  Kugathas  had  been
    interpreted too restrictively in the past and that it ought to be  read
    in the light of the subsequent decisions of the domestic and Strasbourg
    courts (see paragraph [18]).

25. At paragraph 19, the court cited Lord Dyson  M.R  who  emphasised  when
    giving the judgement of the court in Gurung  (at  paragraph  45),  "the
    question whether an individual enjoys family life is one  of  fact  and
    depends on a careful consideration of all the  relevant  facts  of  the
    particular case." In some instances, "an adult child  (particularly  if
    he does not have a partner or children of his own) may  establish  that
    he has a family life with his parents."

26. At paragraph 20 the court also cited the observations  of  Sir  Stanley
    Burnton in Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at [24]:

    "24. I do not think that the judgement which I have referred  leads  to
    any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article  8  cases
    involving adult children. In the case of  adults,  in  the  context  of
    immigration control, there is no legal or factual presumption as to the
    existence or absence of family life the purposes of Article 8. I  point
    out that the approach of the European Commission of Human Rights  cited
    approvingly  in  Kugathas  did   not   include   any   requirement   of
    exceptionality. It all depends on the facts.  The  love  and  affection
    between an adult and his parents or siblings will not of itself justify
    a finding of family life. There has to be something more. A young adult
    living with his parents or siblings will normally have a family life to
    be respected under article 8. A child enjoying a family life  with  his
    parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life at midnight as he
    turns 18 years of  age.  On  the  other  hand,  a  young  adult  living
    independently of his parents may  well  not  have  a  family  life  the
    purposes of Article 8."

27. Lord Justice Lindblom referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    Rai and observed that the single factor which seem to have weighed most
    heavily in the conclusion of the judge in that case was the Appellant's
    parents' willingness to leave Nepal to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom
    when they did without focusing on the practical and financial realities
    entailed in that decision. At [39] the real issue under Article  8  (1)
    was whether, as a matter of fact, the Appellant had  demonstrated  that
    he had a family life with his parents, which had existed at the time of
    their departure to settle in United Kingdom and had endured beyond  it,
    notwithstanding their having left Nepal when they did (see [39]).

28. The court referred to the circumstances of the Appellant and his family
    and the fact that he and his parents would have  applied  at  the  same
    time for leave to enter the United Kingdom and would have come together
    as a family unit had they been able to  afford  to  do  so.  The  court
    considered that this was a factor that had not been taken into  account
    when it should have been. Thus, the question of  whether,  even  though
    the Appellant's parents had chosen to leave Nepal to settle  in  United
    Kingdom when they did, his family life with his parents subsisted then,
    and was still subsisting at the time of the Upper Tribunal's  decision;
    this was "the critical question under Article 8 (1)."

29. The judge did not make any explicit reference to all the case law which
    set out the relevant principles relating to family life between parents
    and adult children although at [7] and [25] he did  make  reference  to
    jurisprudence dealing with cases of  adult  children  of  Gurkhas.  The
    question is whether those  principles  were  properly  applied  to  the
    evidence in the appeal as reflected in the findings of fact.

30. As the decision in Rai makes plain, the critical question is whether as
    a matter of fact, the Appellant demonstrated that he  had  family  life
    with his parents which had existed at the time of  their  departure  to
    settle in the UK and that it endured beyond  it  (see  paragraphs  [39]
    [42] of Rai). This is of significance because the ECO in  her  decision
    referred to the Appellant's parents choosing to  apply  for  settlement
    and their decision to move to the UK in her assessment.

31. The judge's clear assessment of the facts was that  the  Appellant  was
    part of the family unit until the time his parents decided to  come  to
    the United Kingdom and continued to  be  so.  The  judge  accepted  the
    Appellant's claim that he would have entered the UK  with  his  parents
    had he been permitted to do so. The judge also found that the Appellant
    was financially and emotionally dependent on his parents. The  evidence
    was that the Appellant parents made full financial  provision  for  the
    Appellant's living costs and education.

32. The judge had referred to the cultural  expectation  upon  which  their
    family life had been premised in Nepal, and  the  continuing  emotional
    support and dependency between the Appellant and his parents  was  also
    expressed in the evidence  and  witness  statements,  which  the  judge
    accepted, including evidence of regular and extended visits being  made
    by both parents to provide the  emotional  support  the  Appellant  was
    accustomed to as part of the family unit.

33. I am satisfied that the judge properly  focussed  on  the  question  of
    family life and his approach to that question was  entirely  consistent
    with that set out in Gurung, where the Court of Appeal said at [45]:  "
    Ultimately, the question whether an individual enjoys  family  life  is
    one of fact and depends on a careful consideration of all the  relevant
    facts of the particular case" and at  [46]  endorsed  the  guidance  in
    Ghising. The judge had in mind the relevant question,  namely,  whether
    there existed emotional and other ties over and above the  normal  ties
    between adult family members and set out in his findings of  facts  his
    assessment of the evidence which was rationally open to him. While  his
    findings could have been more detailed, I consider that the  judge  did
    apply the relevant principles and it was open to him  on  the  evidence
    and considering the factual assessment  that  he  made,  to  reach  the
    conclusion that family life had been established between the  Appellant
    and his parents (see [23]). The first ground therefore is not made out.

34. Dealing with the  second  and  third  ground  advanced  on  behalf  the
    Respondent, it is submitted that the judge failed to properly apply the
    provisions of section 117B of the 2002 Act and was wrong to dispose  of
    the question of proportionality based on historic injustice.

35. Earlier in his decision the judge had referred in  the  proportionality
    assessment to the issue of "historic injustice"  [25]  and  the  weight
    attached to this as set  out  in  the  cases  of  Gurung.  The  judge's
    conclusions here are adequately reasoned. The  Court  acknowledged  the
    importance of the issue of historic injustice and at paragraph  38  the
    court observed that "the historic injustice is only one of the  factors
    to be weighed against the need to maintain a firm and fair  immigration
    policy.  It  is  not  necessarily  determinative.  If  it   were,   the
    application of every adult child of a UK settled Gurkha who establishes
    that he has a family life with his parent would be bound to succeed".

36.   At paragraph 42 the court held that "If a Gurkha can  show  that,  but
    for the historic injustice, he would have settled in the UK at  a  time
    when his dependant (now) adult child would have been able to  accompany
    him as a dependent child under the age of 18, that is a  strong  reason
    for holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult child to  join
    his family now".

37.   In the decision of Ghising at paragraph  59  the  Tribunal  considered
    the issue of weight to be attached to the issue of  historic  injustice
    as follows:

    "59. That said, we accept Mr Jacobs'submission where article 8 is  held
    to be engaged and  the  fact  that  but  for  the  historic  wrong  the
    Appellant would have settled in the UK long ago  is  established,  this
    will  ordinarily  determine  the   outcome   of   the   proportionality
    assessment; and determine it in an Appellant's favour. The  explanation
    for this is to be found, not  in  any  concept  of  new  or  additional
    "burdens" but, rather, in the weight to be  afforded  to  the  historic
    wrong/settlement issue in a proportionality balancing  exercise.  That,
    we consider, is the proper interpretation of what the Court  of  Appeal
    was saying when they referred to the historic injustice as  being  such
    an important factor to be taken into account in the balancing exercise.
    What was crucial, the court said, was the consequence of  the  historic
    injustice, which was that Gurkhas and BOC's:

    "were prevented from settling in the  UK.  That  is  why  the  historic
    injustice is such an important factor to be taken into account  in  the
    balancing exercise and why the applicant dependent child  of  a  Gurkha
    who settled in the UK has such a strong claim to  have  his  article  8
    (one)   right   indicated,   notwithstanding   the   potency   of   the
    countervailing public interest in maintaining  of  a  firm  immigration
    policy." [41]

    In other words, the historic injustice  issue  will  carry  significant
    weight, on the Appellant cited the balance, and is likely  to  outweigh
    the matters relied on by the Respondent, where these consist solely  of
    the public interest just described."

38.     At paragraph 60 the Tribunal went on to state;

    "once this point is grasped, it can  immediately  be  appreciated  that
    they may be cases where Appellants in Gurkha cases  will  not  succeed,
    even though their family life engages article 8 (one) and the  evidence
    shows that they would come to the United Kingdom with their father, but
    for the injustice that prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here  on
    completion of his military service. If  the  Respondent  can  point  to
    matters over and above the "public interest in maintaining  of  a  firm
    immigration policy", which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of
    leave to enter, these must be given appropriate weight in  the  balance
    in the Respondent's favour.  Thus,  about  immigration  history  and/or
    criminal behaviour  may  still  be  sufficient  outweigh  the  powerful
    factors bearing on the Appellant side. They being  an  adult  child  UK
    settled Gurkha ex-serviceman is, therefore, not a "trump card", in  the
    sense that not every application  by  such  a  person  will  inevitably
    succeed. But, if  the  Respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public
    interest described by the Court of Appeal at  paragraph  41  of  Gurung
    then the weight to be given to the  historic  injustice  will  normally
    require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

39.   By reason of his earlier findings, the judge  reached  the  conclusion
    on the evidence that the Appellant could not  meet  the  provisions  of
    Annex K on account of the two-year criterion at [23]. It is plain  from
    the decision that the judge did not make his findings in a  vacuum,  he
    was clearly alive to the issue, and I am not satisfied that  he  simply
    discounted this finding from his  assessment  of  proportionality.  The
    judge was  entitled  to  attach  significant  weight  to  the  historic
    injustice argument and concluded, having been satisfied on the evidence
    before him that, but for the historic wrong, the Appellant  would  have
    settled in the UK as a child, he found that this  ordinarily  would  be
    sufficient to outweigh the public interest in  maintaining  immigration
    control.

40.   In this appeal, the Respondent has not relied  on  any  countervailing
    factor, such as poor immigration history or criminality that would have
    been capable of displacing  that  presumption.  In  any  event,  it  is
    further plain that the judge  went  beyond  the  consideration  of  the
    historic injustice argument at [28] and weighed into the balance  those
    additional factors referred to therein. That he was entitled to do.

41.   It is true that his consideration of section 117B  of  the  2002  Act,
    was in error of law. Mr Jaisri acknowledged that this was not conducted
    within the correct legal framework, but he submitted, in  view  of  the
    significant  weight  attached   to   the   historic   injustice,   such
    consideration would have made no material difference to the outcome  of
    this appeal. I agree with that submission. The judge gave adequate  and
    sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that  there  was  family  life  and
    dependency between the parties and having reached  conclusions  in  the
    affirmative to the first four questions in Razgar, went on to  consider
    the issue of proportionality.

42.    It  has  not  been  demonstrated  by  the  Respondent  that  the  two
    considerations identified by Mr Clarke; ability to  speak  English  and
    financial independence, even if considered correctly, would  have  been
    of such great or significant weight to have outweighed the other issues
    identified by the judge in this appeal, namely the  significant  weight
    attached to the historic  injustice  argument  and  the  other  factors
    identified at [28]. I therefore find that even  if  the  judge  was  in
    error by not properly applying the provisions of section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act, it was not material in view of the matters set out above  and
    does not justify the setting aside of the decision. The decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal shall  stand;  the  appeal  of  the  Respondent  is
    dismissed.




Notice of Decision

The decision allowing the appeal  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
stand; the Respondent's appeal shall be dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                       Date: 12/11/2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral




