
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/02740/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 July 2017                          |  On 24 July 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ARJUN GURUNG
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Mannan, Counsel, instructed by Jusprowess
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (Appellant)  against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Spicer (the judge), promulgated on 22 March 2017, allowing
        the Respondent's appeal against the Appellant's  refusal,  dated  7
        July 2015, of his  human  rights  claim  made  on  article  8  ECHR
        grounds, which was upheld by an Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) on 26
        October 2015.


   Background


     2. The Respondent is a national of Nepal,  date  of  birth  27  August
        1985. The following facts are  not  in  dispute.  The  Respondent's
        father was a member of the Brigade of Gurkhas. He  served  from  23
        October 1962 to 14 October 1968. He passed away on 9 March 2010. On
        21  May  2009  the  Secretary  of  State  announced   discretionary
        arrangements for the settlement in the UK of members of the Brigade
        of  Gurkhas  who  were  discharged  before   1   July   1997.   The
        discretionary arrangements were amended  on  5  January  2015.  The
        Respondent's mother qualified for a widow settlement Visa under the
        discretionary arrangements and entered the UK on 7 August 2012.  On
        14 June 2015 the Respondent applied for entry clearance  to  settle
        in the UK as the adult dependent child of his  mother.  He  was  29
        years of age at the date of the application.

The Reasons for Refusal Letter

     3. The Appellant noted that, under the discretionary  arrangements  in
        existence at the date of decision,  the  Respondent's  father  must
        have settled in the UK or was  in  the  process  of  being  granted
        settlement. The Respondent could not meet these requirements as his
        father was deceased and  the  discretionary  arrangements  made  no
        provision for adult children of an ex-Gurkha widow.  The  Appellant
        noted that the Respondent had lived apart from his mother for  more
        than  2  years.  The  Appellant  noted  the  absence  of  any  care
        arrangements that had been  put  into  place  by  the  Respondent's
        mother before she migrated to the UK. The Appellant concluded  that
        the  Respondent  was  therefore  able  to  care  for  himself.  The
        Appellant was unclear as to why the Respondent was not  working  in
        Nepal given that he was in good health and  had  been  educated  at
        University up until 2005. The Appellant was not satisfied that  the
        Respondent met the requirements for leave  to  enter  as  an  adult
        dependent relative under Appendix FM of the immigration rules.  The
        Appellant then considered The Respondent's article 8  ECHR  rights.
        Having regard to the observations identified  above  the  Appellant
        concluded that there was no family life between the Respondent  and
        his mother. The  Appellant  finally  concluded  that  the  historic
        injustice to which Gurkhas had been subjected did not outweigh  the
        proportionality assessment under article 8. It  is  significant  to
        note that the ECM reviewing the decision stated:

         From the documents the [Respondent] has  submitted,  I  am  indeed
         satisfied that article 8 (1) is engaged.


        The ECM however concluded that the ECO's decision was proportionate
        and appropriate.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     4. There was no attendance by a representative for  the  Appellant  at
        the First-tier Tribunal hearing. Although she attended the  hearing
        the Respondent's mother was not required  to  give  evidence  other
        than to confirm her  husband's  date  of  birth.  The  judge  heard
        submissions from the Respondent's representative. In  her  decision
        the judge accurately set out the chronology of events and  recorded
        the core elements of the Respondent's  evidence.  The  judge  noted
        that the Respondent had four married sisters in Nepal, that at  the
        time of his application he had been living with his  older  brother
        and his wife, and that before his mother's departure he  had  lived
        with her as  a  family  unit.  The  Respondent  was  unmarried  and
        unemployed and was said to be emotionally attached to  his  mother.
        This evidence was reiterated by  the  Respondent's  mother  in  her
        statement. She had visited him in Nepal from  April  to  July  2013
        because she was missing him very much. The  judge  found  that  the
        sponsor made regular financial transfers to the Respondent and that
        the telephone records provided indicated  regular  contact  between
        the Respondent and his mother. The  judge  noted  the  Respondent's
        educational  qualifications  and  set  out   the   terms   of   the
        discretionary  arrangements  contained  in  Appendix   K   to   the
        immigration rules. The judge concluded that  the  Respondent  could
        not meet the requirements of Appendix  K  or  the  requirements  of
        Appendix FM for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.


     5. The judge then considered article 8 outside the immigration  rules.
        The judge directed herself as to the 5 pronged test established  in
        Razgar [2004] UKHL 27. The judge noted, at [43],


          I find that the decision and not to grant entry clearance to the
          [Respondent] is an interference with the [Respondent's] right to
          respect for his family life. This has been acknowledged by the
          entry clearance manager who has accepted that article 8 (1) is
          engaged.


   6. The judge went on to consider the issue of proportionality. She
      accepted that the Respondent's family could have come to the UK at any
      time after 1968 but for the historic injustice. The judge found that
      the Respondent satisfied most of the requirements in Apendix K but for
      the fact that his father was not granted settlement. The judge then
      considered the relationship between the Respondent and his mother by
      reference to the authority of Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170. At [48]
      the judge found that the effect of the Appellant's decision would be
      to enforce continued separation of the Respondent and his mother. The
      judge repeated the ECM's concession that family life existed between
      the Respondent and the sponsor. The judge then considered the factors
      set out in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002. The judge finally considered the effect of the historic
      injustice identified in Gurung & Ors, R (On the Application Of) v The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and
      Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT
      00567 (IAC). The judge concluded, having been satisfied on the
      evidence before her, that, but for the historic wrong, the Respondent
      would have settled in the UK as a child. Applying both Gurung and
      Ghising the judge found that this ordinarily would be sufficient to
      outweigh the public interest in maintaining immigration control. The
      judge noted that the Appellant had not relied on any countervailing
      factor, such as poor immigration history or criminality that would be
      capable of displacing that presumption. Having specifically stated
      that she had weighed the relevant competing factors and applied the
      appropriate guidance established in the cited authorities the judge
      concluded that the Appellant's decision constituted a disproportionate
      interference with the right to respect for family life and allow the
      appeal under article 8.

The grounds of appeal and submissions by the parties

   7. The grounds repeated many of the points made in the original Reasons
      For Refusal Letter. It was argued that the family ties did not
      demonstrate emotional dependency to the Kugathas standard and that
      there was no "... evidence of further elements of dependency,
      involving more than the normal emotional ties." It was claimed that
      the evidence before the FTT did not substantiate a finding of
      emotional or financial dependency 'beyond the norm'. It was submitted
      that the proportionality assessment could not be assessed in the
      Respondent's favour as his mother came to the UK by choice 2 years and
      10 months prior to his application. The grounds further contend that
      there was no reason why the current sponsorship arrangements could not
      continue and that there was no obvious reason why family life could
      not continue in Nepal. The judge's reasoning in respect of section
      117B was said to be insufficiently reasoned and speculative in that
      the weight attached by the judge to the 'historic injustice' diluted
      its meaning as historic injustice was just one aspect of the
      proportionality assessment.


   8. Permission was granted by Judge of the first-tier Tribunal Cruthers
      who found that the grounds were arguable.


     9. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing I raised with Mr  Tufan
        the issue of the concession made by the ECM.  Mr  Tufan  recognised
        the relevance of this  concession  and  had  anticipated  it  being
        raised. He accepted that the concession had never  been  withdrawn.
        He did not seek at this very late stage to withdraw the concession.
        Whilst accepting that the concession was very generous Mr Tufan did
        not submit that the ECM was not rationally  entitled  to  make  the
        concession on the evidence before him or her. Mr Tufan  highlighted
        some aspects of the judge's decision that were not entirely  clear,
        such as her finding that the Respondents family could have come  to
        the UK at any time after 1968 in circumstances where the Respondent
        was only born in 1985, but accepted  that  the  concession  greatly
        restricted the scope of argument based on the grounds of appeal.

Discussion

    10. The grounds take issue with the  judge's  finding  that  there  was
        family life between the Respondent and  his  mother  of  sufficient
        strength such as to attract the operation of article 8(1).  On  the
        basis of the evidence before the judge she was, it  was  contended,
        not rationally entitled to find  the  existence  of  emotional  and
        financial bonds over and  above  those  normally  expected  between
        adult children and their parents.


    11. The judge's conclusions as to the existence  of  family  life  were
        however based on a clear and unambiguous  concession  made  by  the
        ECM. I am satisfied that the ECM was rationally entitled to concede
        that the requirements of article 8(1) were  met.  The  Respondent's
        representations to the ECM indicated that he  had  lived  with  his
        mother in a single family unit until she came to the  UK,  that  he
        was  single,  unemployed  and  was  financially   and   emotionally
        dependent on his mother. I  note  in  the  context  of  immigration
        control that there is no legal or factual  presumption  as  to  the
        existence or absence of family life for the purposes of Article  8,
        and that the love and affection between an  adult  and  his  parent
        will not of itself justify a finding of family life. There  has  to
        be 'something more'. I am satisfied there was  sufficient  evidence
        before the ECM entitling him  or  her  to  conclude  that,  on  the
        particular facts of this case, there was 'something more' (applying
        Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ.
        630, which was considered in Butt v Secretary of State for the Home
        Department [2017] EWCA Civ 184, and Rai v Entry Clearance  officer,
        New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ 320). Although a  generous  decision,  it
        cannot be said that the ECM's concession was one he or she were not
        rationally entitled to make on the evidence before them.


    12. Nor can it be said that the judge acted in an irrational manner  by
        accepting the unchallenged concession made by the  ECM.  The  judge
        had before her the same evidence produced by the Respondent for his
        entry clearance application and for the ECM review, as well as  the
        witness statement from the Respondent's mother and  the  voluminous
        evidence  of  money  transfers  and  telephone  calls  between  the
        Respondent and his mother, which is evidence of real, committed and
        effective support. Given the clear terms of the concession made  by
        the ECM, and the evidence going to the nature of  the  relationship
        between the Respondent and his mother,  the  judge  was  rationally
        entitled to conclude that the relationship between  the  Respondent
        and his mother went beyond  normal  emotional  ties  and  that  the
        Respondent  was  financially  and  emotionally  dependent  on   the
        sponsor.


    13. When assessing the proportionality of the Appellant's decision  the
        judge properly directed herself as to the  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27
        approach and took into account all  the  relevant  public  interest
        factors in section 117B of the 2002 Act and those relied on by  the
        Appellant in her decision. The judge was entitled, on the  evidence
        before her, to note that the Respondent's  mother  was  capable  of
        financially supporting him and that he intended, in any  event,  to
        work in the UK.


    14. As the recent Court of Appeal decision in  Rai  v  Entry  Clearance
        officer makes clear, the historic injustice  visited  upon  Gurkhas
        and their families is a significant factor that must be weighed  in
        the  proportionality  balancing  exercise  (applying   Gurung   and
        Ghising). The judge's finding of fact that the Respondent's  family
        would have applied for settlement in the UK but  for  the  historic
        injustice was one rationally open to her (see paragraph 42 of Rai).
        The judge attached appropriate weight to the historic injustice and
        demonstrably  considered  whether  there  were  any  countervailing
        public interest factors.


    15. In light of  the  ECM's  concession  the  judge  properly  directed
        herself in accordance with the  appropriate  legal  principles  and
        gave appropriate consideration to both sides of the proportionality
        assessment. I am not persuaded that the judge  misdirected  herself
        in respect of the weight she attached to the historic injustice. In
        the circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  does  not
        disclose any error  of  law  sufficient  to  render  it  unsafe.  I
        therefore dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a  material  error.  The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed.

Signed
[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
                                Date 21 July 2017


