
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
HU/02007/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 13 June 2017                          |On 14 June 2017           |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                              Mr RAJESH GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Washam, Counsel
      (instructed by N C Brothers & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Dineen on 28 April 2017 against the determination
           of First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk who had dismissed  the  appeal
           of the Appellant seeking settlement as the dependant  of  an  ex
           Gurkha soldier on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   The  decision  and
           reasons was promulgated on 11 November 2016.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Nepal.  It was accepted  that  he
           was the son of a former soldier in the Brigade of Gurkhas.   The
           Appellant's father is deceased and his widow has settled in  the
           United Kingdom.  The judge found that the Appellant remained his
           parents' dependant, was living in the family home in Nepal where
           his parents (latterly, his mother) spent time each year and that
           family life continued  in  Article  8  ECHR  terms.   The  judge
           nevertheless dismissed the appeal because she found  that  there
           were no compelling circumstances, as the Respondent had  applied
           her own policy which took sufficient account  of  the  "historic
           wrong" and the Appellant's depression was not such  as  to  have
           caused him to seek treatment.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it was considered  that
           the judge had erred was arguable that the judge had erred in her
           approach  to  Article  8  ECHR  proportionality  by  failing  to
           consider   the   "historic   wrong"   principle   for   herself,
           notwithstanding the Secretary of State's exercise of discretion.




      4.    Standard directions were made by  the  tribunal.    No  rule  24
           notice was filed by the Respondent.




      Submissions


      5.    Mr  Wilding  for  the  Respondent  candidly  accepted  that  the
           determination could not be defended.  The judge had  found  that
           there was family life for Article  8  ECHR  purposes,  and  most
           importantly  had  unchallenged  evidence  before  her  that  the
           Appellant would have settled in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
           father much earlier had he been  able  to  do.   The  judge  had
           materially erred  by  failing  to  apply  Ghising  (Gurkhas/BOC:
           historic  wrong:  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567  (IAC)  to  those
           findings.  Immigration control had to give way where  there  was
           no other legitimate aim  being  pursued  for  Article  8.2  ECHR
           purposes.  No other legitimate aim had been  identified  by  the
           judge.  There was no objection by the Respondent to the  onwards
           appeal's being allowed, and the  original  decision  remade  and
           allowed.


      6.    Ms Wagham for the Appellant was content with this  approach  and
           wished to add nothing further.




      Material error of law finding


      7.    In the tribunal's view, the grant of permission  to  appeal  had
           identified  precisely  the  error  into  which  the  judge   had
           inadvertently fallen.  This is an area of  Article  8  ECHR  law
           which can often seem far from  straightforward.   It  was  right
           that Mr Wilding helpfully indicated immediately that the onwards
           appeal must be allowed and the tribunal accepts his  submissions
           to such effect.


      8.     The  decision  and  reasons  was  careful,  and  there  was  no
           suggestion that the judge's  factual  findings  were  deficient.
           Unfortunately, the judge did not mention Ghising (above).  There
           are other cases with a similar or the same name and  it  may  be
           that the correct and relevant citation  was  not  given  to  the
           judge: the tribunal could not identify any corresponding note of
           any relevant submission  in  the  neat  and  legible  record  of
           proceedings.


      9.    Again as Mr Wilding submitted, had the correct  Ghising  (above)
           been applied to the judge's findings of fact, the only  possible
           outcome would  have  been  that  the  appeal  should  have  been
           allowed.




      Appeal remade


       10.  Little needs to be added.  A material  error  of  law  has  been
           identified as noted above.  The judge's  factual  findings  were
           sufficient and stand. This appeal must be remade on the basis of
           those findings. Adult dependency and corresponding  family  life
           having been found to exist on  an  unusual  set  of  facts,  the
           Gurkha  "historic  wrong"  outweighs  immigration  control   for
           Article 8 ECHR proportionality purposes.  The appeal is allowed.
            There was no suggestion of any need for anonymity.


      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed


      The  making  of  the  previous  decision  involved  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law.   The  original  decision  is  remade  and
allowed.

      Signed                                  Dated      13 June 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








      TO THE RESPONDENT:
      FEE AWARD
      The appeal succeeded and the tribunal makes a full fee award


      Signed                                  Dated 13 June 2017




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


