
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02361/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 22 November 2017                           |On 27 November 2017          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    J V P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M Paul ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 18 January 2017, in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of  leave
    to remain in the UK as dependent  partner  of  a  points  based  system
    migrant.


 2. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ but given  the  allegation,
    yet to be decided, as to the appellant's  honesty  he  is  entitled  to
    anonymity in these proceedings.


Background

 3. Prior to submitting the application which gave rise to the respondent's
    decision and the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  had
    previously applied for leave on 13 April 2012;  he  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate issued by the Educational Testing  Service  in  support  of
    that application. The respondent identified  that  his  test  had  been
    undertaken by  a  proxy  and  refused  the  current  application  under
    paragraph 322  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  grounds  that  the
    appellant had submitted false  documents  in  support  of  the  earlier
    application.


 4. The appellant issued a notice of appeal requesting an oral  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal. By the time of the hearing before the FTTJ the
    appellant had notified the Tribunal that he wanted the hearing to be on
    the papers. The FTTJ's decision records that the appeal was  "heard  on
    the papers" on 11 January 2017 but the decision  is  dated  16  January
    2017 and it was promulgated on 18 January 2017.

 5. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    respondent had failed to comply with the direction that she  serve  her
    evidence by 8 November 2016; nor had the respondent complied with  Rule
    24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  It was averred the FFTJ had  not  complied
    with R25 in making his decision on the papers without an oral  hearing.
    It was also contended in the grounds of appeal that the FTTJ had failed
    to follow the approach in SM & Qadir v SSHD (ETS - Evidence - Burden of
    Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC).

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  "arguable,
    given the evidence on the IAC case  file,  that  the  judge  failed  to
    appreciate that the appellant cancelled his oral hearing, not in  order
    to avoid cross-examination, but because the Tribunal  had  advised  him
    that the respondent had submitted no evidence. Evidence  was  submitted
    by the respondent very late in the day and  it  is  arguable  that  the
    judge may have fallen into procedural error in disposing of the  appeal
    in the manner he did."

 7. Hence the matter came before me.

Preliminary Issue

 8. Both representatives indicated that a potential preliminary  issue  had
    been identified. Before  me  Ms  Ahmad  submitted  that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction for the appeal. She referred to the Immigration Act  2014.
    She noted the application had been made by  the  appellant  in  January
    2015 and the decision of the respondent was taken  in  July  2015.  She
    said that appeal rights had been withdrawn for points based  applicants
    on 20 October 2014; thus the appellant did not have a right of  appeal.
    Nor could jurisdiction be waived by mistake (Virk v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 652).


 9. Mr Singh, for the appellant, noted that the appellant had  applied  for
    leave to remain as the dependent of a points based migrant. As this was
    an issue which had been raised at short notice, he had been  unable  to
    research the relevant legislation. He made no positive submissions as a
    result. He noted  the  respondent's  refusal  letter  had  invited  the
    appellant to pursue an appeal against the refusal; he  submitted  that,
    if this was not correct, the appellant's position had  been  prejudiced
    by the respondent's misrepresentation of his rights.

10. The Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002  Act")  was
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014.  In so  doing  it  restricted  the
    appeal rights available. While it is correct to state that some  appeal
    rights were lost from 10 October 2014, these  were  those  relating  to
    Tier 4 applications.  All other points  based  scheme  applicants  lost
    their appeal rights from 2  March  2015.  On  6  April  2015  remaining
    applicants under  the  Immigration  Rules  lost  their  appeal  rights.
    Dependents of  points  based  scheme  migrants  fall  into  the  latter
    category. They are  covered  by  the  transitional  provisions  in  the
    Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement  No  4,  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 ("the 2015 Order"). In the case of
    the appellant he made his  application  on  15  January  2015  and  the
    respondent's decision was made on 1 July 2015; he thus  benefited  from
    the transitional provisions.

11. This was in fact decided by the Duty Judge  on  27  January  2016,  the
    issue having been raised by the respondent by  email  to  the  Tribunal
    when the notice of appeal was served on her.

12. For these reasons, I find that the appellant  had  a  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent.

Submissions on error of law

13. Mr Singh adopted the grounds of appeal to this tribunal  which  I  have
    summarised above. He said that if the respondent's documents  had  been
    served on 5 January, this was only a matter of days before the date  on
    which the FTTJ had decided the appeal on the  papers.   I  referred  Mr
    Singh to the notice  of  directions  dated  15  December  2016  on  the
    tribunal file; he took instructions and advised  me  that  neither  the
    appellant nor his solicitors had received those directions. In essence,
    the appellant had relied on the respondent's failure to serve a  bundle
    in accordance with the Procedure Rules and the directions issued  after
    the notice of appeal had been lodged. He  had,  as  a  result,  decided
    there was no need for him to attend the hearing: the respondent had not
    adduced evidence such that the  burden  of  proof  would  pass  to  the
    appellant,  pursuant  to  SM  &  Qadir.  It  was  submitted  there  was
    procedural unfairness in the failure of the FTTJ to adjourn the hearing
    to enable the appellant to address the respondent's evidence which  had
    been served late.


14. For the respondent, Ms Ahmad submitted that the issue was  whether  the
    FTTJ had acted fairly; whether, had further evidence  been  adduced,  a
    different  decision  would  have  been  reached.   In  any  event,  the
    appellant  had  not  sought  an  oral  hearing  after   receiving   the
    respondent's documents on 5 January 2017.

Discussion

15. The appellant's solicitors wrote to the Tribunal on  23  November  2016
    asking whether the respondent had provided her bundle and  noting  that
    the oral hearing was scheduled for 9 January 2017. Mr Singh produced an
    email from the tribunal dated 30 November 2016 confirming the  Tribunal
    had not received the respondent's bundle. The  appellant  then  emailed
    the Tribunal the  following  day,  1  December  2016,  to  state  that,
    although he had requested an oral hearing in his notice of  appeal,  he
    now wanted a hearing on the papers.  The appellant had the  benefit  of
    legal advice and would no doubt have been told  the  essence  of  SM  &
    Qadir,  namely  that  the  evidential  burden  was  initially  on   the
    respondent in the appeal and that the burden of proof would  only  pass
    to the appellant if the respondent had discharged it; to  do  that  she
    would have had to adduce  evidence  to  support  her  position  in  her
    reasons for refusal of leave to remain.  She would have to produce,  at
    the least, the generic evidence to which reference  is  made  in  SM  &
    Qadir.  The respondent had  failed  to  adduce  that  evidence  by  the
    deadline in the notice of directions issued on 11 October 2016. Nor did
    the respondent comply with Rule 24 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  which
    requires the respondent to provide her evidence "within 28 days of  the
    date on which the Tribunal sent to the respondent a copy of the  notice
    of appeal".   Thus the respondent had not complied with either of those
    provisions.


16. The appellant  was  entitled  to  assume,  given  the  failure  of  the
    respondent to adduce the generic evidenced required, that  he  did  not
    need  to  provide  further  evidence  in  support  of  his  appeal.  In
    particular, it was not unreasonable for him to assume that  the  appeal
    could be heard on the papers, in the absence of any evidence  form  the
    respondent. I am in no doubt that his  decision  to  request  that  the
    hearing be heard on the papers was for that reason; the timing  of  the
    correspondence  between  his  solicitors,  himself  and  the   tribunal
    supports this.

17. In the absence of challenge, I accept the appellant and his  solicitors
    did not receive the fresh directions  issued  by  the  tribunal  on  16
    December 2016; these were initiated by the tribunal as a result of  the
    appellant's decision to request a hearing on the papers.

18. I have considered whether the appellant should have  responded  to  the
    receipt of the respondent's bundle on 5 January 2017,  for  example  by
    requesting an oral hearing.  However, I consider that, irrespective  of
    whether that was an option for the appellant, it was incumbent  on  the
    FTTJ to consider the reason why the appellant had requested  a  hearing
    on the papers.   He did not take  into  account  that  the  appellant's
    request had followed an exchange of correspondence with the tribunal to
    ascertain whether the respondent's  bundle  had  been  received.  I  am
    satisfied  that,  had  he  taken  that  into  account,  he  might  have
    considered whether to adjourn the  hearing  to  establish  two  issues:
    whether the appellant still wanted the hearing to be on the papers  and
    whether the appellant wanted to produce evidence of an  explanation  by
    way of response to the generic evidence (pursuant to SM & Qadir).


19. The power to adjourn the hearing was in Rule 4(3)(h). Also relevant  is
    Rule 2 which  sets  out  the  overriding  objective  and  the  parties'
    obligation to co-operate with the Tribunal. The  respondent  failed  to
    abide by the Rules and the directions issued in October 2016. The  FTTJ
    was required to deal with the appeal fairly and justly.

20. This appeal was a matter of considerable importance  to  the  appellant
    who had been accused by the  respondent  of  deception,  an  allegation
    which would have far-reaching consequences for the appellant, not  only
    in respect of his right to remain or enter this country.


21. The issue in this case, as Ms Ahmad rightly submitted, is  whether  the
    appellant has had a fair hearing. I am satisfied he has not: he  sought
    a hearing on the papers in the reasonable belief that the tribunal  did
    not have any  evidence  from  the  respondent  and  in  the  reasonable
    assumption that the appeal was likely to be successful in  the  absence
    of such evidence.   The FTTJ failed to take into account the reason for
    the appellant's decision to request a hearing on the papers. Indeed  he
    drew adverse inference from the appellant's failure to  participate  in
    an oral hearing finding that the appellant did not take the test  [14].
    He stated that "The fact the appellant did not attend and was therefore
    not available to be tested on any of this, means that the  evidence  is
    all one way. It follows that I am satisfied  that  the  respondent  has
    established on the balance of probabilities that the appellant did  not
    take the test".  Thus FTTJ has failed to give any consideration to  the
    appellant's documentary and witness evidence which was before him.

22. For these reasons I am satisfied that the  FTTJ  erred  in  failing  to
    appreciate the reason the appellant had requested an oral  hearing  and
    inappropriately drawn an adverse inference from  the  appellant's  non-
    attendance.  That was a procedural error which amounts to an  error  of
    law. The appellant should have been given the  opportunity  to  address
    the late evidence of the respondent to the effect hat the test had been
    taken by a proxy.  The error is material because  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal  might  have  been  different:  the  FTTJ  failed  to  give  any
    consideration at all to the evidence of the appellant  on  the  grounds
    that it had not been tested. The same might be said of the respondent's
    witness statements yet the FTTJ gave them evidential weight whereas  he
    gave none to the witness statement of the appellant.

23. The parties' representatives agreed that, in the event of one  or  more
    material errors of law, the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. That is an appropriate course  given  the
    nature of the errors. The appellant is entitled to a fair hearing.

Decision

24. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of material errors on law and procedure.  The  decision  is  set
    aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be  dealt
    with afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ N M Paul.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  24 November 2017

