

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02694/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House              |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 19 June 2017                   |On: 12 July 2017                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                MRS MK PATEL
                       (anonymity directionS not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr A Janjua of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Presenting Officer


                                                  DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of India, appeals against the decision of the
      respondent to refuse to grant  her  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules. First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Hussain in a decision  dated  2016  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.


   2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-Tribunal Judge  Astle  on  8
      May 2017 saying that it is arguable that  the  Judge's  assessment  of
      reasonableness under  paragraph  276  ADE  and  his  failure  to  make
      adequate findings and conduct  the  evaluation  exercise  needed.  The
      permission Judge further noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge does
      not refer to section 117B (6) in his assessment of the appeal  outside
      the Immigration Rules.


   3. The grounds of appeal argue the following which I summarise. The Judge
      has made an irrational finding because the key issue before the  Judge
      in respect of the Immigration Rules was the reasonableness test  under
      paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv). The Judge fell into  error  when  he  said
      that it has been held that children after the  age  of  10  years  are
      mostly focused on their parents. In other words, until that  age  they
      are capable of adapting to their environment. The jurisprudence of the
      Tribunal has recognised that children form ties outside the home  from
      the age of four which is  the  age  that  a  child  enters  compulsory
      education. The Judge has failed to make adequate findings.


   4. The Judge has failed to conduct  the  evaluation  exercise  or  it  is
      inadequate which is required in PD and  others  (article  8  conjoined
      family claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT  108  (IAC).  The  Judge  made  a
      material misdirection of law by failing to give  proper  consideration
      to the private life ties built up by the appellant's  daughter  during
      her now eight years, although it was seven years at the  date  of  the
      hearing. The Judge has failed to appreciate that eight years residence
      in and of itself points towards it being prima facie  unreasonable  to
      remove the child. The Judge has failed to make adequate  findings  and
      has failed to assess where the appellant's daughter's  best  interests
      actually lie.


   5. The Judge failed to consider  material  evidence  in  respect  of  the
      child. The child in a letter expressed her  wishes  to  live  in  this
      country and his omission to consider vitiates the  Judge's  assessment
      of her best interests and reasonableness.


   6. The Judge made a material misdirection  of  law  when  he  refused  to
      consider  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  stating   that
      exceptional circumstances are needed to consider the appellant's  case
      outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  Judge  misdirected  himself  and
      imposed an  unlawful  gateway  threshold.  The  Judge  has  failed  to
      consider the Article 8 statutory considerations set out  in  paragraph
      117B of the 2002 Act,  which  is  a  complete  answer  to  the  public
      interest question and was relevant in respect of the appellant and her
      husband.


 Findings as to whether there is an error of law in the decision

   7. The Judge found that the appellant does not satisfy paragraph 276  ADE
      and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The  Judge  found  that  the
      appellant and her husband cannot succeed  under  Appendix  FM  because
      neither of them are British  citizens,  settled  in  this  country  or
      persons who have leave as a refugee or humanitarian protection.  There
      is no error of law in his finding that the appellant and  her  husband
      are not captured by EX 1.  This  is  a  sustainable  finding  and  not
      subject to appeal.


   8. After having found  that  both  the  appellant  and  her  husband  can
      relocate to India, the Judge considered  their  child's  circumstances
      and considered whether her  circumstances  changes  anything  for  the
      appellant and her husband.  The Judge referred to the case of  PD  and
      others which was also referred to in the grounds of appeal. The  Judge
      correctly directed himself and said  that  he  must  consider  at  the
      totality  of  the  evidence,  including  all  the  appellant's  family
      members. This was a proper direction that the Judge gave himself.


   9. At paragraph 20, the Judge stated that the fact that  the  appellant's
      child has lived in this country for  seven  years,  there  is  nothing
      remarkable about the child's life. He stated that like  most  children
      in this country of that age, she lives with her  parents  and  attends
      school. The Judge stated, "it has been held that children  up  to  the
      age of 10 years are mostly focused on their parents".  The  Judge  did
      not specifically identify that the appellant's child as  a  qualifying
      child under section 117B, however I find that the Judge has considered
      all the relevant criteria in that section.


  10. The test in paragraph 117B, is reasonableness of return which  is  the
      test that the Judge applied. If a child is a qualifying child for  the
      purposes of section 117B of the 2002 Act, the issue will generally  be
      whether it is not reasonable for  that  child  to  return.  The  Judge
      clearly found that it is  not  unreasonable  for  the  appellant,  her
      husband and the child to return to India as a family unit.  As  stated
      in EV Philippines that the child's best interests are to be  with  her
      parents wherever they live.


  11. In the case of R (on the application of Osanwemwenze) v SSHD 2014 EWHC
      1563 which was not specifically concerned with  section  117B  it  has
      some relevance in terms of the reasonableness of a child  leaving  the
      UK. In this case, the claimant's 14-year-old stepson from Nigeria  had
      been in the United Kingdom for more than 7  years  and  had  leave  to
      remain in his own right. It was held that this was  an  important  but
      not an overriding consideration and it was reasonable  to  expect  the
      claimant's family including the stepson to relocate  to  Nigeria.  The
      parents had experienced life there into adulthood and would be able to
      provide for the children and help them to reintegrate. In AM (S  117B)
      Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that when the  question
      posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed in relation  to  children
      by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must  be  posed  and  answered  in  the
      proper context of whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
      follow its parents to their country of origin.


  12. In the case of Azmi-Moyed and others [2013] UKUT 00197 it  was  stated
      that seven years from the age of four is likely to be more significant
      to a child in the first seven years of life.


  13. The Judge found that the appellant's daughter was seven years old  and
      young enough to adapt to life in India, which is the  country  of  her
      parent's  heritage.  I  do  not  find  this  is  a  perverse   finding
      considering the jurisprudence on the issue  of  children  accompanying
      their parents to the country from which they come and where they lived
      before they came to the United Kingdom.


  14. The Judge considered the appellant's child's welfare at  paragraph  21
      of the decision and found that there is nothing in the evidence before
      him which suggests that the child's welfare would suffer such a degree
      of harm as to adversely affect her overall welfare.


  15. The grounds of appeal do not refer to any evidence that the Judge  did
      not consider, other than the letter from the child which  stated  that
      she wants to live in this country. There is  no  indication  that  the
      Judge did not consider this evidence. The Judge is not required to set
      out in his decision every piece of evidence before him. It is  obvious
      from the decision that the Judge was aware that the  child  wanted  to
      continue to live in this country when he stated, "whilst life in India
      may not be comfortable for the appellant and the facilities  available
      to her may not be as rich and varied as it is in this  country,  there
      is nothing on the evidence before me,  to  suggest  that  the  child's
      welfare would suffer such degree of harm as to  adversely  affect  her
      overall welfare". This demonstrates that the Judge  did  consider  the
      child's welfare on her return to India.  The  child's  views  are  one
      consideration but ultimately the test is the reasonableness of return.


  16. The Judge found that none of the appellant's family could satisfy  the
      Immigration Rules and there  is  no  material  error  for  failing  to
      consider the appellant,  her  husband  or  her  child's  rights  under
      Article 8. It has been held that Article 8 does not allow a person  to
      choose the country in which they wish to live.  The  Judge  said  that
      there are no exceptional circumstances where the  appellant  would  be
      granted leave to remain under Article 8 when she could not satisfy the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules, which are Article 8  compliant.
      There is no material error of law in the Judge's  finding  that  there
      are  no  exceptional  circumstances  in  the  appellant's  case  which
      warrants consideration outside the Immigration Rules and under Article
      8.


  17. Furthermore, the evidence before the Judge  was  that  the  first  and
      second appellant's right to remain in this country was on a  temporary
      basis as the first appellant and her husband came to this  country  as
      visitors on 19 December 2004. He also considered that on 25 May  2008,
      she gave  birth  to  her  daughter  while  she  was  in  this  country
      unlawfully. Her applications for leave to remain in this country  were
      refused  and  her  appeal  was  dismissed  on  30  October  2012.  The
      appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  the  decision  was
      refused. This immigration history demonstrated to the Judge  that  the
      appellant must have known that she would have to return to India  with
      her family when she no longer had a right to live in this country. The
      Supreme Court commented on this aspect in  Patel  and  ors  UK  SC  72
      [2013] at page 55 to 56, noting the limited utility of temporary leave
      in considering Article 8 issues.


  18. In the case of R (on the application of MA (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v
      Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  and  Another  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 705 it was  held  (notwithstanding  reservations)  that  when
      considering whether it was reasonable to remove a child  from  the  UK
      under rule 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules and section  117B(6)
      of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a  court  or
      tribunal should not simply focus on the child but should  have  regard
      to the wider public interest considerations, including the conduct and
      immigration history of the parents. It was also confirmed however that
      if section 117B (6) applies then "there can be no doubt  that  section
      117B(6) must be read as a self-contained provision in the  sense  that
      Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions specified  in  the
      sub-section are  satisfied,  the  public  interest  will  not  justify
      removal." It was additionally held, however,  that  the  fact  that  a
      child had been in the UK for seven years should be  given  significant
      weight in the proportionality exercise  because  of  its  relevant  to
      determining the nature and strength of the child's best interests  and
      as it established as a starting point that  leave  should  be  granted
      unless there were powerful reasons to the contrary.


  19. The Judge was entitled in the circumstances to  find  that  there  are
      powerful reasons for why the appellant her husband and the appellant's
      child  should  not  be  granted  leave  to  remain  in  this  country,
      considering all the evidence in the appeal.


20. I find that there is no material error in the  decision  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge. The Judge gave legally sustainable reasons  for  his
   finding that the family unit can  return  to  India  and  continue  their
   family and private life. I find that no differently constituted  Tribunal
   would come to  different  conclusion  on  the  facts  of  this  case  and
   considering the jurisprudence on the issue.


Decision


Appeal dismissed


Signed by


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs                                 S                                  Chana
    This 29th day of June 2017


