
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02397/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2021                     |On 26 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                           Ibingo Princess Briggs
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Yetunde Alabi, solicitor with Kingscourt
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Stephen Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 23 January 2020 to refuse her leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on human rights grounds, either within the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as
    amended) by reference to paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM,  or  outside
    the Rules. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.



Background

 2. The appellant is a 28 year old woman.  She was born in Nigeria in  1992
    and it seems that in or about 2008, she  suffered  a  stroke  while  in
    Nigeria.  On 28 June 2010 she came  to  the  United  Kingdom  with  her
    mother and two siblings, to join her  father  who  was  studying  here.
    They all had dependant visas.

 3. The appellant's leave to  remain  was  extended,  first  as  a  Tier  4
    dependant and later as a Tier 2 dependant until 20 November  2014,  but
    on 19 February 2014, her father's visa and those of his dependants were
    curtailed to expired on 20 April 2014.

 4. The appellant has not had valid leave to remain since then.

 5. On 20 November 2014, she made a further application as an adult Tier  2
    dependant, which was refused with an in-country right of  appeal.   She
    was appeal rights exhausted on that application on  23  February  2017.
    She was 24 years old.

 6. The present application was made on 8 February 2019, on the basis  that
    her mother and  her  younger  brother,  who  was  still  in  full  time
    education, both had leave to remain as her  father's  dependants.   The
    appellant said that she was living with them.  The appellant  said  she
    had lived in the United Kingdom for almost  9  years,  that  she  still
    suffered from the consequences of her earlier stroke, and that she  was
    unable to travel for medical reasons.

 7. When refusing her further leave to  remain  on  23  January  2020,  the
    respondent said that the appellant could not meet the Rules, that there
    were no very significant obstacles to her return to Nigeria,  and  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances for which leave to remain ought
    to be granted outside the Rules.   Nigeria had a functioning healthcare
    system, and she had no terminal illness.

 8. Applying N v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Terrence
    Higgins Trust intervening) [2005] UKHL  31,  the  respondent  concluded
    that the appellant could not succeed.   The respondent did not have the
    benefit of the decision  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC  17,  which  was
    handed down three months later, on 29 April 2020.



First-tier Tribunal decision

 9. The First-tier Tribunal  applied  the  Supreme  Court  decision  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) and took account  of  the  appellant's  medical  conditions,
    which are set out at [28].  The only medical evidence  was  part  of  a
    letter dated 16 July 2109  from  Croydon  University  Hospital  to  the
    appellant's general medical practitioner, Dr Georgine Whyte of Thornton
    Road Surgery, but only the first page of that letter was provided.  The
    name of the author was not provided.

10. At [40], the judge noted that the appellant's father no longer had  any
    existing leave to remain in the United Kingdom and could accompany  her
    back to Nigeria and help her there.  At  [48],  the  judge  noted  that
    there was no witness statement from the  appellant's  mother  or  other
    family  members,  although  there  were  unsigned,  undated  proofs  of
    evidence, and that no family member had attended to be  cross-examined.



11. The appellant's health was properly considered at  [26]-[28]:  she  had
    been  diagnosed   with   'benign   hypermobility   syndrome;   previous
    haemorrhagic infarct; headache; seizures; dizziness; asthma; previously
    low  vitamin  D;  family  history   of   sickle   cell   disease;   and
    hypertension'.  The appellant was taking cinnarizine (an  antihistamine
    which  makes  you  drowsy),  topiramate  (an  epilepsy   and   migraine
    treatment), asthma inhalers, amitriptyline (also a  migraine  and  pain
    remedy, which she takes at night), vitamin  D  and  glucosamine  (which
    helps protect joints).   The appellant  had  been  receiving  treatment
    from the  NHS  without  paying  the  contribution  required  from  non-
    nationals.

12. None of the more recent letters provided  by  the  appellant  indicated
    that there had been further significant deterioration  in  her  health,
    nor were the conditions relied upon said  to  be  life-threatening.  At
    [28], the judge recorded that the only evidence that the appellant  was
    unfit to fly was Ms Alabi's assertion to that effect.  Dr Ho-man  Kwong
    at Thornton Road Surgery in a letter dated 11 September 2019  expressly
    said that he could not comment on whether the appellant was fit to fly.



13. The First-tier  Judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  given  evasive
    evidence about whether she still had  family  in  Nigeria.   The  judge
    considered it likely that she had: at  [37]-[38]  the  judge  expressed
    surprise at the vagueness of the appellant's recollection of her family
    ties there:

         "38. ... On consideration, given that the  appellant  was  aged  17
         when she came to the United Kingdom, I find it  surprising  to  say
         the least that she has such a hazy recollection of her wider family
         in Nigeria, including whether her parents have  any  siblings,  and
         whether she had even met any of them.  Taken in the round with  the
         fact that her parents and siblings were not present at the  hearing
         to be cross-examined on their evidence, I find this damaging to the
         appellant's credibility, and I am unpersuaded  that  the  appellant
         has no family ties in Nigeria as claimed, or that, if she did, they
         would be unable to look after her.  On balance, I find that  it  is
         likely that she has family members in Nigeria who could assist  her
         on return."

14. At [44], the judge observed that the  appellant's  father  was  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully and her mother and siblings only had  limited
    leave to remain.  The judge accepted that the appellant 'could  not  be
    expected to return to Nigeria alone, given her many  health  problems'.
    Her other family members were not settled in the United Kingdom and  if
    she really needed their support, it remained open  to  the  appellant's
    mother, brother or father to return to Nigeria with her.  The  family's
    enhanced role in caring for the appellant  was  not  accepted,  on  the
    evidence before the judge.

15. The First-tier Judge found that the appellant had  not  discharged  the
    burden of demonstrating that she would be unable to access  appropriate
    healthcare  in   Nigeria  and  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to her re-establishing her private life in Nigeria.

16. In balancing all the relevant factors under Article 8 outside the Rules
    at [52], the judge said this:

         "52. ...I accept that the appellant has established a private  life
         in the United Kingdom with her family, friends and through her past
         studies and Church membership over  the  past  10  years.   I  also
         accept that she came to the United Kingdom with her family, not out
         of her own choice.   The  appellant's  poor  health  is  of  course
         central to her claim.  It is clear ...that over the past 10  or  so
         years, the appellant has unfortunately been subjected to  a  number
         of health complaints, many of them serious in nature, which have no
         doubt derailed her life in  many  ways.   One  can  only  have  the
         greatest sympathy for what she has gone through, and  continues  to
         go through, at such a young age.   It  has  required  her  to  seek
         treatment on the NHS, which understandably she  does  not  want  to
         disrupt by returning to Nigeria. "

17. Only 'little weight' could be given to the appellant's private life  in
    the United Kingdom and her removal would be proportionate.

18. For the appellant, Ms Alabi raised Article 3 ECHR at the hearing,  with
    relation to the appellant's medical conditions,  having not  previously
    indicated that she would rely on it.  The Tribunal permitted  Ms  Alabi
    to argue Article 3, although she acknowledged that  this  was  not  the
    appellant's strongest claim.  There was no medical evidence to  support
    the appellant's claim that the  flight  could  be  fatal  to  her.   No
    efforts had been  undertaken  to  establish  what  treatment  would  be
    available in Nigeria and there was no medico-legal  report  or  country
    expert evidence to assist the First-tier Judge.  The  First-tier  Judge
    applied AM (Zimbabwe) but found that the standard therein was not met.

19. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.  The appellant appealed to the
    Upper Tribunal.



Grounds of appeal

20. The appellant's challenge was to the  First-tier  Judge's  findings  of
    fact and credibility, in particular the judge's findings on the lack of
    Kugathas family life are challenged.  Ms Alabi, who settled the grounds
    of appeal, asserted that to remove the appellant would destabilise  the
    whole family situation.


21. The appellant's father had completed  his  PhD  and  had  worked  as  a
    lecturer but no longer  had  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  was
    currently unable to work in academic life as he had.  He had now passed
    the retirement age of 60 which applied in Nigeria and would not be able
    to seek employment if he returned there.

22. The rest of her family still had leave to remain and were on the  route
    to settlement.  They  were  working  and  studying,  enabling  them  to
    support the appellant financially, physically and emotionally. Ms Alabi
    argued that as the judge had accepted at [44] that the appellant  could
    not be expected to return alone  to  Nigeria,  given  her  many  health
    problems, it would be unduly harsh to expect her  family  members,  who
    had jobs and lives enabling them to care for her, to uproot  themselves
    in the pandemic and in uncertain  times.   Removing  the  appellant  to
    Nigeria  would  result  in  irreversible  decline  in  her  health  and
    wellbeing.



Permission to appeal

23. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge  McClure  who  set
    out the various factual challenges  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   His
    decision continued:

         "2.  The issue with regard to the cerebral haemorrhage  being  made
         by the judge was that it had occurred at least 10  years  prior  to
         the date of the doctor's letter, if not more.  Subsequent to  that,
         the appellant had applied to study  at  University  in  the  United
         Kingdom and been granted leave on that basis.  Whilst by reason  of
         a further medical problem, she was unable to complete a  University
         course, nevertheless, she had recovered enough from the haemorrhage
         and  had  the  advantage  of   the   [United   Kingdom]   education
         opportunities provided.

         3.   A valid point is made by the judge [that] if the family are so
         concerned  as  to  the  welfare  of  the  appellant  they  can,  if
         necessary, care for her in Nigeria.  There is no abs "

24. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.



Rule 24 Reply

25. The respondent did not  prepare  a  Rule  24  Reply  to  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.

26. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

27. For the respondent, Mr Walker said that the appellant had been  stymied
    by the lack of any concrete family evidence to support  her  contention
    that it would be disproportionate to return her to Nigeria and that she
    depended on her family members at the Kugathas level, such  that  there
    was still family life between her and them.  Her  family  members  were
    present during the First-tier Tribunal hearing  and  could  have  given
    evidence, but chose not to do so.  There were also some  pages  missing
    from the Croydon University Hospital report.   Mr  Walker  argued  that
    there was no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  decision
    and asked me to uphold it.

28. For the appellant, Ms Alabi relied on the grounds of appeal and  argued
    that there was sufficient evidence to show that the appellant's medical
    conditions were deteriorating.  She accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    provided no evidence of conditions in hospitals in Nigeria, and that no
    signed witness statements or oral  evidence  other  than  that  of  the
    appellant had been provided.

29.  Ms  Alabi  continued  to  assert  that  the  appellant's  health   was
    deteriorating and her family her main support.  Her mother  and  sister
    had attended the hearing (which was remote) and gave the appellant  her
    medications during the hearing.  Ms Alabi accepted that  the  appellant
    could have given evidence, but said that the  appellant  had  not  been
    very strong that day and that the appellant's solicitors had  made  the
    choice for her just to give  evidence  and  to  rely  on  her  family's
    'witness statements'.  The appellant had been able to have  someone  to
    go to hospital with her, despite the pandemic, because  she  could  not
    attend alone.  She had fainting spells.

30. Ms Alabi asserted that there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge and that it should be  set  aside  and
    remade afresh.



Analysis

31. The appellant's challenges are really disagreements with  the  findings
    of fact and credibility made by the judge on the very limited  evidence
    provided.

32. Unsigned 'witness statements' are nothing of the kind: they are  merely
    the solicitor's proof of evidence as to what  the  witness  might  say,
    with no confirmation that the witness has seen or  approved  it.   That
    can sometimes be remedied, if a witness gives evidence and  adopts  the
    document, but that did not happen here.

33. I remind myself of the narrow circumstances in which it is  appropriate
    to interfere with a finding of fact by a First-tier Judge who has heard
    the parties give oral evidence: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran)  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [90]
    in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke, with whom Lord Justice Chadwick
    and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed.

34. That standard  is  not  met  here.  There  is  neither  perversity  nor
    Wednesbury unreasonableness in  the  judge's  reasoning  which  on  the
    contrary is careful, proper, intelligible and adequate to  support  the
    conclusions reached.   I  decline  to  interfere  with  the  First-tier
    Judge's findings of fact and credibility.

35. Out of an abundance of caution, I asked to be sent the full version  of
    the curtailed medical letter from Croydon University Hospital dated  16
    July 2019 and Ms Alabi provided it during the hearing.  The author  was
    Dr Natalie Horwood PhD FRCP, a  consultant  rheumatologist  in  Croydon
    Hospital's Rheumatology Department.    She  wrote  to  the  appellant's
    general  medical  practitioner,  Dr  Georgia  Whyte,  copying  in   the
    appellant.  After  listing  the  conditions  and  medications   already
    referred to above, Dr Horwood said this:

         "Thank you for referring this 26-year-old Lady to the  Rheumatology
         Department.   She is not currently working.  She used to train as a
         chef.  For quite a while, she  has  had  pain  in  her  joints  and
         previously has been told she was hypermobile as  a  child.   Things
         have worsened over the past year.

         She was sent for some physiotherapy in Hayes.  The  physiotherapist
         thought she would [need] to have  a  Rheumatology  opinion  due  to
         ongoing pain.  She is complaining of pain mostly  around  the  hips
         and knees and this can keep her awake at night."

36. That part of the letter was in the bundle before the First-tier  Judge.
    The omitted part of the letter continued as follows:

         "She finds it difficult to get comfortable.  She also gets swelling
         in her ankles and more recently with some finger  pains.   She  has
         pain lying down at night  but  also,  she  finds  it  difficult  to
         [manage] stairs or walking any distance.  She is using a  stick  in
         her right hand.

         She has moved in from the Oxted area.  I do not have access to  her
         investigations, but apparently, her blood tests were  normal.   She
         has also been noticing some clicking  in  the  knee  on  the  left,
         morning stiffness can be up to an hour, but there were no  features
         of connective tissue disorders, although she does have a history of
         sinusitis.

         On examination, she has a Beighton score of 9/9.  She  has  stretch
         marks on her thighs and mild pes planus (flat feet).  There  is  no
         frank joint synovitis.

         My impression is that [this is] a  benign  hypermobility  syndrome.
         Heart sounds are normal, but I have arranged an echocardiogram  and
         also booked an MRI scan of her  hips  and  knees  (both).   I  have
         updated her blood tests and told her  that  we  need  to  keep  her
         vitamin D levels up in the high 70s.  Currently  it  is  50,  so  I
         would advise she takes an additional 1000iu (25mcg) daily.

         I will refer her on to physiotherapy if nothing comes back from the
         scans unexpectedly."

37. I am satisfied that even had this letter been available in full to  the
    First-tier Judge, it would not have altered the findings  of  fact  and
    credibility made.   The appellant has suffered from hypermobility as  a
    child, and still does, which causes pain.  She had a stroke, some  time
    before 2008, when she lived in Nigeria, but was able to study at degree
    level in the United Kingdom, and later to train as a chef.

38. The evidence before this judge was not strong  enough  to  support  the
    assertions made by Ms Alabi on the appellant's behalf.  The  appellant,
    despite her health troubles, has  not  shown  that  she  can  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, nor that there  are  exceptional
    circumstances for which she should be granted leave to  remain  outside
    the Rules.

39. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal  decision.
    I uphold the decision of the First-tier Judge and dismiss the appeal.


DECISION

40. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      23 March
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

