
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02319/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Working Remotely by Skype for Business        |                              |
|On 18 February 2021                           |On 04 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              OKANLAWON SOPITAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:        Mr S Galliver-Andrew instructed by Migrant
                  Legal Project (Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born  on  22  July  1967.
    His immigration history was a matter in dispute.   He  claims  to  have
    entered the  UK  in  1986.   That  was  subsequently  disputed  by  the
    respondent on the basis that  the  stamp  within  his  passport  was  a
    forgery.  The appellant remained in the UK  until  June  2006  when  he
    returned to Nigeria.  He came back  to  the  UK  in  August  2006.   He
    returned with leave as a visitor valid until 1 January 2007.

 3. On  27  January  2009,  the  appellant  submitted  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain based upon fourteen years' residence.   That
    application was refused with no right of appeal.

 4. On 9 March 2012, the appellant submitted an application  for  leave  to
    remain as the unmarried partner of a person settled in  the  UK.   That
    application was also refused with no right of appeal.

 5. On 18 October 2014, the appellant was served with notice  of  intention
    to remove (IS151A).

 6. On 24 August 2015, the appellant made a human rights claim  relying  on
    Art 8.  That claim was refused and certified.  The appellant  only  had
    an out of country right of appeal which he did not exercise.

 7. On 10 May  2016,  the  appellant  made  an  asylum  application.   That
    application was refused with no right of appeal.

 8. On 1 June 2016, the appellant made an application as a potential victim
    of trafficking but that was also refused.

 9. On 5 April 2017, the appellant submitted an application  for  leave  to
    remain based upon his private and family life under Art 8.

10. Then, on 28 August 2018 he  submitted  an  application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain which was refused.

11. On 24 January 2020, the Secretary of State  refused  his  human  rights
    claim made on 5 April 2017.  The basis of that application, in addition
    to  relying  upon  his  private  life  in  the  UK,  relied  upon   his
    relationship with his 'partner' in the UK under the relevant  Rules  in
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).  In  refusing
    the appellant's application, the Secretary of State concluded that  the
    applicant could not meet the requirements of the ten-year  route  as  a
    partner (R-LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d) of Appendix  FM).   In  particular,
    the Secretary of State concluded that the appellant's claim fell to  be
    refused as he did not meet  the  suitability  requirement  in  para  S-
    LTR.4.3. on the basis that he had made a false representation by  using
    a passport which contained a false or  fraudulent  stamp  in  it.   The
    Secretary of State also concluded that the appellant could not  succeed
    under Art 8 either under  the  Rules  (namely  para  276ADE(1)(vi))  or
    outside the Rules.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 2 October 2020, Judge  Page  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal.
    First, the judge found that the suitability ground in  para  S-LTR.4.3.
    of Appendix FM did not apply.  He found that  it  was  not  established
    that the appellant had knowingly used deception in  the  light  of  the
    fact that the Home Office, at the hearing, had not sought to obtain and
    provide  any  verification  evidence  to  prove  that  the  appellant's
    passport had a forged or counterfeit stamp in it.   Indeed,  the  point
    was not pursued by the HOPO before judge Page.

13.  Having  made  that  finding,  Judge  Page  went  on  to  consider  the
    appellant's claim under the Rules and Art 8 of the ECHR.  First, he set
    out para EX.1 of Appendix  FM.   The  appellant  relied  upon  EX.1(b),
    namely that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner
    in the UK who was a British citizen and that there were "insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK".

14. At para  22  of  his  determination,  Judge  Page  made  the  following
    findings:

         "The  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office  advice  is  that  British
         citizens are advised not to travel  to  Nigeria.   The  appellant's
         wife would have to provide a negative  test  certificate  96  hours
         before being allowed to board a  flight  to  Nigeria  and  pre-book
         another test seven days after arrival.  There are dangerous  levels
         of COVID-19 in the provinces in Nigeria documented on  the  Foreign
         and Commonwealth Office website.  It would plainly be  an  obstacle
         to the appellant's partner if she had to take the risk if she  went
         there with the appellant while he sought  entry  clearance  as  her
         partner.  She is in work as a nurse and is entitled  to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom as a British citizen and if  the  appellant  was
         removed to Nigeria it would put an end to their  cohabitation  akin
         to married life.  There would plainly be an interference with their
         protected  right  to  family  life  under  Article  8  and   having
         established that interference the burden is upon the respondent  to
         justify the interference on  the  balance  of  probabilities  as  a
         legitimate  and  necessary  interference   proportionate   to   the
         legitimate aim of immigration control.  She is in employment and is
         able  to  support  him   financially   in   the   United   Kingdom.
         Consequently, I cannot see any great public interest  in  requiring
         him to return to Nigeria to obtain the necessary entry clearance to
         return as her partner.  For these reasons I find that the appellant
         does meet the requirements of EX.1 and EX.2 above of  Appendix  FM.
         As this Immigration Rule is met this must be of great weight in the
         balancing exercise that I must perform under Article 8".

15. Then at para 23, the judge went on to find that para 276ADE(1)(vi)  was
    not met if the appellant returned alone as:

         "There would not be very significant difficulties because he  could
         do it, albeit with hardship.  As I have found  that  the  appellant
         meets the requirements of EX.1 and EX.2 because of his relationship
         with his British citizen partner he cannot reasonably  be  expected
         to go to Nigeria in  the  current  circumstances.   Findings  under
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) are otiose in any event".

16. Then at para 24 the judge  reached  the  following  conclusion  on  the
    appeal:

         "For the above reasons I allow the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules under Article 8".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  She did so on a number of grounds.   First,  the  judge  had
    conflated   two   separate   issues,   namely   whether   there    were
    "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing in  Nigeria  under
    para EX.1 and whether  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    appellant to  return  to  Nigeria,  in  particular  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application.  Secondly, as regards that latter issue, to  the
    extent that the judge sought to apply Chikwamba v SSHD [2008]  UKHL  40
    in concluding that the appellant could not be expected to go to Nigeria
    to seek entry clearance, the judge had made no finding as to whether or
    not an entry clearance application  was  bound  to  succeed.   Further,
    following the UT's decision in Younas (section  117B(6)(b);  Chikwamba;
    Zambrano) Pakistan [2020] UKUT 129 (IAC), the judge had failed to  take
    into account s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    (as amended) and the public interest issues in determining  that  there
    was a breach of Art 8.  Thirdly, in respect of  the  issue  under  para
    EX.1, the judge failed adequately to reason why there  would  be  "very
    serious hardship" in returning to Nigeria given the  COVID-19  pandemic
    prevalent throughout the world and that the situation in Nigeria was no
    more dangerous than in other parts of the world including parts of  the
    UK itself.  Finally, the judge  failed  to  identify  the  "exceptional
    circumstances" justifying a finding that Art 8 was breached given  that
    the relationship between the appellant and his partner  was  formed  in
    full knowledge that he had no right to be in the UK.

18. On 23 October 2020, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Parkes) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on all grounds.

19. In response, the appellant filed a rule 24 response dated  20  November
    2020 seeking to uphold Judge Page's decision.

20. The appeal was listed  at  the  Cardiff  Civil  Justice  Centre  on  18
    February  2021  with  the  UT  working  remotely.   Mr   McVeety,   who
    represented  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  Mr  Galliver-Andrew,  who
    represented the appellant, joined the hearing  remotely  by  Skype  for
    Business.

Discussion

21. It was accepted before me that the judge's finding that the suitability
    ground in para S.LTR.4.3. of Appendix FM  was  not  applicable  to  the
    appellant, stood unchallenged.

22. The 10-year route for leave to remain as a  'partner'  is  set  out  in
    Section R-LTRP.1.1(a), (b) and (d).  It was accepted before me that the
    appellant's claim under the 10-year route turned upon  the  application
    of para EX.1.   It  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  meets  all  the
    suitability requirements in Section S-LTR (Section  R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i)).
    Further he meets the eligibility requirements in paras  E-LTRP.1.1.  to
    1.12 (R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii)).  But, in order to satisfy  the  requirements
    in R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(ii) and (iii), he also had  to  establish  that  para
    EX.1 applied.  That was also the position before Judge Page.

23. So far as relevant para EX.1 provides as follows:

         "(b)     The applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
             with a partner who is in the UK  and  is  a  British  citizen,
             settled in  the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
             humanitarian  protection,   and   there   are   insurmountable
             obstacles to family life with that partner continuing  outside
             the UK".

24. Paragraph EX.2 defines what "insurmountable obstacles" mean as follows:



         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) 'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner".

25. If the appellant satisfies the requirements of para EX.1, and therefore
    mets the requirements for leave to remain as a 'partner',  there  would
    be no public interest in removing him and in  those  circumstances  his
    removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR (see TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1109 at  [34]  per  Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals).

26. If, however, the appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules
    then his claim outside the Rules would require  an  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of his removal balancing the impact upon him  (and  his
    partner)  of  removal  against  the  public   interest   in   effective
    immigration control.  In such circumstances, the public interest  would
    only be outweighed if there were unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  to
    the appellant and/or his partner (see R (Agyarko and  Another)  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11 at [48] and [50] per Lord Reed).

27. In a case where an individual claims that there is no  public  interest
    in their removal because after leaving the UK  they  would  be  granted
    entry clearance, requires an assessment of whether an  entry  clearance
    application would be  successful  and,  even  if  it  would,  that  the
    balancing exercise under Art 8.2 be undertaken  having  regard  to  the
    relevant  considerations  set  out  in  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (see Younas  at  [83]-[90],  explaining
    the House of Lords' decision in Chikwamba).

28. In this appeal, Mr McVeety submitted that the judge conflated the issue
    of "insurmountable obstacles" under para EX.1 with the issue of whether
    the appellant should be required to return to Nigeria simply to  obtain
    entry clearance.  Indeed, in that latter regard, Mr  McVeety  submitted
    the judge failed also to find whether the  appellant  would,  in  fact,
    meet the entry clearance requirements as a partner.

29. Mr Galliver-Andrew submitted that the judge had not conflated  the  two
    issues.  He had made a clear finding that para  EX.1  was  met  on  the
    basis that there were "insurmountable obstacles" to the  appellant  and
    his partner continuing their family life in Nigeria.  He had come to  a
    reasoned decision based upon the length of their relationship, that his
    partner  was  a  nurse  who  worked  in  the  NHS  and   the   COVID-19
    circumstances, including that his  partner  had  previously  contracted
    COVID-19 and her evidence was that her "body is never  the  same"  (see
    para 16 of the determination).  Mr Galliver-Andrew  accepted  that  the
    decision might not be the most cohesive but the judge  had  made  quite
    clear the basis on which he had made his findings and the appellant had
    succeeded in establishing para EX.1  applied  and  that  therefore  his
    removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.   Mr  Galliver-Andrew  accepted
    that there were some problems around the judge's consideration  of  the
    Chikwamba issue as he had not made any findings as to  whether  or  not
    the  appellant  would  meet  the  requirements  for  entry   clearance.
    Although Mr Galliver-Andrew contended that the appellant would in  fact
    meet the requirements as a partner, he accepted that the judge had made
    no finding in that regard.

30.  The  judge  appear  to  reach  his  ultimate  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal on the basis that the appellant met the requirements
    of the Rules as a 'partner', in particular  the  requirements  of  para
    EX.1.   The  judge  specifically  said  that  the  appellant  met   the
    requirements of para EX.1 in para 22 of his determination and, it would
    appear, his  decision  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  "under  the
    Immigration Rules under Article 8" set out in para 24 was,  in  effect,
    an application of the position in TZ (Pakistan) at  [34],  namely  that
    there is no public interest in removing the  appellant  who  meets  the
    requirements of the Rules.

31. That said, however, the judge's reasoning in para 22  is  not  entirely
    clear.  He conflates the issue under para EX.1, which is whether  there
    would be "insurmountable obstacles" to the appellant  and  his  partner
    continuing their family life in Nigeria, with the issue that,  applying
    Chikwamba, whether there any public interest in the appellant's removal
    to Nigeria in order to seek entry clearance.  That issue was,  however,
    irrelevant if the appellant succeeded because he met  the  requirements
    of the Rules.  It was only relevant to a claim that his  removal  would
    breach Art 8 outside the Rules.

32. Further, to the extent that the judge's reasoning was directed  to  the
    Chikwamba issue, he clearly fell into error in two respects.  First, he
    made no finding as to whether or not the appellant would meet the entry
    requirements as a partner.  It  may  well  be  that  he  would,  as  Mr
    Galliver-Andrew submitted, but the  judge  made  no  findings  in  that
    regard at  all.   Secondly,  even  if  the  appellant  would  meet  the
    requirements for entry clearance as a partner, the judge did not engage
    with the balancing exercise required even in that circumstance applying
    the considerations set out in s.117B which, as the UT  pointed  out  in
    Younas, must be undertaken even if the Chikwamba  principle  is  relied
    upon.

33. Taken together with the lack of clarity  in  the  judge's  reasoning  -
    moving between para EX.1 and proportionality - these errors are, in  my
    judgment, fatal to his ultimate disposal of the appeal by  allowing  it
    under Art 8.

34. But, in any event, even  if  the  judge's  reasoning  can  be  seen  as
    exclusively directed towards the issues  under  para  EX.1,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the judge's reasoning is sustainable.

35. Whilst the judge set out the requirements of EX.1 and  the  meaning  of
    "insurmountable obstacles" in para EX.2, it is  not  clear  whether  in
    para 22 of his determination, in finding that the requirements of  EX.1
    and EX.2 were  met,  he  properly  applied  that  definition  and  gave
    adequate reasons for concluding that the requirements were met.

36. In Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925, the Court of Appeal identified  the
    proper approach to determining whether under para EX.1 (by reference to
    the  definition  in  para   EX.2)   an   individual   has   established
    "insurmountable obstacles" to their family life continuing abroad.   At
    [36], the Court said this:

         "In applying this test, a logical  approach  is  first  of  all  to
         decide whether the  alleged  obstacle  to  continuing  family  life
         outside the UK amounts to a very  significant  difficulty.   If  it
         meets this threshold requirement, the next question is whether  the
         difficulty is one which would make it impossible for the  applicant
         and their partner to continue family life together outside the  UK,
         if not, the  decision-maker  needs  finally  to  consider  whether,
         taking account of any steps which  could  reasonably  be  taken  to
         avoid or mitigate the difficulty, it would nevertheless entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner (or both)".

37. As the Court of Appeal in Lal noted (at [37]), Lord Reed said (at [43])
    in Agyarko that the test had to be:

         "understood in a practical and  realistic  sense,  rather  than  as
         referring solely to obstacles which make  it  literally  impossible
         for the family to live together in the country of origin of the non-
         national concerned".

38. In para 22 of his determination, Judge Page concluded that  the  impact
    of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  in  Nigeria  was  "an  obstacle"  to   the
    appellant's partner going with the appellant  to  Nigeria.   The  judge
    said that in the context of  his  going  to  Nigeria  to  obtain  entry
    clearance.  The judge also noted that the appellant's partner worked as
    a nurse in the NHS and,  no  doubt,  by  that  reference  captured  the
    appellant's case, and his partner's evidence, concerning  her  role  in
    the NHS and that she had been ill with COVID-19.  The  judge  did  not,
    however, address whether that obstacle amounted to a "very  significant
    difficulty" - the first issue identified  in  Lal  when  applying  para
    EX.2.

39. Further, and if it did, the judge  did  not  make  any  finding  as  to
    whether that difficulty made it "impossible" for the applicant and  his
    partner to continue their family life in Nigeria and, if  it  did  not,
    whether any steps could  reasonably  be  taken  which  would  avoid  or
    mitigate the difficulty and whether nevertheless returning  to  Nigeria
    would entail "very  serious  hardship"  to  the  appellant  and/or  his
    partner - the second and third issues identified in Lal  when  applying
    para EX.2.

40. That was the approach - described as the "logical approach" to applying
    EX.2 - by the Court of Appeal in Lal.  Whilst it is  not  necessary  to
    apply a rigidly structured approach to the issues under para  EX.2,  in
    determining whether there are "insurmountable obstacles", the essential
    elements of para EX.2 have to be addressed and, with adequate  reasons,
    findings made in favour of an individual before it would be  proper  to
    conclude that para EX.2 is satisfied.

41. I accept Mr McVeety's submissions that the judge's reasoning in para 22
    cannot sustain his conclusion that the appellant succeeded under Art 8.
     In this appeal, I am  persuaded  that  the  judge's  findings  do  not
    reflect sufficiently the elements of para EX.2 and, as  a  result,  his
    reasons are not  adequate  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Rules.  The judge was, it would  appear,  deflected
    from the essential elements of para EX.2 by focusing, at various points
    in para 22 of his determination,  upon  the  issue  about  whether  the
    appellant (and his partner if necessary) should be required  to  return
    to Nigeria to obtain entry clearance.  That, of course, was a  separate
    issue (arising under Art 8 outside the Rules) from whether  there  were
    "insurmountable obstacles" for their family life continuing in  Nigeria
    so that the requirements of para EX.1 were met.

42. In summary, therefore,  the  judge  failed  properly  to  consider  the
    elements of para EX.1. read with para EX.2 and  wrongly  conflated  the
    issues under para EX.1 and those relevant to the  Chikwamba  issue  and
    whether there was any public interest in removing the appellant  if  he
    could succeed in obtaining entry clearance as a partner  on  return  to
    Nigeria.

43. For these reasons, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 involved the making of a material error  of  law  and  that
    decision cannot stand.  It is set aside.

44. At the end of the hearing, I invited the views of  the  representatives
    as to the proper disposal of the appeal if I concluded that the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision could not stand as  a  matter  of  law.   Both
    representatives accepted that the decision would  need  to  be  re-made
    and, Mr Galliver-Andrew indicated, both the appellant and  his  partner
    might well wish to give evidence.  Both representatives  accepted  that
    the judge's conclusion (at para 21)  in  relation  to  the  suitability
    requirement was not  challenged  and  should  stand.  In  addition,  Mr
    McVeety accepted that the only remaining live issue under  the  10-year
    route for leave as a 'partner' was para EX.1.  The genuineness  of  the
    relationship and the remaining eligibility requirements in E-LTRP.1.1.-
    1.12. were not in dispute.



Decision

45. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 involved the making of an  error  of  law.   That  decision
    cannot stand and is set aside.

46. In the light of the extent and nature  of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal to re-make  the  decision  in  respect  of  Art  8.   The
    findings referred to above at  para  45  are  preserved,  including  in
    relation to the suitability requirement.  The appeal should be heard by
    a judge other than Judge Page.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            22 February 2021

