

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02880/2015
                                                               HU/04616/2015
                                                               HU/04608/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2017                       |On  6 July 2017                      |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                 [CLIVE B.]
                                [SHELLEY W.]
                                 [MESHA B.]

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Malik, instructed by Ansah Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are  nationals  of  Jamaica,  husband,  wife  and  their
    daughter, who was born  in  2010.   They  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on human rights grounds against the  respondent's  refusal  to
    grant  them  leave.   Judge  Rayner  dismissed  their   appeals.    The
    appellants have permission to appeal to this Tribunal  on  one  ground,
    identified by Judge Allen in granting permission.  It is that the judge
    erred in law in failing to take into account any applicable  discretion
    when applying the Rules on long residence.

 2. The appellants' applications  were  not  made  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence, but as I understand it, it  was  common  ground  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that if they had qualified under  the  Rules,
    that was a matter to take into account in assessing the proportionality
    of the present refusal.  Paragraph 276B of the Statement of Changes  in
    Immigration Rules, HC395 (as amended) has, as the  primary  requirement
    for leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long  residence,  that  the
    applicant "has had at least ten years continuous  lawful  residence  in
    the United Kingdom".  It is also required by that  paragraph  that  the
    applicant must not be in the United Kingdom in  breach  of  immigration
    laws, except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days  or
    less will  be  disregarded.   Paragraph  276A  provides,  in  part,  as
    follows:

             "For the purposes of [paragraph] 276B...
             (a)  "continuous  residence"  means  residence  in  the  United
               Kingdom for an unbroken period, and  for  these  purposes  a
               period shall not be considered to have been broken where  an
               applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for a period  of
               6 months  or  less  at  any  one  time,  provided  that  the
               applicant in question has existing limited leave to enter or
               remain upon their departure and return ...."

 3. There is no doubt that the first and second appellants'  leave  expired
    in 2011.  There is some confusion in the judge's calculations,  because
    he appears to have thought that the 28 days condoned unlawful  presence
    for which provision is made in paragraph 276B was  to  be  regarded  as
    lawful presence.  That cannot, of course, be right: if it were  lawful,
    it would not need to be condoned.  The judge concluded that  the  first
    appellant's lawful residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  expired  on  12
    November 2011, when the respondent refused an application he  had  made
    for leave outside the Rules.  There has been no subsequent challenge to
    that conclusion.  The second appellant's lawful presence in the  United
    Kingdom ended on 28 March 2011, when a similar application by  her  was
    refused.  The question in each case is whether,  by  the  date  of  the
    expiry of their leave, either of them had achieved 10 years  continuous
    lawful residence.

 4. In the first appellant's case, it  is  simply  impossible.   His  first
    entry to the Untied Kingdom was 8 October 2002, which is less  than  10
    years before his leave expired.  The second appellant's  case  is  more
    complex.  At the hearing before me Mr  Malik  produced  her  passports,
    from which I was able to obtain detailed information on  her  movements
    which had not been available to Judge Rayner.  She  first  entered  the
    United Kingdom on  2  September  2000.   She  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom, lawfully, until 30 August 2001, when she returned to  Jamaica.
    She applied for a new entry clearance in Jamaica, which was granted  on
    18 February 2002.  It was used on 1 March 2002, the date on  which  she
    last arrived in the United Kingdom.  She was thus absent for  a  period
    of 183 days, beginning on 30 August 2001 and ending on  1  March  2002.
    That is a period of more than six months, because months means calendar
    months, and no period of six months beginning in August 2001 could  end
    as late as any date in March 2002.  Indeed, the appellants accept  that
    the second appellant's absence was for longer than six months.

 5. Staying for the moment with the express terms of the immigration rules,
    a difficulty arises in relation to the appropriate  starting-point  for
    the calculation of  the  second  appellant's  presence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge decided that it was 1 March 2002.  At  the  hearing
    before me, Mr Malik complained that this was a mistake: it should  have
    been 1 September 2000.  This was not a point  on  which  permission  to
    appeal had been granted, but I heard his submission de bene esse.   The
    reason for the judge's decision was that, because  of  the  absence  of
    more than six months, the period  of  lawful  continuous  presence  was
    broken.  Thus, that period, as calculated  by  reference  to  paragraph
    276A, could only have begun on the second appellant's return on 1 March
    2002.  But the answer to the question posed by Mr Malik's complaint  is
    essentially the same as that posed by the ground on which he  did  have
    permission: is there some  basis  upon  which  the  second  appellant's
    absence can or could be treated as an absence of less than six months?

 6. Mr Malik relied on published guidance in the following terms:

          "If the applicant has been absent from the UK for  more  than  six
          months in one period and more than eighteen months in  total,  the
          application should  normally  be  refused.   However,  it  may  be
          appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  over  excess  absences   in
          compelling or compassionate circumstances, for example  where  the
          applicant  was  prevented  from  returning  to  the   UK   through
          unavoidable circumstances."

 7. Mr Malik supported his grounds by reference to a number of decisions of
    the Tribunal in relation to the review of discretion and in relation to
    the application of the rules relating to long residence.   The  problem
    is, however, as I pointed out at  the  hearing,  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal available to an appellant have changed very  considerably  since
    those cases were decided in 2010, 2011 and 2012.  Before the amendments
    to the appeal  rights  introduced  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  an
    individual could appeal on the ground that the decision was contrary to
    the Immigration Rules; and could appeal also on  the  ground  that  the
    decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law,  for  example  if  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to  consider  the  exercise  of  any
    applicable discretion.  Those grounds are no longer available.   It  is
    very difficult indeed to see how  the  exercise  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's discretion outside the Rules can  fall  for  examination  in  a
    statutory appeal governed by the new appeals provisions.

 8. Mr Malik's secondary position was that if the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was going to consider the substance of the Rules at all, he ought  also
    to consider the exercise of any applicable discretion.  That cannot  be
    right.  The Secretary of State always has a discretion to  depart  from
    the Rules.  The question in a human rights appeal  of  this  nature  is
    typically whether the application of  generally  human-rights-compliant
    rules to the appellant has resulted, exceptionally, in a decision which
    disproportionately interferes with Convention rights.  That process  is
    not readily capable of being informed by considering the  circumstances
    in which there might have been departure from the Rules.

 9. In any event, I do not understand that Judge Raynor was invited to take
    any notice of the guidance or of the discretion mentioned  in  it,  nor
    that he was presented with any evidence that the length of  the  second
    appellant's  stay  in  Jamaica  was  affected  by  any  compelling   or
    compassionate circumstances.  On that basis it is very difficult to see
    how he could have erred in law by  failing  to  take  this  issue  into
    account.

10. The appellants did not meet the  long  residence  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  The judge did not err in his approach to  applying  the  Rules.
    The appellants' appeals are dismissed.












                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 4 July 2017
