
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02440/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Teams)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2021                       |On 22 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 VIKAS PURI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondents:   Mr Y Din, counsel, instructed by Lova Solicitors ltd


This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Microsoft Teams. A face to face hearing was not  held  all
issues could be fairly determined in a remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  ("the  appellant")
         appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Barker ("the judge"), promulgated on 22 October 2020, allowing  the
         human rights appeals of Mr Vikas Puri  ("the  respondent")  against
         the decision of the appellant dated 6 February  2020  refusing  his
         human rights claim.

      2. The respondent is a national of India born on  24  March  1989.  He
         entered the UK on 12 September 2010 as a student.  He  was  granted
         further periods of leave, the last valid until 28 August  2014.  An
         appeal against an earlier refusal to grant him  further  leave  was
         dismissed and he became appeal rights exhausted on 13 June 2016. On
         this date his leave, extended  by  virtue  of  section  3C  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971, expired. The respondent has  not  had  lawful
         leave since this date.

      3. On 12 December 2019 the respondent made a human rights claim  based
         on his family and private life. This was refused by  the  appellant
         on 6 February 2020.  The  appellant  was  not  satisfied  that  the
         respondent had  been  in  a  relationship  akin  to  marriage  with
         Harpreet Kaur Dhariwal, a British citizen, for at least two  years,
         or that there were insurmountable obstacles to the  respondent  and
         Ms Dhariwal  living  together  in  India.  Nor  was  the  appellant
         satisfied that the respondent would face very significant obstacles
         to his integration in India, as required by paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
         of the Immigration Rules. The  appellant  was  not  satisfied  that
         there were any exceptional circumstances  such  as  to  render  the
         refusal of the human rights claim a breach of Article 8  ECHR.  The
         respondent appealed the refusal of his human rights  claim  to  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to   s.82   of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      4. The judge had before her several  documents  contained  in  bundles
         prepared by the respondent and the appellant. This included, inter-
         alia, statements by the  respondent  and  Ms  Dhariwal,  and  three
         statements from Dr Anna Valeria Weil, a British citizen who was  75
         years old at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  A
         statement from Dr Weil contained in  the  respondent's  bundle  was
         dated 27 August 2015, a statement from Dr  Weil  contained  in  the
         appellant's bundle was  dated  9  January  2020,  and  a  statement
         contained in a supplementary bundled was dated 26  September  2020.
         The judge heard oral evidence from the respondent, Ms Dhariwal, and
         from Dr Weil. All three adopted  their  statements.  There  was  no
         cross-examination of Dr Weil.

      5.  In  her  decision  the  judge  accurately  set  out  the  relevant
         legislative  provisions  (Appendix  FM,  paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi),
         s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002) and the
         applicable legal principles in respect of the assessment of a human
         rights claim outside of the Immigration Rules (e.g.  Razgar  [2004]
         UKHL 27; MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10). The judge correctly directed
         herself as to the appropriate burden and standard of proof.

      6. In the section of her decision headed "Findings"  the  judge  found
         (and it was not  disputed)  that  Ms  Dhariwal  did  not  meet  the
         definition of 'partner' contained in Appendix FM  because  she  and
         the respondent had not been residing  together  in  a  relationship
         akin to marriage for at least two years prior to  the  respondent's
         application. The judge acknowledged that no issue  had  been  taken
         with  the  genuineness  and   subsistence   of   the   respondent's
         relationship with Ms Dhariwal. The judge found that there  were  no
         insurmountable obstacles to family life between the respondent  and
         Ms Dhariwal continuing outside the UK. The judge found  that  there
         were no very significant obstacles to the respondent's  integration
         in India, although she accepted the respondent's  account  that  he
         was estranged from his family as a result of  his  conversion  from
         Hinduism to Christianity and his relationship with Ms Dhariwal.

      7. From [55] onwards the judge considered the appeal in respect of the
         respondent's family and private life under Article  8  outside  the
         Immigration Rules.

      8. At [56] the judge found  that  the  respondent  had  established  a
         private and family life with Ms Dhariwal. At [57] to [65] the judge
         considered the  various  factors  in  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  noting,  inter-alia,  that  the
         respondent had developed a significant life in the UK although this
         had been established when he was here  precariously.  At  [66]  the
         judge found  that  the  respondent  and  Ms  Dhariwal  had  "...  a
         particularly close relationship and rely heavily on each other  for
         emotional support" but that although  she  was  obliged  to  attach
         little weight to the  relationship  given  the  time  when  it  was
         formed, it is nevertheless appropriate to attach "some  weight"  to
         the relationship.

      9. At [68] the judge indicated that, although she was  struck  by  the
         credibility of all those who gave evidence before her, she "... was
         particularly struck by the evidence of Dr Weil,  who  made  a  very
         impressive witness." At [69] and [70] the judge stated:

             "I have been provided with a comprehensive statement  from  Dr
             Weil which detailed her  relationship  with  the  [respondent]
             (ASB 8). It is clear that this relationship is  vital  to  the
             well-being of Dr Weil, and I accept that she has no family  in
             the  United  Kingdom  and  relies  on  the  [respondent]   for
             companionship and emotional and spiritual support.

             Dr Weil gave evidence that  the  impact  of  the  [respondent]
             being removed from the United Kingdom would be as she  put  it
             "tremendous". It is evident that the [respondent] provides  Dr
             Weil with support that  no  one  else  does  could.   Dr  Weil
             described the [respondent] as like a  son  to  her,  and  when
             asked whether someone could be paid to provide the same  care,
             Dr Weil said, and I accept, that this isn't possible."

     10.  At  [71]  the  judge  found  that  the  relationship  between  the
         respondent and Dr Weil went "far beyond that that could be provided
         professionally" and that Dr Weil relied on the relationship for her
         emotional well-being. It was noted that the respondent was regarded
         as  Dr  Weil's  next  of  kin  and  the  judge  found  that   their
         relationship was "one akin to a  parental  relationship"  and  went
         beyond that found in normal parental  relationships.  At  [72]  the
         judge found  that  Dr  Weil  gave  clear,  balanced,  measured  and
         powerful evidence and concluded that if the respondent was  removed
         this would be detrimental to Dr Weil's emotional  health.  At  [74]
         the judge found that separation between the respondent and Dr  Weil
         would amount to unjustifiably harsh consequences for both  of  them
         and would lead to an inability for Dr  Weil  to  lead  a  full  and
         fulfilling life.

     11. At [76] the judge indicated that she had  considered  the  evidence
         "... in the round,  including  that  contained  within  the  bundle
         relating to the [respondent's]  religious  beliefs  and  the  clear
         support he receives from leaders and members  of  his  church,  and
         applied a holistic approach, balancing the factors relating to  the
         rights of the [respondent] and the public interest."  At  [77]  the
         judge concluded given the length of time that  the  respondent  had
         resided in the UK and his strong private  and  family  life  formed
         whilst in the UK, that his  removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
         interference with Article 8. The  judge  consequently  allowed  the
         appeal on human rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The grounds  of  appeal,  amplified  by  Mr  McVeety  in  his  oral
         submissions, argue that the judge made a material  misdirection  of
         law.  The  grounds  contend  that  it  was  unclear  how  long  the
         respondent and Dr Weil had known each other or how  they  met,  and
         that there was no  finding  that  their  relationship  amounted  to
         family life for the purposes of Article  8  beyond  an  "unreasoned
         finding" that Dr Weil relies on the respondent for  "companionship,
         emotional and spiritual support." The grounds contend  that  it  is
         "extraordinary" that the judge therefore made a finding that  their
         relationship was akin to a parental relationship. The  relationship
         was no  more  than  a  friendship  and  in  any  event  a  parental
         relationship between adults did not necessarily  amount  of  family
         life for the purposes of Article 8 without a finding of  additional
         dependency. The grounds further note that a  relationship  that  is
         established when an individual's immigration status  is  precarious
         is to be afforded little weight and that the judge therefore  erred
         in attaching "any weight" (although Mr McVeety corrected  this  and
         submitted that the judge  was  instead  obliged  to  attach  little
         weight) to the relationship in her proportionality assessment.  The
         grounds further contend that the judge failed to consider  that  Dr
         Weil was entitled to the assistance of public services  in  the  UK
         should she require any support.

     13. Mr Din adopted his rule 24 response and submitted  that  the  judge
         was entitled to her  conclusions,  that  her  decision  had  to  be
         understood by reference to the  statements  upon  which  the  judge
         relied, and that there was a sufficient evidential basis  entitling
         the judge to conclude that the relationship between the  respondent
         and Ms Weil was one akin to a  parental  relationship  with  strong
         elements of dependency.

     14. I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     15. Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 (at [40]), UT  (Sri  Lanka)  v
         SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 (at [19], [26] and [27]), AA (Nigeria)  v
         SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 (at [9], [32] & [38]), and KB (Jamaica) v
         SSHD  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1385  (at  [16])  are  support   for   the
         propositions  that  different  tribunals  might  reasonably   reach
         different conclusions in respect of the  same  evidence,  that  the
         Upper Tribunal is not entitled to remake a decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal simply because it does not agree with it  or  because
         it is not as well-structured or expressed as it might be, and  that
         the basis for the First-tier Tribunal's decision  may  be  set  out
         directly or by inference. I bear these principles at the  forefront
         of my mind when assessing the judge's decision.

     16. Although it would have been preferable for the judge to  have  more
         clearly set out the context of the respondent's  relationship  with
         Dr  Weil,  she   expressly   identified   and   referred   to   the
         "comprehensive  statement"  from  Dr  Weil  which   "detailed   her
         relationship with the [respondent]" [69]. The full circumstances as
         to how the respondent and Dr Weil met are clearly  set  out  in  Dr
         Weil's statement, including the care and supported provided by  the
         respondent  to  her  when  she  was  hospitalised  in   2014,   his
         registration as her Next  of  Kin  with  her  GP  surgery  and  his
         authorisation to conduct her "final things"  on  her  passing.  The
         statements and unchallenged oral evidence from  Dr  Weil  indicated
         that she had no other relatives in the UK, that the respondent  had
         never been  a  paid  employee,  and  described  the  depth  of  the
         emotional relationship established through  the  respondent's  care
         for Dr Weil and their mutual journey converting to Christianity.

     17. The judge was entitled to refer to statements  that  supported  her
         conclusions  without  necessarily  setting  out  all  the  relevant
         content of those statements if her reasoning was apparent from  her
         decision, read as a whole. The basis for the judge's  decision  can
         readily be inferred by reference to the statements upon  which  she
         expressly relied. The  tenor  of  Dr  Weil's  statements  (and  her
         unchallenged oral evidence) indicated that the respondent  provided
         her with strong emotional support, akin  to  that  of  a  son.  The
         evidential basis for the judge's conclusion that  the  relationship
         between  the  appellant  and  Dr  Weil  involved  strong  bonds  of
         emotional  care  and  support  was  supported  not  just   by   the
         documentary and oral evidence of the appellant and Dr Weil, but  by
         the unchallenged statement of Rev Millen Bennet who indicated  that
         Dr Weil loved the appellant "as her son".

     18. The grounds note that there was no finding  that  the  relationship
         between the respondent and Ms Weil amounted to family life. So  far
         as it goes, this is correct. The respondent and Ms Weil do not have
         a  consanguineous  relationship  and  there  is  no   other   legal
         relationship  that  could  give  rise  to  family  life  (such   as
         adoption). But the judge was clearly aware  of  this  and  did  not
         suggest that there was a family  life  relationship.  At  [71]  the
         judge found that the relationship  was  one  "akin  to  a  parental
         relationship." The judge found that the  relationship  between  the
         respondent and Dr Weil displayed strong elements of attachment  and
         emotional dependency usually found in the context of a family  life
         relationship. On the basis of the evidence before her the judge was
         rationally entitled to conclude  that  the  relationship  contained
         strong elements of emotional reliance and dependency. The judge was
         also rationally entitled to find that  this  is  not  the  type  of
         support that could be replicated by the public services to which Dr
         Weil will be entitled in this country.

     19. Nor can it be said that the judge erred in law by failing to attach
         only "little weight" to the private life relationships  established
         by the respondent given  that  his  presence  has  only  ever  been
         precarious or unlawful. A holistic consideration  of  the  decision
         makes  apparent  that  the  judge  was  acutely  mindful   of   the
         requirement of s.117B(4) & (5) (see [64] to [66]). S.117B(4) &  (5)
         are not to be regarded as a straightjacket  and  have  within  them
         some limited flexibility  to  ensure  that  any  decision  made  is
         compatible with the UK's obligations under Article 8  (s.6  of  the
         Human Rights Act 1998) (see Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58, at  [49]).  At
         [53] Lord Wilson stated:

             "Although a court  or  tribunal  should  have  regard  to  the
             consideration that little weight should be  given  to  private
             life established  in  [the  specified]  circumstances,  it  is
             possible without violence to the language  to  say  that  such
             generalised  normative  guidance  may  be  overridden  in   an
             exceptional  case  by  particularly  strong  features  of  the
             private life in question ...'"

     20. The judge was legitimately entitled to  consider  that  there  were
         particularly strong  features  of  the  private  life  relationship
         between the respondent and Dr Weil and  that  the  impact  on  this
         relationship for Dr Weil required the attachment of greater  weight
         in the overall proportionality assessment. Moreover, it is apparent
         from  [76]  and  [77]  that  the  judge's   final   proportionality
         assessment did not rely solely  on  the  respondent's  relationship
         with Dr Weil but that  she  also  took  into  account  her  finding
         relating  to  the  strength  of  the   respondent's   family   life
         relationship with Ms Dhariwal and the length of  his  residence  in
         the UK. Whilst  another  tribunal  may  have  reached  a  different
         overall conclusion, I am not persuaded that  the  judge's  decision
         was one she was not entitled to reach on the  evidence  before  her
         and for the reasons given.

     21. I find that the making of the decision did not involve  the  making
         of the decision did not involve the making of an error on  a  point
         of law requiring the decision to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The judge did not make an error on a point of law.

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


D.Blum   8 June 2021

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


