
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02508/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               mrs faiza khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Tinsley, Counsel instructed by jJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Ford of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  14
    January 2019 dismissing her appeal against the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on 4 December 2017 refusing to grant entry  clearance  under
    paragraphs E-ECP.2.1 to 2.10 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge did not accept that the appellant had  shown  she  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage with the UK sponsor.  Her reasons  were
    set out at paragraphs 19 - 22:

         "19. I do not accept on the evidence before me that as at  date  of
             decision or as at date of hearing that this  relationship  was
             genuine and subsisting because;-


             (a)  The Sponsor's evidence as to how he and his  family  knew
                  the Appellant was not consistent.  He  said  that  he  had
                  come to the UK in 2009  and  that  his  parents  knew  the
                  Appellant's family because they were  neighbours  for  5/6
                  years in  Pakistan.   Yet  he  did  not  claim  any  prior
                  knowledge of the Appellant before they were married.


             (b)  The evidence of  phone  calls  between  this  couple  was
                  surprisingly limited.  The Sponsor  explained  that  there
                  were few phone calls in June and in  August  2017  because
                  the Appellant had moved to live in a mountainous area  for
                  those months and internet coverage was  poor  there.   Yet
                  there were more phone calls in May that in either June  or
                  August and a long phone call in August  was  made  3  days
                  after the Sponsor said he arrived to visit the  Appellant.
                  He has not produced his passport despite the comments made
                  by the ECM.


             (c)  There was no evidence as to what the couple did  together
                  in the course of spending 1 month, 45  days  and  53  days
                  together in March 2017, August 2017 and April  2018.   The
                  photos in the bundle were referred to  as  wedding  photos
                  and the only photos produced that I was  told  were  taken
                  during a visit after the wedding,  were  included  in  the
                  wedding photos in the bundle.  I do not find the Sponsor's
                  explanation that he had another phone and could not access
                  the photos he had taken to be credible given the length of
                  time this couple are supposed to have spent together.


             (d)  I  have  considered  the  content  of  the  social  media
                  messaging.  It does not  show  any  development  in  their
                  relationship and is limited in frequency  as  well  as  in
                  content.  There are  very  few  references  to  family  or
                  friends or to what the other person has been doing in  the
                  periods between contact.


         20.  The Appellant has been on notice since the ECM review that the
             decision was being maintained yet very little effort has  been
             made to produce relevant recent evidence in  support  of  this
             appeal.  The Sponsor told me that he had been spending 30 mins
             to an hour every day on the phone to the Appellant in the last
             5-6 months yet there was no documentary evidence of  this.   I
             was provided with a copy of the Sponsor's  flight  reservation
             for 09 January 2019 but still not provided with his  passport.
             I accept that there  is  another  flight  reservation  in  the
             bundle.


         21.  The Appellant bears the burden of proof in this appeal.  I  am
             not satisfied that the evidence produced is consistent with  a
             genuine and subsisting relationship between the  parties.   In
             so concluding I have fully considered the impact of  being  an
             arranged marriage and of cultural  factors  and  the  distance
             between the places of  residence.   The  ECO  expressed  valid
             concerns and those concerns  were  echoed  by  the  ECM.   The
             Appellant has  done  little  to  allay  those  concerns.   The
             sponsor's evidence further damaged the Appellant's case and  I
             did not find him to be a credible witness in relation  to  the
             contact between them.  I found his evidence on this  issue  to
             be evasive and vague.


         22.  Given that I am satisfied that the relationship is not genuine
             and subsisting, I am not satisfied that Article 8  is  engaged
             in relation to family life and the decision does  not  disturb
             the stablished private  lives  of  the  Appellant  or  of  the
             Sponsor.  The appeal on Article  8  human  rights  grounds  is
             dismissed."

2.   The  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  maintain  that  the  judge  gave
    insufficient reasons  for  dismissing  the  sponsor's  explanation  and
    evidence regarding his and his  family's  knowledge  of  the  appellant
    prior to marriage and had failed to appreciate that the  appellant  met
    the indicators of a genuine and subsisting marriage as set out  in  the
    IDIs, Family Members under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules,  Annex
    FM Section FM 20 in relation to an arranged  marriage.   In  amplifying
    the grounds of appeal, Mr Tinsley said that in respect of each  of  the
    sub-heads of paragraph 19 the judge failed to take  sufficient  account
    of the state of the evidence.  He took particular issue with  what  the
    judge stated at  19(b)  and  paragraph  20,  the  latter  which  stated
    categorically that there was "no documentary evidence of  [the  sponsor
    having phone conversations with the appellant] in the last 5-7 months".
     He pointed out that this wholly overlooked the documentation contained
    between pages 70-90 of the appellant's bundle  covering  the  period  5
    June 2018 to 7 September 2018 (the hearing was on 7 January 2019).

3.   Mr Clarke sought to argue that this documentation (these were  said  to
    be phone calls via IMO which is an application similar to WhatsApp) did
    not show the claimed contact of 30 minutes per day and showed very  few
    calls in June and none in July.  He did not consider that a "smattering
    of evidence covering half the period" could have been determinative.

4.   With respect to Mr Clarke, the issue concerning this  evidence  is  not
    whether it was determinative but whether it could have had  a  material
    impact on the outcome of the appeal when considered by a  judge  acting
    reasonably.  The judge's  unequivocal  statement  that  there  was  "no
    documentary evidence" represented a clear failure to take into  account
    relevant evidence.  Further, even though the judge stated that she  had
    fully considered the impact of  the  fact  that  the  marriage  was  an
    arranged marriage in a different cultural context (the couple were both
    Pashtun), it is far from clear that she did not in fact apply  criteria
    more fitted to a western marriage (see especially paragraph 19(d)).

5.    Whilst  I  consider  that  the  appellant  may   have   difficult   in
    establishing her case, I am persuaded that the judge's assessment of it
    was vitiated by legal error necessitating that I set it aside and remit
    it to the FtT.

6.   In order to assist  the  next  judge  dealing  with  this  appeal,  the
    appellant's representatives are directed to  make  available  certified
    copies of the sponsor's passport. I envisage that although the  sponsor
    will need to give oral evidence both parties  will  seek  to  focus  on
    matters arising from  the  written  and  oral  evidence  he  has  given
    already.

7.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Ford).

8.   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:                                 Date:18 April 2019

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

