
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02855/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 27 September 2019                |On 3 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         shana mohamadsharif shaikh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Maqsood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 9 May 1987. She has  been
      given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Greasley dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision
      to refuse her human rights claim.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 11 March 2011  with  leave
      to enter as a Tier 4 General Student valid until  30  September  2012.
      She applied for leave to remain on the same basis on 29 September 2012
      and was granted further leave until 28 January  2014.  On  23  January
      2014 she applied for further leave  to  remain,  again  as  a  Tier  4
      student, but on that occasion her application was refused on 19  April
      2016. She was served with  removal  papers  on  the  basis  of  having
      obtained leave to remain by deception in relation  to  the  use  of  a
      fraudulently obtained TOEIC  English  language  certificate  from  the
      Educational Testing Service, ETS, which she had submitted  in  support
      of her current and previous applications. The certificate  related  to
      an English language test taken at Synergy Business College  of  London
      on 22 August 2012. Her application was also refused on the basis  that
      she did not have a valid CAS, her  Tier  4  sponsor  having  lost  its
      licence.

   3. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was  heard
      on 6 December 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Telford who found that
      the respondent had made out the allegation of deception and use  of  a
      fraudulently  obtained  certificate.  The   appellant's   appeal   was
      dismissed on 12 January 2018 and permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal was refused. The appellant became appeal rights exhausted  on
      28 March 2018.

   4. On 10 April 2018 the appellant applied for leave to remain on  Article
      8 private life grounds. Her application  was  refused  in  a  decision
      dated 30 January 2019. The respondent considered  that  the  appellant
      failed to meet the suitability requirements in paragraph S-LTR.1.6  as
      her presence in the UK was not conducive to the  public  good  because
      her conduct, in fraudulently obtaining a TOEIC  certificate,  made  it
      undesirable to allow her to remain in the UK. The respondent had  been
      informed by ETS that a proxy test taker had been used  and  that  they
      had cancelled the appellant's test result. The appellant was therefore
      unable to meet the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1). The respondent
      considered further, and in any event, that there were  no  significant
      obstacles to the appellant's integration in India and that there  were
      no exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of leave  outside  the
      immigration rules.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. Her appeal was heard  on
      24 April 2019 by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Greasley.  The  respondent
      was  not  represented  at  the  hearing.  The  appellant  was  legally
      represented. She gave oral evidence before the judge denying that  she
      had acted dishonestly in relation to  the  English  language  test  at
      Synergy Business College of London and claiming that she had taken the
      test and genuinely obtained the scores that she did. She  stated  that
      she wished to study for a Ph.D. in Management. The  judge  noted  that
      there was no evidence from the respondent. There was  no  ETS  bundle,
      generic or otherwise, and no determination from the  previous  appeal,
      and neither was there any representation on behalf of the  respondent.
      On that basis the judge concluded that the respondent  had  failed  to
      establish the facts upon which he sought to rely in  relation  to  the
      allegation of cheating. The judge went on to consider the  appellant's
      human rights claim. He considered that the appellant was not  able  to
      meet any of the criteria in Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE(1) of  the
      immigration rules on the basis of family or private  life.  The  judge
      considered that the appellant's real intention was to stay in  the  UK
      permanently and that she saw further studies, such as a Ph.D, as a way
      of achieving that, rather than having  any  clear  idea  of  what  she
      wanted to study or how she would fund her studies. He  concluded  that
      she would be able to continue her private life in India and  that  the
      decision to remove her from the UK was lawful  and  proportionate.  He
      dismissed the appeal.

   6. The appellant then sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      on the grounds that Judge Greasley's conclusion, that her removal from
      the UK would not breach her Article 8 human rights,  was  inadequately
      reasoned and that the judge had failed to give appropriate  weight  to
      her private life established in the UK.

   7. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth.

   8. The matter then came before me. At the hearing  Ms  Bassi  produced  a
      Rule 24 response, an application under Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  to produce the determination of
      Judge Telford in the appellant's previous appeal and the decisions  of
      the First-tier Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal  refusing  permission  to
      appeal, and an application to cross-appeal out of time  against  Judge
      Greasley's finding on the allegation of fraud.

   9. Ms Bassi confirmed that  she  wished  to  pursue  a  cross-appeal  and
      challenge Judge Greasley's findings on the  basis  that  the  previous
      determination ought to have been produced and would have led the judge
      to have followed the principles in Devaseelan.  Mr Maqsood objected to
      the application on various bases including that it had been  made  out
      of time, with no explanation  for  the  delay,  and  with  no  reasons
      provided for the respondent having failed to refer to Judge  Telford's
      determination in the refusal decision and having failed to produce  it
      for the appeal before Judge Greasley.

  10. I refused Ms Bassi's application as there was no reason given  by  the
      respondent, let alone any satisfactory reason, for the timing  of  the
      application for permission to cross-appeal. No reason was given as  to
      why an application had not been made within the permitted period  from
      service of Judge Greasley's  decision  on  1  May  2019  and  why  the
      application was being made at such a late stage. In any event, even if
      the respondent's application for permission was admitted, there was no
      basis for concluding that Judge Greasley had erred in law  by  failing
      to consider a document which had not been brought to his attention and
      therefore Judge Telford's determination was of  no  relevance  to  the
      error of law assessment. Its  relevance  would  only  arise  if  Judge
      Greasley's decision were set-aside and there was to be a re-making  of
      that decision. The grounds seeking permission, even if admitted,  were
      therefore unarguable.

  11. Mr Maqsood then proceeded to make his submissions in  support  of  the
      appellant's challenge to Judge Greasley's decision. He relied upon the
      Court of Appeal judgments in Khan & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1684 and  Ahsan  v  The  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2017] EWCA  Civ  2009  and  the
      respondent's compromise arising from those cases, that where a finding
      was made by the First-tier Tribunal in an ETS case that there had been
      no deception, the decision would be rescinded and the appellant  would
      be put back in the position he was in prior to the decision being made
      and would be able to make a fresh application. In the appellant's case
      she should, therefore, be put back in the position she was in when she
      made her application on 23 January 2014. She would be able to  make  a
      fresh student application and could then pursue her Ph.D. That  was  a
      matter that Judge Greasley ought to have considered but had failed  to
      do. He had failed to follow the rationale in Khan  and  had  therefore
      erred in law.

  12. Ms Bassi objected to the grounds pursued by Mr  Maqsood  referring  to
      Khan, as that was not included in the grounds seeking  permission  nor
      was it the basis upon which permission was granted. As for the grounds
      giving rise to the grant of permission, the judge  had  made  adequate
      findings on Article 8 and had considered  all  relevant  matters.  The
      grounds did not challenge the judge's findings in  relation  to  "very
      significant obstacles", but only his findings outside the  immigration
      rules. However the judge had considered all relevant matters  in  that
      regard, adopting the proper approach to the question of  private  life
      as set out in the case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v
      Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813. The judge's findings were open to him  and
      there was no error of law.

  13. Mr Maqsood, in reply, reiterated the points previously made in  regard
      to the principles in Khan and submitted that the  appellant  ought  to
      have been given an opportunity to vary her application  to  a  student
      application.

  14. I advised the parties that I was upholding Judge Greasley's  decision.
      My reasons for so doing are as follows.

  15. I do not agree with  Mr  Maqsood  that  the  submissions  he  made  in
      relation to Khan could be read into the grounds seeking permission  to
      appeal. I found his grounds to bear little, if any,  relation  to  the
      original grounds and  on  that  basis  alone  I  reject  the  case  he
      presented. Mr Maqsood's reliance upon Khan was, in any  event,  in  my
      view, misconceived. The case of Khan, like Ahsan, was  concerned  with
      the adequacy of  a  remedy  challenging  a  section  10  decision.  It
      involved different circumstances entirely, whereby the applicants had,
      as a result of a section 10  removal  decision  made  pursuant  to  an
      allegation of deception, which had  the  effect  of  curtailing  their
      leave to remain or refusing them further leave,  been  deprived  of  a
      right of appeal in which they could challenge the deception allegation
      before the First-tier Tribunal. The compromise made by the  respondent
      was for the applicants to be given the opportunity  to  make  a  human
      rights claim which, if refused, gave rise to a right of appeal and, if
      successful in showing that there had been no fraud, would lead to  the
      decision being rescinded and would enable the  applicants  to  make  a
      fresh application.  They  would  effectively  be  put  back  into  the
      position they were in before the deception allegation  was  made.  For
      the appellant in this case, the position  she  was  in  prior  to  the
      respondent's decision of 30 January 2019 was that she had already  had
      the benefit of an  in-country  right  of  appeal  and  the  First-tier
      Tribunal had concluded that she had fraudulently  obtained  her  TOEIC
      certificate.

  16. I entirely  reject  Mr  Maqsood's  suggestion  that  Judge  Greasley's
      findings on the deception point vindicated the appellant to the extent
      that she ought to be returned to the position  she  was  in  when  she
      submitted her application on 23 January 2014, prior to  the  deception
      allegation having been made in the first  place  and  prior  to  Judge
      Telford's decision. Judge Greasley did not conclude that the appellant
      had  not  cheated  and  had  not  used  deception.  His  decision  was
      essentially a criticism of the respondent for a lack of  participation
      in the proceedings and a lack of evidence and his conclusion was that,
      as a consequence of such inactivity,  the  respondent  had  failed  to
      establish the facts upon which he relied in making the allegation. His
      decision in no way undermined or overturned the previous  findings  of
      the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  which  he  was  unaware.  Mr  Maqsood's
      submission to the contrary was simply wrong.

  17. Accordingly there is no merit in the submission  that  Judge  Greasley
      erred by failing to take account of the effect of Khan, as Mr  Maqsood
      interpreted it, in his assessment of the appellant's private life  and
      in his approach to her evidence about her intended studies. The  judge
      plainly  had  concerns  about  the  genuineness  of  the   appellant's
      intentions in relation to her studies and  gave  detailed  and  cogent
      reasons for those concerns, at [24] and [25]. He was entitled to  draw
      the adverse conclusions that he did in that  regard.  Having  properly
      concluded that the appellant could not meet the criteria in  paragraph
      276ADE(1) the judge had regard to all relevant  matters  in  assessing
      proportionality  outside  the  immigration  rules.  He  gave  detailed
      consideration to the appellant's private life in the UK, including her
      length of residence  here  and  her  ties  to  the  UK,  and  he  also
      considered her circumstances in India in terms of family, cultural and
      other ties, employment prospects and ability  to  pursue  her  private
      life in that country. He was  fully  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
      appellant had failed to show that her circumstances were  such  as  to
      justify a grant of leave outside the immigration rules and he properly
      concluded that her removal from the UK would not be disproportionate.

  18. For the  reasons  fully  and  properly  given,  and  on  the  evidence
      available to him, the judge was fully entitled to dismiss  the  appeal
      on the basis that he did.



DECISION

  19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 2 October 2019
