
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeal Number: HU/02733/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

| Decided under rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2020                    |On 7 October 2020                    |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                KATE OMOREGHE
                                                                   Appellant
                       -and-

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria. She applied for leave to  enter
    for the purposes of settlement with her husband on 10 October 2018, but
    her application was refused on 2 January 2019. She appealed and  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain  dismissed  her  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 2 December 2019.

2.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Robertson on 29 April 2020. She found that it was arguable that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hussain erred in law as  he  had  not  referred  to
    witness statements by members of the Appellant's family  or  given  any
    reason for giving no weight to this evidence.

3.   Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek made directions on 31 July 2020,  having
    come to the view that in the light of the  Corona  Virus  Pandemic,  it
    would be appropriate to determine whether there had been  an  error  of
    law on the papers.

4.   The Appellant replied to these directions on  10  August  2020,  making
    further submissions in support of her appeal. The Respondent replied on
    12 August 2020. In this response, she accepted that First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Hussain had made a material errors of law in his decision  in  so
    far as he had failed to take into account relevant  witness  statements
    and accepted that his decision should be set aside.

5.   It was the Respondent's view that the error  of  law  appeal  could  be
    determined on the papers. The Appellant had not responded to this  part
    of Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek's directions but did  not  object  to
    there being a hearing on the papers.

6.   I have read and taken into account the  detailed  submissions  made  by
    both parties and have taken into account the fact that the error of law
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain lead to him not  giving  full
    consideration to the Appellant's entitlement  to  entry  clearance.  In
    these circumstances, I find that there are issues which  will  need  to
    explored at an oral hearing but,  in the light of the findings of  fact
    that will need to be made, the appropriate venue for such a hearing  is
    the First-tier Tribunal.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.   As accepted by both parties, Frist-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain  made  a
    material error of  law  when  he  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established that her marriage was genuine and subsisting because he had
    not taken all relevant evidence  into  account  or  given  reasons  for
    failing to do so.

8.   Therefore, I find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hussain's  decision
    contained material errors of law.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to be heard de novo in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges
    Hussain or Robertson.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  Any further evidence on which the Appellant wishes to  rely  should  be
    submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.






















                                                                     Nadine
    Finch
Signed                                  Date 1 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


