
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02872/2019
                                                               HU/02873/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2020                  |On 7 October 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     RWG
                                     RMG
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sihota of Reiss Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petersen Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellants appeal with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Ince ('the Judge') promulgated on 12  December  2019
        in which the Judge allowed the appeal of the mother  of  the  above
        appellants but refused their appeals for the reasons set out in the
        determination under challenge.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis this was a complex appeal in which the  above
        appellants were children at  the  date  of  application  for  entry
        clearance but adults by the date of the hearing, their  mother  had
        also applied for entry clearance but had not  applied  until  after
        the appellants and yet there were two  younger  children  who  like
        their father in  the  United  Kingdom  (the  sponsor)  are  British
        citizens.  Permission was granted for  the  reasons  given  in  the
        grounds dated 20 December 2019 with reference to the decision in PD
        and others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri  Lanka  [2016]
        UKUT 00108.



Background


     3. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan, the first appellant having
        been  born  on  21  November  2000  and  his  brother,  the  second
        appellant, on 19 November 2001.
     4. On 9 November 2018 when the first appellant was  aged  17  and  the
        second appellant 16 they  made  applications  for  entry  clearance
        which were refused on 22 January 2019 on the  basis  that  although
        they  met  all  the  other  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
        Immigration Rules ('the Rules') they did not meet the  relationship
        requirement. Their appeals against the decision were lodged  on  13
        February 2019.
     5. In relation to the appeals under the Rules  the  Judge  at  [29-34]
        sets out the reasons why the appellants could not succeed.
     6. This is a human rights appeal in which the Judge sets out  a  self-
        direction that it is necessary to  consider  the  position  of  the
        appellants at the date of decision under the  Rules  which  was  22
        January 2019. At [30-31] the Judge writes:


        30.  The  next  question  is  whether  they  satisfy  paragraph  E-
             ECC.1.6. This provides that one of their parents  must  either
             [i] be in the UK with limited leave to enter or remain or that
             [ii] entry clearance  as  a  partner  or  a  parent  is  being
             granted, or has been granted, to that parent. This person  can
             only be their  mother  (because  their  father  is  a  British
             citizen and therefore cannot be a person granted only "limited
             leave to enter or remain"). Under sub-paragraph 1.6 (a)  their
             mother's partner must also be their other parent (which is the
             case - the sponsor is the other  parent).  Accordingly,  under
             this rule, only if their mother had  already  been  granted  a
             visa or was in the process of applying for one, would she fall
             within the rule. The difficulty for the brothers is that their
             mother had not yet made such an application by the time  their
             decisions were made. Accordingly, on a  strict  interpretation
             of the rules, they do not satisfy paragraph E- ECC.1.6 (a).


        31.   That  leaves  the  other  alternatives,  namely   (under   E-
             ECC.1.6(b)) that their parent (namely their  mother)  has  had
             and continues to have sole responsibility for their upbringing
             [which cannot be satisfied since the sponsor says that he  has
             had such responsibility - my conclusion is that they had joint
             responsibility, which is usually the case where  both  parents
             are alive and involved to  some  extent  in  their  children's
             lives] or (under E - ECC.1.6(c) that  there  are  serious  and
             compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion
             of the  brothers  undesirable  [which  I  consider  cannot  be
             satisfied since the alternative would be that they remained in
             Pakistan with almost all of  their  family  together  with  an
             extended family, accommodation and a means of support, which I
             consider cannot amount to circumstances  which  would  satisfy
             the provisions of the paragraph].

     7. The Judge also finds the appellants cannot meet the requirements of
        paragraph 297(1) as their mother had not applied to come to the  UK
        at the same time and thus could not have been admitted at the  same
        time;  and  due  to  the  position  regarding  the  issue  of  sole
        responsibility  and  serious  and  compelling   considerations   as
        referred to above.
     8.  The  Judge  was  satisfied  the  appellants  met   the   financial
        requirements of Appendix FM.
     9. The Judge considered the merits of the appeal pursuant to article 8
        ECHR in a properly structured manner concluding that so far as  the
        appellants mother was concerned any interference with her protected
        rights would not be proportionate. In relation  to  the  appellants
        article 8 rights at [57-58] the Judge writes:


        57.  In respect of the brothers, I have found that they had  failed
             to satisfy your requirements of Appendix FM. Moreover, I  note
             that I have found that, under  paragraph  E-ECC.1.6  (C)  that
             there  were  no  serious  and  compelling  family   or   other
             considerations  which   made   exclusion   of   the   brothers
             undesirable on the basis  that  they  would  be  remaining  in
             Pakistan with almost all of  their  family  together  with  an
             extended family, accommodation and a means of support  -  they
             were not alone nor were they in danger of destitution.


        58.  I appreciate that they almost satisfied the Immigration  Rules
             (it was, essentially, a question of timing  that  was  against
             them);  that  they  were  exempt  from  the  English  language
             requirements and that they would have been able to live in the
             UK without recourse to public funds, but  as  young  Pakistani
             males who were soon to reach adulthood, remaining in  Pakistan
             in the apparently comfortable and safe circumstances that they
             enjoy and having spent almost  all  of  their  juvenile  lives
             without the company of  their  father,  I  consider  that  the
             scales come down conclusively in favour of the  Respondent  on
             this  point.  I  therefore  find  that  the   Respondent   has
             demonstrated that refusing their applications to come  to  the
             UK is not disproportionate. I therefore dismissed their  Human
             Rights appeals under Article 8.



Error of law



    10. Mr Sihota relied upon the grounds drafted by Mr Caswell a barrister
        who represented the appellants  before  the  Judge.  Those  grounds
        assert the Judge erred by failing to consider, having dismissed the
        appellants appeal under E-EC.1.6,  whether  the  appeal  should  be
        allowed pursuant to GEN 3.2 and GEN 3.3  of  Appendix  FM,  thereby
        failing to make any or any relevant findings of fact as to what was
        in the best interests of all the relevant children.  It is asserted
        the Judge failed to take into consideration the  interests  of  six
        such relevant children and failed  to  make  findings  whether  the
        appellants mother would simply refuse to travel to  United  Kingdom
        if that meant permanently breaking up her  family  and  permanently
        leaving behind two of her children in Pakistan, and in  failing  to
        give any adequate consideration to and/or adequate findings of fact
        as to whether the sponsor's brother in Pakistan will be content for
        his nephews to remain a financial burden on  him  even  after  they
        became young adults, and  in  failing  to  assess  the  impact  the
        refusal of the appellants appeal will have on the whole family.
    11. GEN.3 sets put the provision relating to exceptional  circumstances
        in Appendix FM in the following terms:
        GEN.3.1.
        (1) Where:
           (a)  the  financial  requirement  in  paragraph  E-ECP.3.1.,  E-
           LTRP.3.1. (in the context of an application for limited leave to
           remain as a partner), E-ECC.2.1. or E-LTRC.2.1. applies, and  is
           not met from the specified sources referred to in  the  relevant
           paragraph; and
           (b) it is evident from the information provided by the applicant
           that there are  exceptional  circumstances  which  could  render
           refusal of entry clearance  or  leave  to  remain  a  breach  of
           Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,  because
           such refusal could result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
           for the applicant, their partner or a relevant child; then
           the  decision-maker  must  consider   whether   such   financial
           requirement is met through taking into account  the  sources  of
           income, financial support or funds set out in  paragraph  21A(2)
           of  Appendix  FM-SE  (subject  to  the  considerations  in  sub-
           paragraphs (3) to (8) of that paragraph).
         (2)  Where the financial requirement in  paragraph  E-ECP.3.1.,  E-
           LTRP.3.1. (in the context of an application for limited leave to
           remain as a partner), E-ECC.2.1. or E-LTRC.2.1. is met following
           consideration under sub-paragraph (1)  (and  provided  that  the
           other relevant requirements of the Immigration  Rules  are  also
           met), the applicant will be granted entry clearance or leave  to
           remain under, as appropriate, paragraph D-ECP.1.2., D-LTRP.1.2.,
           D-ECC.1.1. or D-LTRC.1.1.  or  paragraph  315  or  316B  of  the
           Immigration Rules.
         GEN.3.2.
         (1)Subject to sub-paragraph (4), where  an  application  for  entry
         clearance or leave to enter or remain made under this Appendix,  or
         an application  for  leave  to  remain  which  has  otherwise  been
         considered  under  this  Appendix,  does  not  otherwise  meet  the
         requirements of this Appendix or Part 9 of the Rules, the decision-
         maker must consider whether the circumstances in sub-paragraph  (2)
         apply.
         (2) Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the decision-maker  must
         consider,  on  the  basis  of  the  information  provided  by   the
         applicant, whether there are exceptional circumstances which  would
         render refusal of entry clearance, or leave to enter or  remain,  a
         breach of Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,
         because  such  refusal  would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences for the applicant, their partner, a relevant child  or
         another family member whose Article 8 rights  it  is  evident  from
         that information would be affected by  a  decision  to  refuse  the
         application.
         (3)  Where  the  exceptional  circumstances  referred  to  in  sub-
         paragraph (2) above apply, the  applicant  will  be  granted  entry
         clearance or leave  to  enter  or  remain  under,  as  appropriate,
         paragraph  D-ECP.1.2.,  D-LTRP.1.2.,  D-ECC.1.1.,  D-LTRC.1.1.,  D-
         ECPT.1.2., D-LTRPT.1.2., D-ECDR.1.1. or D-ECDR.1.2.
         (4) This paragraph does not apply in the  context  of  applications
         made under section BPILR or DVILR.
         GEN.3.3.
         (1) In considering an application for entry clearance or  leave  to
         enter or remain where paragraph GEN.3.1. or GEN.3.2.  applies,  the
         decision-maker must take into account, as a primary  consideration,
         the best interests of any relevant child.
        (2) In  paragraphs  GEN.3.1.  and  GEN.3.2.,  and  this  paragraph,
        "relevant child" means a person who:
         (a) is under the age of 18 years at the date  of  the  application;
        and
         (b) it is evident from the information provided  by  the  applicant
         would be affected by a decision to refuse the application.
    12. The Judge make a specific finding there are no  such  circumstances
        arising in this case such as to amount to a  breach  of  article  8
        ECHR. There was no evidence before the Judge that the mother  would
        refuse to travel to the United Kingdom as the evidence given by the
        sponsor to the Judge was that there are family members in Pakistan,
        namely his brother, who lives on the family farm with not only  the
        appellants but also two  other  children  of  the  sponsor  who  he
        confirmed he was unable to bring across to the  United  Kingdom  at
        this point for economic reasons. Those children are minors. It  was
        therefore always the intention of the family unit that  the  mother
        of the above appellants would be leaving members of her  family  in
        Pakistan if she was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  with
        her two other British national children who were not the subject of
        this appeal. There was no evidence before the Judge to show that if
        the appeals of the  appellants  were  refused  their  mother  would
        refuse to travel to the United Kingdom and remain in Pakistan.
    13. The assertion the Judge failed to give adequate  consideration  and
        make adequate findings  as  to  whether  the  sponsors  brother  in
        Pakistan will be content for  the  above  appellants  to  remain  a
        financial burden on him is a submission contrary  to  the  evidence
        given by the sponsor who stated he  provides  for  members  of  his
        family who remain in Pakistan.  The sponsor  works  in  the  United
        Kingdom and ensures that his family members  are  adequately  cared
        for, both those in the UK and those remaining on  the  family  farm
        with his brother. There is no  evidence  that  the  uncle  had  any
        objection to the continuing arrangement,  or  any  objection  being
        raised if the appeals were refused. The Judge's  finding  that  the
        appellants could remain in Pakistan in apparently  comfortable  and
        safe circumstances is a reference to the  position  in  which  they
        will remain in Pakistan with their uncle on the family farm.
    14. It is not made out on the information available to the  Judge  that
        the impact of the refusal on the whole family was such as  to  make
        the respondents decision disproportionate. Article 8 questions  are
        intently fact specific and there was simply not enough  before  the
        Judge to suggest the only reasonable finding available was for  the
        appeals to be allowed.
    15. The appellants, when challenging the decision  outside  the  Rules,
        refer to PD and others asserting the Judge  did  not  consider  and
        determine the article  8  appeals  holistically  and  jointly,  but
        rather sequentially and independently, thereby failing to take  all
        material facts and  considerations  into  account  and  failing  to
        consider adequately the possibility that the effect of the  refusal
        of the appeals would stultify the effect of the decision  to  allow
        the appeal of their mother.
    16. Mrs Peterson in her submissions referred to the fact  PD  concerned
        an in-country appeal where there was  a  qualifying  child  and  in
        which it was not found to be  proportionate  to  separate  all  the
        members of that family on the facts. The issue in  PD  was  whether
        the other family members could remain in the United  Kingdom  based
        on one appellant's appeal, that  of  the  qualifying  child,  being
        allowed, which is a factually different scenario from this  appeal.
        There is merit in that submission.
    17. It is also clear that the Judge has taken  into  account  the  fact
        there are six children of the sponsor but  there  was  insufficient
        evidence to make out any adverse impact arising from the  decision,
        sufficient  to  warrant  the  appeal  being  allowed.  There   was,
        specifically, no evidence that the effect of  the  refusal  of  the
        appeal would stultify the effect of the decision  in  the  mother's
        appeal or that additional weight should be  given  to  the  factors
        relied upon by the appellant in relation  to  this  appeal,  beyond
        that given by the Judge.
    18. It is clear when reading the decision as a whole that the Judge did
        take into account the  family  situation  including  the  fact  the
        appellants mother had decided to leave other children in  Pakistan.
        It is not  made  out  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  matter
        holistically with the required degree of anxious scrutiny required.
    19. The assertion the Judge erred by  taking  into  account  irrelevant
        considerations in refusing the appeals, in part as a  result  of  a
        failure to satisfy E-EC.1.6(C) as the appellants did not to satisfy
        need to satisfy the provision as they had  already  been  found  to
        satisfy ECC 1.6(a) has no arguable merit. The  Judge's  finding  at
        [30] of the decision is  that  contained  in  the  final  paragraph
        namely that on a strict interpretation of the Rules  they  did  not
        satisfy E-EC.1.6(a). There is no finding  by  the  Judge  that  the
        primary provision was  satisfied.  If  it  had  been  found  to  be
        satisfied there would have been no need to  have  considered  later
        provisions of the Rules. The Judge gives adequate reasons  for  why
        it was found E-EC.1.6(a) could not be satisfied which  was  on  the
        basis the above appellants mother had not been granted a  visa  and
        was not in the process of applying for one by the  date  the  above
        appellants applications had been  refused.  As  the  Judge  reminds
        himself, under the Rules the relevant date is the date of  decision
        which in relation to the above appellants appeals was a date  prior
        to their mother making her own application for leave to  enter  the
        United Kingdom.
    20. It is not  made  out  the  Judge  did  not  consider  the  evidence
        adequately. It is  not  made  out  the  Judge's  findings  are  not
        supported by sufficient reasoning. It is not made out  the  Judge's
        conclusions either under the Rules or pursuant to  article  8  ECHR
        are  contrary  to  the  evidence,   are   unreasonable,   unlawful,
        irrational, or outside the range of findings reasonably open to the
        Judge.
    21. Whilst it is appreciated that the intention of the sponsor and  the
        appellants mother was to bring their family members to  the  United
        Kingdom article 8 does not give a person the right to choose  where
        they wish to live.  In this case the Judge gives  adequate  reasons
        to support the conclusion the  appellants  had  not  established  a
        right to enter the United Kingdom. On that  basis  no  legal  error
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal  is  made  out.  The
        decisions shall stand.


Decision

    22. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

Anonymity.


    23. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 September 2020












