
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02415/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 July 2017                                |On 24 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                           amir hamza pervez raja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Mohammed, Counsel, instructed by Legis Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 9 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thomas
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, against a
    decision made on 10 January 2016 refusing him  leave  to  remain.   The
    appellant had applied for leave on the basis of ten  years'  residence.
    The judge noted that the appeal was restricted under s.84 of  the  NIAA
    2002 to human rights grounds.

2.   The judge found first of all  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirement of ten years' continuous lawful residence because  s.3C  of
    the Immigration  Act  1971  as  amended  only  extends  leave  when  an
    application has been made during an extant period of leave.  The  judge
    then turned  directly  to  the  appellant's  Article  8  circumstances,
    considering him first under para 276ADE and concluding that he did  not
    meet its requirements in full since he had failed  to  establish  there
    would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into  Pakistan.
    Finally,  the  judge   considered   whether   there   were   compelling
    circumstances to justify a grant of leave outside the Rules, stating at
    para 21:

         "21. I have considered whether there are  compelling  circumstances
             to justify consideration of Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   I
             take account of the Appellant's relationship with his brother;
             his claimed problems with his  previous  representatives;  and
             the length of time he has lived in the United Kingdom.   I  do
             not however, find that  these  matters  amount  to  compelling
             circumstances  to  consider  leave  outside  the  Rules  under
             Article 8 ECHR."

3.   The appellant's grounds of appeal were confined to a challenge  to  the
    judge's finding on family and private life which were said to represent
    a failure to engage with the fact that the appellant  had  family  life
    with his brother.

4.   At the hearing I received submissions from both parties, Mr  Mohammed's
    including a challenge not just to the judge's findings  on  family  and
    private life but those on long residency.  In relation  to  the  latter
    issue, he contended that the judge's reasoning at para 18  betrayed  an
    error of law because it wrongly asserted that  although  the  appellant
    had lost s.3C  leave,  he  had  regained  it,  which  was  not  legally
    possible.  This error, he said, had  also  infected  his  reasoning  as
    regards the length of the appellant's overstay.

5.   I must state straightway that I do not admit this  second  ground.   It
    was not advanced in the written grounds of appeal; there  has  been  no
    application to amend the grounds.  In any event I would  have  rejected
    Mr Mohammed's submissions regarding it.  Whilst the  judge's  reasoning
    at para 18 contains some muddled passages, its essential finding,  that
    the appellant did not have ten years' continuous  lawful  residence  at
    the date of application, was clearly correct.  At that point he was  an
    overstayer and s.3C does not permit an applicant to make an application
    to vary leave whilst leave is extended pending a decision on an appeal.

6.   I turn therefore to the only ground  raised  in  the  written  grounds,
    which concerned the judge's treatment of the  appellant's  private  and
    family life ties.  Whilst it is not expressly stated  in  the  grounds.
    this ground can only bite on the judge's assessment of the  appellant's
    case outside the Rules since in order to succeed  under  the  Rules  he
    would  have  had  to  show  that  he  met  the  requirements  of   para
    276ADE(1)(vi) by proving there would be very significant  obstacles  to
    his integration into Pakistan.  At para 20 the judge said the following
    on this matter:



         "20. The Appellant came to the United Kingdom at  the  age  of  21.
             Prior to this, he lived in Pakistan.  His parents continue  to
             live there.  He was  educated  in  Pakistan  and  completed  a
             degree at the University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir.  He has no
             cultural or linguistic difficulties in Pakistan and no  health
             issues.    He   would   return   with   further    educational
             qualifications  and  work  experience  gained  in  the  United
             Kingdom to assist integration.  Despite the length of time  he
             has lived in the United Kingdom, I am not  persuaded  that  he
             has no ties to his home country.  Considering all  matters,  I
             do not find that there are very significant obstacles  to  his
             integration in Pakistan."

7.   The grounds take no issue with the judge's  reasoning  on  this  matter
    (nor with the judge's conclusion adverted to earlier that the appellant
    could not meet the requirements of para 276B (long residence)).

8.   So  far  as  the  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's family and private life circumstances. the  judge  received
    submissions  from  the  parties  regarding  this  matter,  including  a
    statement from Mr Mohammed (who represented him at  the  FtT  level  as
    well) that the appellant "has a substantial  family  and  private  life
    developed since 2005".  I have already set out what the  judge  decided
    on this issue in his paragraph 21.  It is right to say that the judge's
    treatment therein of this issue is cursory.  At the same time, this has
    to be viewed in the  context  of  the  surrounding  factual  and  legal
    circumstances.    Mr  Mohammed  has  argued  that  on  the  appellant's
    evidence as set out in his  witness  statement  the  appellant  enjoyed
    family  life  with  his  brother  and  sister-in-law  because  he   was
    financially supported by his brother and had emotional ties with  them.
    What Mr Mohammed failed to mention was that the appellant himself  made
    no mention of the importance  to  him  of  his  relationship  with  his
    brother in his original grounds of appeal dated 22 January 2016 nor had
    he mentioned them in an earlier s.120 notice  nor  in  the  submissions
    sent to the respondent on 17 September 2015.   Those  documents  simply
    referred broadly to the appellant having formed close ties  to  the  UK
    and with his social circle of  friends.   If  the  appellant  genuinely
    believed that his emotional ties  with  his  brother  went  beyond  the
    normal ties between adult siblings, I consider he would most  certainly
    have said so at this stage.

9.    Secondly,  so  far  as  concerns  his  private  life   ties   (whether
    encompassing his brother and/or his circle of friends) it was incumbent
    on the judge to attach little weight to them by virtue of s.117B(4) and
    (5) of the 2002 Act.  The appellant's immigration status in the UK  had
    always been precarious within the meaning of that provision.  So far as
    concerns the appellant's family  life,  even  assuming  the  judge  had
    accepted that the ties with the brother constituted family life  within
    the meaning of Article 8, the weight the judge could attach to that was
    again reduced by the fact that he had gone and lived with  his  brother
    at a time  when  his  immigration  status  was  precarious:  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence applies such an approach to private and family life ties:
    see Rajendran (s.117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138  (IAC).   In  such
    circumstances it was sufficient for the judge to deal very shortly with
    the appellant's relationship with his brother.  On  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's own witness statement he was  not  financially  independent
    and that was a further statutory consideration the judge would have had
    in mind (see s117B(3)).  In short, the appellant's development  of  his
    claim to have a substantial family life in the course of litigation did
    not demonstrate either that he enjoyed family  life  with  his  brother
    within the meaning of Article 8 or, even if he  did,  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances arising from it warranting a grant of leave to
    remain outside the Rules.

     For the above reasons:

     The FtT judge did not materially err in law.

     The decision of the FtT judge must accordingly stand.


No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 21 July 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal







