
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02467/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th July 2019                    |On 23rd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                            Mrs Charity Emmanuel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Amgrah (UK Law Associates)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant with permission
granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant, who is a
Nigerian national, had appealed a decision of 18th January 2019 refusing
her Article 8 human rights claim.  In the First-tier Tribunal the matter
came before Judge Bell on 27th March 2019 at Nottingham and in a Decision
promulgated on 17th April 2019 Judge Bell dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal was granted solely on the basis that it was arguably
an error of law for the judge not to have set out the burden and standard
of proof in the Decision.  However, when you read the Decision as a whole
it is quite clear that whether or not the judge has set out the burden and
standard of proof, she has applied it correctly.  It is an Article 8 case.
She has set out the evidence, set out what she accepts and what she does
not accept, carried out an appropriate balancing exercise and concluded
that there are no very significant obstacles to the Appellant integrating
into Nigeria with her child on return where she has extended family member
and her husband. Mr Amgrah was unable to take me to any part of Judge
Bell's Decision and Reasons where she has applied too high a standard of
proof or reversed the burden of proof.

I can find no error of law in the Decision and Reasons and for that reason
the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed [pic]                            Date 17 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed [pic]                            Date 17 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
