

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02427/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : (UT)IAC Birmingham                 |Decision Promulgated         |
|On : 12 June 2017                             |On : 14 June 2017            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ashwant shibdoyal
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Ishwar Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Mr  Shibdoyal's
   appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  his  application  for
   indefinite leave to remain on long residence grounds and  to  refuse  his
   human rights claim.

2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr Shibdoyal as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 11 June 1983. He  entered
   the United Kingdom on 6 June 2004 with entry clearance as a student valid
   until 30 September 2006 and was granted further  leave  to  remain  as  a
   student until 31 October 2007. On 30 October 2007 he applied for  further
   leave to remain as a student but his application was rejected as invalid.
   He then made a valid application on 16 November 2007 which was refused on
   10 January 2008 on the basis that he  had  failed  to  show  evidence  of
   satisfactory progress on his  CIMA  course  of  study,  having  failed  a
   significant number of his examinations.


4. The  appellant  unsuccessfully  appealed  against  that  decision.  At  a
   hearing before Judge Petherbridge on 26 February 2008 he conceded that he
   could not succeed under the rules because of his examination failure  but
   relied on a letter from a different college  which  stated  that  it  was
   believed that he could pass his examinations if he  was  offered  another
   chance. Judge Petherbridge dismissed the  appeal  on  7  March  2008  and
   commented that it was open to the appellant to bring the  college  letter
   to the respondent's attention in a fresh  application  for  consideration
   outside the immigration rules.


5.  The appellant then wrote to the Home Office on 11 March 2008  requesting
   that his application be reconsidered outside the  immigration  rules.  In
   the meantime, on 17 March 2008 he became appeal rights exhausted.  In  an
   undated letter of reply, which is said to have been sent on 12 June 2008,
   the respondent declined to exercise discretion in the appellant's  favour
   or to take any further action and suggested the option of making a  fresh
   application for leave outside the rules.


6.  On 2 July 2008 the appellant applied for leave  to  remain  outside  the
   immigration rules on form  FLR(O).  His  application  was  treated  as  a
   student application and he was granted Tier 4 leave on  23  October  2009
   until 30 April 2010. Further periods of leave as a Tier  4  student  were
   granted until 30 April 2015. On 12 August 2014 the appellant applied  for
   indefinite leave to remain on the basis of completing 10 years continuous
   lawful residence. His application was refused on 22 December 2014 with no
   right of appeal.

7. On 21 April 2015 the appellant applied again for ILR on the basis  of  10
   years continuous lawful residence. His application was refused on 16 July
   2015 on the basis that he was without lawful leave  in  the  UK  from  14
   November 2007 until the next grant  of  leave  on  23  October  2009  and
   therefore had not demonstrated 10 years continuous lawful  residence  and
   did not satisfy the requirements of the immigration  rules  in  paragraph
   276B(i). The respondent went on to consider the appellant's  family  life
   and private life but considered that the  criteria  in  Appendix  FM  and
   paragraph 276ADE(1) could not be  met.  The  respondent  considered  that
   there were no exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the immigration rules.


8. Prior to that decision, and in response to the  appellant's  request  for
   reconsideration of the decision  of  22  December  2014,  the  respondent
   accepted that the appellant's application of 16 November 2007 was wrongly
   recorded as out of time and considered that the appellant's period of  3C
   leave ended on 17 March 2008 and that the relevant period of time in  the
   UK without lawful leave was therefore 18  March  2008  until  23  October
   2009.

9. The appellant appealed against the decision of 16 July 2015.  His  appeal
   was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 23 September  2016
   and was allowed in a  decision  promulgated  on  7  October  2016.  Judge
   Hollingworth considered that the appellant's reconsideration  request  of
   11 March 2008,  which  had  been  made  within  the  period  for  seeking
   permission to  appeal,  extended  the  appellant's  3C  leave  until  the
   decision of 12 June 2008. He  considered  that  since  the  2  July  2008
   application was made within 28 days of the 12  June  2008  decision,  the
   period from 12 June 2008 until 2 July 2008 fell within paragraph  276B(v)
   as being a period of overstaying which was  to  be  disregarded  for  the
   purposes of calculating the 10 years of continuous lawful  residence.  He
   concluded that the  appellant  was  not  without  lawful  leave  and  had
   established 10 years of continuous lawful residence. The judge considered
   that the appellant's ability to meet the requirements of the  immigration
   rules was a weighty matter in assessing proportionality under  Article  8
   and that the interference with the appellant's private life caused by the
   refusal decision was disproportionate and in  breach  of  Article  8.  He
   allowed the appeal.

10. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge  had  arguably  erred  by  considering  the
   appellant's correspondence of 11 March 2008 as  an  application  for  the
   purposes  of  the  immigration  rules.  The  grounds  asserted  that  the
   correspondence  was  not  an  application  and  that  the  appellant  was
   unlawfully in the UK between 17 March 2008 and 2 July 2008.  The  judge's
   error had infected the remainder of his decision.

11. Permission to appeal was granted on 4 January 2017.

Appeal Hearing

12. Mr Mills expanded upon the grounds, submitting that the judge had  erred
   by considering the 11 March 2008  letter  as  an  application  triggering
   section 3C leave, whereas it clearly was  not  an  application  complying
   with the Immigration (Leave to Remain)(Prescribed Forms  and  Procedures)
   Regulations 2006. The appellant's  leave  ended  when  he  became  appeal
   rights exhausted on 17 March 2008 and he made his subsequent  application
   outside the relevant 28 day period. He was therefore without lawful leave
   from 18 March 2008 to 23 October 2009. The judge was therefore  wrong  to
   allow the appeal under the immigration rules and that  in  turn  infected
   his Article 8 findings.

13. Mr Ahmed said that he was not running the 3C argument  and  I  summarise
   his submissions as follows. He submitted that the long residence rule did
   not require the appellant to  have  made  a  valid  application  for  the
   provisions to bite and that, provided there  was  a  pending  application
   before the Secretary of State, such as the appellant's  request  for  the
   exercise of discretion  in  his  favour,  that  was  sufficient  for  the
   purposes of paragraph 276B.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
   conclusion that he did on the  basis  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
   appellant had been  trying  throughout  to  regularise  his  status.  The
   absence of any deliberate or intentional breach of the immigration  rules
   weighed in the appellant's favour and the judge was therefore entitled to
   allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


14. I advised the parties that in my view the judge had materially erred  in
   law by considering the 11 March 2008 letter as an  application  extending
   the appellant's leave under section 3C. I agreed with the respondent that
   the appellant had had no leave between 18 March 2008 and 23 October  2009
   and was unlawfully in the UK throughout that period so that he could  not
   succeed in demonstrating 10 years of  continuous  lawful  residence.  The
   judge was wrong to find that the appellant could meet the requirements of
   paragraph 276B and this in turn infected his  proportionality  assessment
   under Article 8. I therefore set aside the judge's decision and asked the
   parties how they would wish me to re-make the decision. Both were content
   to make further submissions and Mr Ahmed confirmed that  the  appellant's
   circumstances had not changed and that there was no further  evidence  to
   be considered. I then heard further submissions with a view to  re-making
   the decision.


15. Whilst Mr Ahmed's submission was  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to
   carry out an exercise  of  discretion  under  paragraph  276B,  Mr  Mills
   submitted that discretion had been considered in accordance with the Long
   Residence Guidance, as found  at  page  172  of  the  appellant's  appeal
   bundle. There was nothing in the appellant's circumstances  to  meet  the
   scenarios given in the guidance to justify the exercise of discretion  in
   his  favour.  There  was  nothing  exceptional  about   the   appellant's
   circumstances. In any event the respondent  had  clearly  considered  the
   question of discretion and had reconsidered the  appellant's  application
   in her letter of 27 May 2015. The  appellant  could  not  succeed  on  an
   Article 8 claim outside the rules on private life grounds. As  a  student
   his leave was always precarious and accordingly little  weight  could  be
   attached to his private life.


16. Mr Ahmed said that discretion had  not  been  properly  considered.  The
   appellant's removal was not in the public interest. He had been in the UK
   lawfully, he spoke English and was well integrated and not  a  burden  on
   the taxpayer. Mr Ahmed referred to the respondent's delay in  considering
   the appellant's application and the fact that the GCID notes at  page  57
   showed that it was decided to consider his application as one for student
   leave and to grant leave on 23 October 2009.


17. At this point the appellant passed Mr Ahmed a further  document  showing
   his admission notice to examinations in May 2017. Mr Ahmed said that  his
   circumstances had otherwise not changed and that he was  simply  awaiting
   the outcome of this appeal.

Consideration and Findings

18. I have to confess to having had some difficulty in following Mr  Ahmed's
   submissions which appeared to include a concession that section 3C  leave
   was not a matter being relied upon but to then proceed on the basis  that
   the appellant was nevertheless able to meet the requirements of paragraph
   276B  given  that  any  periods  without  leave  were  spent  seeking  to
   regularise his status. I did  not,  in  any  event,  find  merit  in  his
   submissions.

19. It is plain that the appellant's letter of 11  March  2008  was  not  an
   application  triggering  3C  leave.  It  was   merely   a   request   for
   reconsideration of his original  application,  following  the  suggestion
   made by Judge Petherbridge. Neither was the respondent's response  of  12
   June 2008 an immigration decision, but it was merely  a  refusal  by  the
   respondent to take any further action in the appellant's case followed by
   an advice to make  a  fresh  application  if  he  required  there  to  be
   consideration of his position  outside  the  immigration  rules.  In  any
   event, as I advised the parties, the appellant was not  able  to  make  a
   valid application whilst his appeal was still pending, further to section
   3C(4) of the Immigration Act 1971.  Accordingly  the  appellant's  lawful
   residence, and his 3C leave, came to an end when his appeal  rights  were
   exhausted on 17 March 2008. The next valid application made was on 2 July
   2008, which was more than 28 days later and was therefore made at a  time
   when he was an overstayer.


20. As to the exercise of discretion by the respondent in regard to the  gap
   in the appellant's residence between 18 March 2008 and 23  October  2009,
   the Home Office guidance makes it clear that there  must  be  exceptional
   reasons for an application to have been made more than  28  days  out  of
   time. Mr Ahmed's submission in that respect  was,  I  believe,  that  the
   respondent had failed to consider the exercise  of  discretion  and  that
   discretion ought to have been exercised in the appellant's favour because
   he was following  the  advice  of  Judge  Petherbridge  in  requesting  a
   reconsideration and was seeking to regularise his status  throughout  the
   relevant period. However it is clear that the respondent did consider the
   exercise of discretion but declined to exercise  it  in  the  appellant's
   favour. The respondent  considered  whether  to  exercise  discretion  in
   relation to the decision refusing further student leave, as seen  in  her
   reply of 12 June 2008 (page 73  of  the  appeal  bundle)  and  considered
   discretion when reconsidering the 22 December 2014 decision to refuse ILR
   in her  letter  of  27  May  2015.  In  the  decision  of  16  July  2015
   consideration  was  given  to  whether   there   were   any   exceptional
   circumstances arising in the appellant's case, albeit in the  context  of
   Article 8. In  any  event  there  clearly  were  no  exceptional  reasons
   justifying a grant of discretion in the appellant's favour in respect  of
   the gap in his lawful residence. Mr Ahmed relied on  the  GCID  notes  at
   page 57 as providing some justification given that the caseworker decided
   to change his status back to that of a student following his  application
   outside the immigration  rules  when  granting  leave  in  October  2009.
   However it is relevant to note that the following entries, which Mr Ahmed
   did not draw to my attention, refer to the appellant's continued  failure
   in his examinations. Indeed it is not clear  why  leave  was  granted  in
   October 2009.


21. Accordingly the appellant plainly could not  meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 276B on the basis of 10 years continuous lawful  residence.  It
   is not suggested that he is  able  to  meet  the  criteria  in  paragraph
   276ADE(1) and I find there to be nothing in the evidence to suggest  that
   there are any  compelling  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
   outside  the  rules  or   that   the   appellant's   removal   would   be
   disproportionate and in breach of Article 8. Although Judge  Hollingworth
   took into account the  appellant's  ties  to  the  UK  in  terms  of  his
   employment, education and friends, there is in fact limited  evidence  of
   such  ties  and  the  bundle  of  documents,  whilst  referring  to   the
   appellant's registration for examinations, does not actually include  any
   evidence of educational achievements or  qualifications.  The  admissions
   notice submitted by the appellant at the hearing before me shows no  more
   than the appellant is continuing to take examinations  some  eight  years
   after the appeal before Judge Petherbridge. In  accordance  with  section
   117B(5) little weight is to be accorded to the appellant's  private  life
   in any event, and the fact that he  speaks  English  and  is  financially
   independent are neutral factors.


22. For all of these reasons the appellant cannot succeed in his  Article  8
   claim. He has no current basis of stay and plainly any interference  with
   his private life in the UK would  be  proportionate  and  in  the  public
   interest. I therefore dismiss his appeal on human rights grounds.

DECISION

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error
   on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly allowed
   and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside as stated above.
   I re-make the decision by dismissing Mr Shibdoyal's appeal.












Signed:       [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 13 June 2017
