
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02716/2017
                                                               HU/02738/2017
                                                               HU/02719/2017
                                                               HU/02725/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                          | On 17th October 2018         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL MONSON


                                   Between

                        1) coo (NIGERIA)
                        2) feo (nIGERIA)
                        3) jeo (nIGERIA)
                        4) cdo (NIGERIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Jaufurally, Solicitor, Callistes Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint James QC, who, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  11  May  2018,
    dismissed their human rights appeals which were  primarily  brought  on
    the basis that the third and fourth appellants had accrued  over  seven
    years' residence in the UK as children, and hence it was not reasonable
    to expect them to leave the UK with their parents (the first and second
    appellants), who were overstayers.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    make an anonymity direction, but as the central issue in the appeals is
    whether the best interests of the minor children should or  should  not
    prevail over wider proportionality considerations,  I  consider  it  is
    appropriate to make an anonymity direction for these proceedings in the
    Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 13 August 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle granted permission to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the Judge's proportionality assessment
         is flawed because he failed to take into account the length of time
         the two child appellants had been in the UK and did not follow  the
         guidance in MT and ET (Child's best interests; ex-temporary  pilot)
         Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).

         3.  It is arguable that the Judge had failed to take account of the
         best interests of the children and had failed to take into  account
         the length of residence of the two child appellants in  considering
         this case.   It is arguable that the Judge did not make any  proper
         findings in relation to the children's best interests, and there is
         no finding on the strong, powerful reasons which favour removal."

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellants are all nationals  of  Nigeria.   The  first  appellant,
    whose date of birth is 17 December 1971, is the husband of  the  second
    appellant, whose date of birth is 17 April 1981.  They are the  parents
    of the third appellant, [JEO], whose date of birth is 4 March 2006, and
    of the fourth appellant, [CDO], whose date of birth is 21 April 2008.

 4. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on or about  16  January
    2008, with valid entry clearance as a student.  He remained lawfully in
    the UK in the capacity of a student until 31 May  2011.   On  31  March
    2011 he applied for further leave to remain as a Highly  Skilled  (Post
    study work) migrant, and was granted leave in this  capacity  until  18
    July 2013.  On 10 July 2013 he applied for further leave to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of family and private life established here.   This
    application was refused on 12 August 2013, and his appeal against  that
    refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nightingale  on  29
    July 2014.  He applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
    but permission was refused on 14  August  2014,  whereupon  his  appeal
    rights became exhausted.

 5. On  16  September  2008  the  remaining  appellants  joined  the  first
    appellant in the UK as his dependants.  At all material  times  up  and
    until 14 October 2014, the second to fourth  appellants  were  lawfully
    present in the UK as the dependants of the first appellant,  save  that
    for reasons which are unclear the fourth appellant was not included  as
    an appellant in the appeal heard by Judge Nightingale.

 6. Judge Nightingale also referred to  the  existence  of  two  additional
    children, also not included in the appeal before her.  There was a  boy
    who had been born on 14 March 2011 in the UK, and another boy  who  had
    been born on 6 November 2013 in the UK.

 7. At the time of the hearing before Judge Nightingale, [JEO] was aged  8.
    But she had been born in Benin, not the UK, and she had not yet accrued
    seven years' residence in the UK.

 8. On 8 October 2015 the first appellant made a human  rights  application
    for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of family life as a  partner
    and parent in the UK.  By this time, both [JEO] and [CDO]  had  accrued
    over seven years' continuous residence in the UK.

 9. On 31 January 2017 the respondent gave her reasons  for  refusal.   She
    understood that the first appellant had two children in the  UK.   (The
    respondent appears to have been unaware  that  he  had  two  additional
    children in the UK, making four altogether.)  The two children declared
    in the application had both accrued over seven years' residence in  the
    UK.  It was not unreasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK  as  they
    would be returning to Nigeria with their parents as part  of  a  family
    unit.  It was generally accepted that the best  interests  of  a  child
    whose parents were facing removal from the UK were best served by  that
    child remaining with their parents and being removed with  them.   This
    represented the centrality of a child's relationship with their parents
    in determining their well-being.  The children were citizens of Nigeria
    and they would have full rights to live there and  to  continue  to  be
    supported by both parents.

10. The children were currently enrolled in education in the UK.   However,
    Nigeria had a functioning education system which the children would  be
    able to enter.  He and his partner would be able to  work  legally  and
    use the skills and experience they had gained in the UK to support  job
    applications in Nigeria.   It  was  both  reasonable  and  section  55-
    compliant for both children to return to Nigeria with him.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellants' appeals came before Judge Jones QC  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross on 23 April 2018.  There was  no  appearance  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, but Mr Jaufurally appeared on behalf of the appellants.

12. The  Judge  received  oral  evidence  from  the  parents,  and  in  his
    subsequent decision he made the following findings of fact at paragraph
    [17]:

          a) The second appellant had lied  quite  deliberately,  when  she
             claimed that her husband had  ceased  working  in  2014.   The
             first appellant traded and continued to trade in clothing, and
             in doing so  he  had  chosen  to  flaunt  the  employment  and
             immigration laws of this country.

          b)  The  children  had  had  the  advantage  of  publicly  funded
             schooling in this country since becoming of  school  age.   In
             the case of [JEO], that meant from sometime in or about  2011;
             and in the case of [CDO], it meant from  some  time  in  about
             2013, when he would have been five years of age.

          c) The family lived in a rented house, and the  rental  outgoings
             were funded from the husband's  income  derived  from  illegal
             working.

13. The Judge continued: "...I can make no findings concerning  the  nature
    and extent of any private life with  any  of  the  appellants  in  this
    country, because none of them has chosen to given any or  any  detailed
    evidence relating thereto.  The only  relevant  evidence  that  I  have
    related to private life relates to the fact that the third  and  fourth
    appellants attend school.  As a matter of common sense,  I  proceed  on
    the basis that each appellant is likely to have built up  a  circle  of
    friends and acquaintances, but  over  and  above  that,  I  can  go  no
    further.  None of the appellants has given evidence of  involvement  in
    things  such  as  matters  religious,  romantic,  political,  cultural,
    sporting, charitable or just general social activity."

14. At paragraph [33], the Judge said that the essence of the  appeals  was
    whether it would be unreasonable to expect the third  and  fourth-named
    appellants, or either of them, to leave the UK.  At paragraph [34],  he
    said that those inward looking and rather precious about life in the UK
    might instinctively arrive at the knee-jerk response that it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK: "Those who take  a
    more global, adventurous view of life's opportunities  and  experiences
    may well take a different view.  As the Court  of  Appeal  has  pointed
    out, I have to take a holistic, rounded view and keep in mind  that  it
    is not the duty of the United Kingdom to educate the  world  at  public
    expense.  In my judgment this is particular  so  where  the  first  and
    second-named appellants have quite deliberately and cynically sought to
    manipulate themselves into a position  where  they  believe  that  they
    would benefit from any such decision being made in favour or either  or
    both of their children."

15. At paragraph [35], the Judge observed that  children  and  adolescents,
    along with their respective families, move from city to city, county to
    county, country to country, and continent to continent with regularity.
     It was not some kind of novel  event.   Sometimes  it  occurred  as  a
    matter of choice - for example, when a family member sees an employment
    opportunity or wishes to relocate to a more congenial  environment.  It
    may arise as a matter of necessity, either economic or political.   For
    most, such an event presented as an exciting new horizon, which  itself
    could bring new opportunities and experiences to help  develop  a  more
    worldly experience for a mature young person.

16. At paragraph [39], the Judge cautioned  himself  again  as  not  to  be
    influenced by the sins of  the  appellant's  parents.   Notwithstanding
    that caveat, he did not consider it unreasonable to expect the children
    to depart from the UK for Nigeria within the  bosom  of  their  nuclear
    family.  He went on to give nine reasons for this conclusion.   One  of
    them was as follows: "Despite the unspoken tendency in  some  decisions
    of the higher courts to assume that a person's best interests are  best
    served by him/her remaining in the United Kingdom, any such  sentiment,
    borne  primarily  of  a  consideration   of   the   numerous   material
    considerations which I have sought to identify above, is as vacuous  as
    it is presumptuous."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Jaufurally developed the arguments advanced in  the  permission
    application. He submitted that the Judge had gone on a  frolic  of  his
    own.  He had not applied  the  guidance  given  by  Elias  L  J  in  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  He had failed  to  take  into  account
    that the children had been in the UK for nearly ten years, and both  of
    them had established significant social contacts involving  friends  in
    school and outside.  Powerful reasons had to exist  for  their  removal
    from the UK in these circumstances, and the fact that their parents had
    decided to stay here without leave since October 2014 did not amount to
    powerful reasons.

18. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that the Judge had taken  into  account
    the length of residence  of  the  children,  as  he  had  set  out  the
    immigration histories of all the appellants earlier  in  his  decision.
    He drew attention to the fact that the Judge had highlighted the dearth
    of evidence relating to private life.  In the circumstances, the  Judge
    had given adequate reasons for finding that it was reasonable to expect
    the children to return to Nigeria with their parents.

19. Having heard from both representatives, I ruled that an  error  of  law
    was made out.  I gave my reasons for so finding in short form,  and  my
    written reasons are set out below.

20. I invited the representatives to make submissions on how  the  decision
    should be re-made.  Mr Whitwell invited me to reach the same conclusion
    as the First-tier Tribunal.  The fact that the  10-year  watershed  had
    now  been  passed  did  not  make  a   material   difference   to   the
    proportionality assessment.  Mr Jaufurally submitted that the fact that
    the children had now accrued over 10  years'  residence  fortified  the
    case that the appeals ought to be allowed, following the  reasoning  of
    the Upper Tribunal in MT and ET.

The Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

21. At paragraph [49] of MA, Elias L J said: "However, the  fact  that  the
    child has been in the UK  for  seven  years  would  need  to  be  given
    significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two  related
    reasons: first, because of its relevance to determining the nature  and
    strength  of  the  child's  best  interests;  and  second,  because  it
    establishes a starting point that leave should be granted unless  there
    are powerful reasons to the contrary."

22. I consider that the Judge identified powerful reasons as to why it  was
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the country.   But  he  fell
    into error in not visibly incorporating into his analysis the reasoning
    of Elias LJ set out above, or similar reasoning which is to be found in
    numerous other authorities, including MT and ET.

23. The Judge deliberately eschewed the two-stage  "hypothetical"  approach
    for  the  resolution  of  the  question  of  reasonableness  which  was
    articulated by Clarke L J in EV (Philippines) -v-  SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ
    874 at paragraphs [33]-[37], preferring the "real  world"  approach  of
    Lewison LJ in the same case, at paragraphs [49] following.

24. The other Judge in the three-man panel agreed with both  judgments,  as
    Judge Jones noted.  However, it was the hypothetical approach of Clarke
    LJ which was expressly  approved  and  applied  by  Elias  L  J  in  MA
    (Pakistan).

25. While the 'real world' approach operates satisfactorily in cases  where
    children have  not  accrued  seven  years'  residence,  it  is  not  an
    appropriate approach on a stand-alone basis in cases  where  the  seven
    year Rule is in play.  The starting point of the 'real world'  approach
    is that it is in the best interests of minor children to return to  the
    country of origin with their parents  who  have  no  leave  to  remain.
    Conversely, the required starting point in seven  year  Rule  cases  is
    that prima facie it is in the children's best interests to remain here,
    irrespective of the immigration status of their parents.

26. The upshot is that the Judge did not perform an  adequate  analysis  of
    the children's best interests. He did not make a  clear  finding  about
    where on the spectrum their best interests lay,  before  moving  on  to
    consider wider proportionality considerations.

27. Justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be done, and  it  is
    well established that the assessment of the best  interests  of  minors
    facing removal must be properly performed.  Accordingly,  the  decision
    must be set aside on the grounds of inadequate reasoning.

The Remaking of the Decision

Best Interest Guidance

28. A useful summary of the learning on the best interests of  children  in
    the context of immigration is to be  found  in  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others
    (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC):

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.
The relationship between the Rules and Section 117B(6)

29. In AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  the
    duty of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  quite  clear.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal was required  to  have  regard  to  considerations  listed  in
    Section  117B.   It  had  no  discretion  to   leave   any   of   those
    considerations out of account, if  it  was  a  consideration  that  was
    raised on the evidence before it.  The Tribunal continued in  paragraph
    [13]:

         There is also in our judgment no requirement that  the  FtT  should
         pose and answer the same question  more  than  once,  simply  as  a
         matter of form.  Thus since both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the
         Immigration Rules, and s117B(6), both raise the  same  question  in
         relation to a particular child, of  whether  or  not  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect that child to leave the UK: it is  a  question
         that need only be answered once

The question of reasonableness

30. In MA (Pakistan) and Others, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal
    (IAC) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph [45] Elias LJ said:

         In my judgment, the court should have regard to the conduct of  the
         applicant and any other matters relevant  to  the  public  interest
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' concept under Section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         Section 117B(6).  ...  The critical point is that  Section  117C(5)
         is in substance a  free-standing  provision  in  the  same  way  as
         Section 117B(6), and even so the court in  MM  (Uganda)  held  that
         wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into  account
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' criterion.  It seems to me that it
         must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criterion  in
         Section 117B(6).  It would not be appropriate to  distinguish  that
         decision simply because I have reservations whether it is  correct.
         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct and that the only significance of  Section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year Rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted.

31. At paragraph [46] Elias LJ said that the published Home  Office  Policy
    guidance merely confirmed what is implicit in adopting  a  policy  [the
    seven year rule] of this nature:

         After such a period of time the child will have put down roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less when the children are very  young
         because the focus of their lives will be on their families, but the
         disruption becomes more serious as they  get  older.  Moreover,  in
         these cases there must  be  a  very  strong  expectation  that  the
         child's best interests will to be remain in the UK with his parents
         as part of  a  family  unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a  primary
         consideration in the proportionality assessment.

32. At paragraph [48] Elias LJ cited with approval the explanation given by
    Clarke LJ in EV (Phillipines) at  [34]-[37]  as  to  how  the  Tribunal
    should apply the  proportionality  test  where  wider  public  interest
    considerations are in play, in circumstances where the  best  interests
    of the child dictate that he should remain with his  parents.  At  [36]
    Clarke LJ said that  if  it  is  overwhelmingly  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain, the need to maintain immigration control may  well
    not tip the balance. By contrast if it is in the child's best interests
    to remain, but only on balance (with some factors  pointing  the  other
    way), the result may be the opposite. Clarke LJ continued in [37]:

         In the balance on the other side  there  falls  to  be  taken  into
         account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to  maintain
         immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-being  of  the
         country and the fact that, ex hypothesi,  the  applicants  have  no
         entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the  parents  may
         also be relevant e.g.  if  they  are  overstayers,  or  have  acted
         deceitfully.

Preservation of  the  Primary  Findings  of  Fact  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal

33. As will be apparent from my error of law ruling, the  primary  findings
    of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  do  not  require  to  be
    revisited, and therefore they  are  preserved.   The  only  potentially
    material development is that the children  have  now  accrued  over  10
    years' residence.  I was told that [JEO] is now in Year 8 at  secondary
    school.

Best Interests

34. [JEO] has the strongest private life claim, as she is the oldest child.
     The fact that she has now resided in the UK for 10 years does not have
    the same significance as it would if she had been born here, as in that
    event she would be eligible to apply for naturalisation  as  a  British
    citizen.  But the third and fourth principles of  Azimi-Moayed  clearly
    operate in her favour.  Not only is she three years past the seven year
    watershed, but she has also accrued seven years' residence from the age
    of four, and she  had  embarked  on  her  secondary  school  education.
    Although there is no specific evidence about any  ties  which  she  has
    formed outside the home, she can be expected to have  established  some
    significant social contacts involving friends in school.

35. However, she has  not  yet  reached  a  significant  milestone  in  her
    education.  She is still a long way off  from  taking  GCSEs.   She  is
    likely to receive an adequate education in Nigeria.  With  the  support
    of her parents in adjusting to life  there,  and  in  common  with  her
    younger siblings, she will be able to enjoy all the benefits  attendant
    upon her Nigerian citizenship, including being immersed in  the  social
    and cultural milieu from which both her parents spring. As Judge  Jones
    put it at paragraph [39] of his decision, the children  can  enjoy  the
    exciting prospect of being able  to  experience  and/or  embrace  their
    natural culture and traditions.

36. In her decision, Judge Nightingale found that the first  appellant  was
    educated to degree standard in Nigeria and had considerable links  with
    that country.  He had acquired an MBA through his studies  in  the  UK.
    She found that the second appellant had also been educated  in  Nigeria
    to GCSE standard.  Both of them spoke excellent English  and  presented
    as intelligent and articulate individuals.  She found that  the  family
    connections in Nigeria included two sisters and a brother of the  first
    appellant, and a sibling of  the  second  appellant.   There  was  also
    family property.  It was not suggested  that  the  siblings  would  not
    assist the appellants, if necessary, in reintegrating into Nigeria.

37. Accordingly, relocation to Nigeria would carry the additional advantage
    of the children being able to enjoy family reunion with extended family
    members there, including uncles and aunts.

38. Nonetheless, I accept that the third and fourth principles outweigh the
    first and second principles in Azimi-Moayed, with the consequence  that
    overall it is in her best interests  to  remain  in  the  UK  with  her
    parents and younger siblings.  The same applies to [CDO],  albeit  with
    slightly lesser force, as he has not  accrued  seven  years'  residence
    from the age of four.

39. However, while overall it is in the best interests of both children  to
    remain in the UK, it is not overwhelmingly so.  There are some  factors
    pointing the other way, which are the  ones  identified  in  paragraphs
    [35] to [37] above.

Wider Proportionality Considerations

40. In order to answer the question of whether it is reasonable  to  expect
    the children to leave the UK despite being in their best  interests  to
    remain  here,  it  is  necessary  to  have   regard   to   have   wider
    proportionality considerations.  Both parents have adverse  immigration
    histories.  They are not mere overstayers.  They have remained  in  the
    UK in defiance of  the  decision  of  Judge  Nightingale  that  it  was
    reasonable to expect them and the children to leave the  country.   The
    finding of Judge Nightingale was that the parents were in good  health,
    as were all their children, and were quite capable of taking employment
    in Nigeria, earning a living and supporting their  family.   While  the
    matter of educating their children might prove to be more expensive  in
    Nigeria, she could not find that  this  should  override  the  need  to
    maintain fair and effective immigration control so as to safeguard  the
    economic wellbeing of the UK: "The education of four children at public
    expense is, in short, an expensive matter."

41. So, the parents' continued presence  in  the  UK  has  been,  and  will
    continue to be, a considerable burden on the taxpayer.  There  is  also
    the aggravating factor that the parents have only been able  to  remain
    in the UK with their children since  October  2014  through  the  first
    appellant working illegally.  Judge Jones also made a finding of deceit
    against the second appellant.  Whereas the first appellant acknowledged
    that he had been  supporting  the  family  by  working  illegally,  she
    claimed in her evidence that since October 2014 a person  called  Sunni
    had paid their rent and utility bills and had provided  "pocket  money"
    for the entire family at the rate of �5,000 a month.  The  Judge  found
    this to be a lie.

42. Mr Jaufurally submits that the immigration history of  the  parents  is
    not as bad as that of the mother in MT & ET, and therefore,  by  parity
    of reasoning, he submits that the best interests of the children should
    prevail.  However, I consider  that  the  child  in  that  case  had  a
    stronger private life claim than [JEO], as she was aged 14.

43. I do not accept that the legal effect  of  MA  (Pakistan)  is  that  10
    years' residence  as  a  child  is  a  trump  card  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case. In AM (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180, cited
    by Judge Jones at [29] of his decision, the Court of Appeal found  that
    the  FTT  had  not  erred  in  dismissing  appeals  involving   teenage
    qualifying children aged 16 and 13 - and hence,  in  the  case  of  the
    oldest qualifying child, with a much stronger private life  claim  than
    [JEO].

44. In her decision, Judge Nightingale rightly applied the fifth  principle
    of Azimi-Moayed, which is that those who come to the  UK  as  students,
    and decide to found families while they are here, must  not  expect  to
    remain here once they have finished their studies.  Rather,  they  must
    expect to return to their home countries with their  children.   Having
    regard (a) to the outcome of the appeals before Judge Nightingale,  and
    the refusal of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and (b)  the
    subsequent  conduct  of  the  parents,  I  consider  that   there   are
    sufficiently strong reasons for expecting the children to leave the UK.
     While the first and second appellants have a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with their children, it is reasonable  to  expect
    all the children, including the third and fourth appellants,  to  leave
    the country. None of the other relevant public interest  considerations
    arising under Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  militate  against  the
    proportionality of the removal of the  family.  The  decision  appealed
    against strikes a fair balance between, on the one hand, the rights and
    interests of the appellants and, on the other hand, the wider interests
    of society.  It is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to
    be achieved, namely the protection of the country's economic  wellbeing
    and the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the appellants' appeals on human rights grounds are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

