
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02754/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 December 2017                    |On 24 January 2018                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                                  MISS Y C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lamb of Counsel, AP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As the appellant is a  minor  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity
    order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no
    report of these proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China who was born  on  [  ]  1997.   She
    initially applied for entry clearance to join the sponsor in the UK  in
    November 2013 when she applied with her  mother  and  younger  brother.
    That application was refused on 14 February 2014 on the basis that  her
    parents were not in a subsisting relationship  and  did  not  meet  the
    financial requirements  under  Appendix  FM.   The  appellant  appealed
    against that decision as a dependant of her mother and that appeal  was
    dismissed on 13 November 2014.

 3. On 27 April 2015 the appellant applied for entry clearance to join  her
    father, [YL], who is a British national and is the appellant's sponsor.
    On 13 July 2015 the Entry Clearance  Officer  refused  the  appellant's
    application on the basis that it was not accepted that the  account  of
    the appellant's circumstances were as claimed,  that  the  sponsor  had
    sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing or that  there  were
    serious and compelling family or other considerations to make exclusion
    from the UK undesirable.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated  on  18  October  2016  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R G Walters dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and on 6 September 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant's case, as set out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  as
    amplified by Mr Lam at the hearing, are firstly that the judge did  not
    consider correctly the test as set out in the case of TD (Yemen) [2006]
    which is whether the sponsor has continuing control and direction  over
    the child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
    the child's life.  The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  fails  to
    make any findings on whether the appellant has been  supported  by  the
    sponsor  and  appeared  to  base  findings  on  the   issue   of   sole
    responsibility mainly on the fact that the sponsor  did  not  know  the
    content of the appellant's upcoming degree course. This  is  irrational
    for a number of reasons; the  sponsor  is  a  lay  person  who  has  no
    specialist knowledge of spatial informatics and digitalised technology,
    the appellant only started the course in September so it would  not  be
    reasonable to expect  the  sponsor  to  be  familiar  with  the  course
    structure unlike other conventional subjects such as law  or  medicine,
    the sponsor categorically stated that he helped  the  appellant  choose
    the university from six which she was thinking of applying  for.   This
    demonstrates that the sponsor had a strong input into  the  appellant's
    decision in her choice of universities.  It is unreasonable  to  expect
    the sponsor alone, without the input of  the  appellant,  to  make  the
    decision about the university given the age of the  appellant  and  the
    level of education.  In paragraphs 16 and 17 of the  sponsor's  witness
    statement he confirmed that it was he who made  the  decision  for  the
    appellant to live in another property.  When making a finding  on  this
    in paragraphs 16 and 17 Judge Walters did not  accurately  reflect  the
    evidence of the sponsor in full.

 7. Ground 2 is that the judge's conclusion, based on the sponsor's answers
    as to what the appellant was good at, is irrational.  In  paragraph  40
    the judge indicated he would  expect  the  sponsor  to  know  all  four
    subjects.  The question in re-examination was  not  what  subjects  the
    appellant got an A grade  in  school,  rather  the  question  was  what
    subject was the appellant good at.  It is  entirely  possible  for  the
    appellant to have been better at one or more subjects even though  they
    are all grade As.

 8. Ground 3 is that the judge expected documentary evidence to be produced
    from the appellant's mother to the effect that she is willing  to  give
    up visitation rights and for the appellant to come to the UK.  There is
    no legal requirement for the sponsor to seek approval from his  ex-wife
    for the appellant to come to the UK and given the fact that there is no
    contact between the mother and the appellant it is irrational to expect
    the  appellant  to  have  such  a  document.    The  sponsor  has  sole
    responsibility over  the  upbringing  of  the  appellant,  custody  has
    already been awarded to him and it is the sponsor's decision alone  for
    the appellant to come to the UK.

 9. Ground 4 is that the judge concluded that  the  appellant's  upbringing
    was  presently  shared  between  the  appellant's   sponsor   and   the
    appellant's grandmother.  The appellant's grandmother is acting only as
    her guardian. It  is  not  in  dispute  that  some  of  the  day-to-day
    responsibility may  be  shared  with  the  grandmother  but  the  major
    decisions are made by the sponsor.  Judge Walters did not make  such  a
    distinction as mentioned, he simply said the appellant's upbringing  is
    presently shared. The judge failed to take into account the  fact  that
    the appellant is financially supporting the appellant.  Judge  Walter's
    conclusion is at odds with the principles of TD (Yemen),  reference  is
    made to paragraphs 52, 57, 58 and 59.

10. Ground 5 asserts that the judge did not undertake a  proper  assessment
    on proportionality.  The judge had made many  findings,  some  of  them
    favourable, some not to the appellant.  It was  wholly  unclear  as  to
    what findings the judge relied on to dismiss the appellant's appeal  on
    Article 8 private and family life.  Further,  he  did  not  explain  in
    clear and brief terms his reasons.

11. In oral submissions Mr Lamb submitted that at paragraph 4 the fact that
    the sponsor was not able to answer comprehensively questions  regarding
    the course should be considered against the background that this is  an
    extremely complex course, the appellant is a lay person  and  that  the
    appellant in her statement said she had discussed the course  with  her
    father.  With regard to shared responsibility  he  submitted  that  the
    judge agreed that there was shared responsibility however the  role  of
    the grandmother is to see to the appellant's daily needs.  He  referred
    to TD (Yemen) and the principles set out at paragraphs 52, 53  and  57.
    The judge did not distinguish between  meeting  the  appellant's  daily
    needs and requirements.  In TD (Yemen) it was held that there  will  be
    shared care where there  is  absence.   The  judge  has  not  made  any
    findings with regard to the grandmother's witness statement  where  she
    says at paragraph 4 that she is only acting as a guardian, the  sponsor
    sends her money and that the sponsor remains responsible for the  major
    decisions.  He referred to paragraph 39 of the decision  and  submitted
    the judge was expecting a document from the mother to give consent  for
    the appellant to go to the UK.  However there is no  legal  requirement
    in the divorce settlement for the  mother  to  give  consent.   If  the
    mother wants to visit the appellant that is  up  to  her,  however  the
    appellant has not seen her mother since 2014 that was confirmed in  the
    appellant's  witness  statement.   The  judge   did   not   take   into
    consideration the age of the  appellant  when  making  decisions  about
    university courses and which university to go to.  The judge failed  to
    take into account the financial aspect of  the  father  supporting  the
    daughter.  He acknowledged that by itself this is not determinative but
    should be taken into account.

12. Mr Mills submitted that this case must be considered in the context  of
    the previous appeal.  In the 2014 decision Judge Hodgkinson  found  the
    sponsor  was  deliberately  untruthful.   The  fact  that  the  sponsor
    previously lied  to  the  Tribunal  was  relevant  when  assessing  his
    evidence.  He submitted that the judge was not saying that there was  a
    requirement for a legal document giving consent for  the  appellant  to
    come to the UK but given the factual history the judge  found  that  it
    seemed surprising that there was nothing from the  appellant's  mother.
    At paragraph 7 the judge  is  quoting  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision, the Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  expressly  disputed  that
    within days of her previous appeal,  having  been  brought  up  by  the
    appellant for seven years, the mother suddenly relinquished control and
    care of her daughter.  In that context it is surprising that  there  is
    nothing from the parent who had been the main carer for  the  child  up
    until that stage and in a few short weeks gave her up.  He referred  to
    paragraph 40 and said that there was a general lack  of  knowledge  and
    vagueness and the judge was only using the lack of knowledge about  the
    degree course, the judge sets out for example.  The judge said that  if
    the appellant has sole responsibility the judge does not  find  because
    the grandmother had shared care that the sponsor  does  not  have  sole
    responsibility.  This goes far beyond that, the judge  found  that  the
    appellant does not seem to know what his daughter is doing.

13. In reply Mr Lamb submitted that Devaseelan  [2004]  UKIAT  000282  only
    deals with asylum claims.  This previous decision  did  not  deal  with
    sole responsibility and things have moved on.  He submitted  that  this
    was not a situation where the mother was looking  after  the  daughter.
    There were lots of problems and arguments and  the  relationship  broke
    down and the  appellant  has  not  seen  her  mother  since  2014.   He
    submitted that the sponsor went back to China on a number of  occasions
    to make sure that things were going smoothly.  He spent two  months  in
    China organising accommodation.  This was a strong indication that  the
    sponsor made decisions about his daughter.  Mr Lamb submitted that  the
    sponsor did not claim sole responsibility until comparatively recently,
    custody was only granted to the sponsor on 28 November 2014.  It  would
    be unreasonable given the age of the appellant at the time of  choosing
    the course that the sponsor would make the sole decision for her choice
    of university and subject.  Excessive weight was placed by the judge on
    this perceived reason i.e. the lack of very  specific  knowledge  about
    her course.

Discussion

14. The  judge  took  as  the  starting  point  the  previous  decision  of
    Immigration Judge Hodgkinson promulgated  on  14  November  2014.   The
    judge correctly had regard to this decision -  see  B  (Pakistan)  2003
    UKIAT 00053.

15. From paragraphs 11 to 36 the  judge  set  out  the  evidence  from  the
    sponsor, the appellant and her grandmother in some detail.   The  judge
    also took into account the divorce agreement.  Having set out all  this
    evidence the judge then set out at paragraph 40:

         "40. Having considered all  the  evidence,  I  concluded  that  the
             Appellant's upbringing is presently shared between the Sponsor
             and the Appellant's grandmother.  I did not  accept  that  the
             Sponsor has been  involved  in  the  major  decisions  of  the
             Appellant's life.  For example, I found it probable  that  she
             chose her university  herself  with  minimal  input  from  the
             Sponsor.  He was certainly extremely vague about  the  content
             of her degree course and why Shanghai Ocean University  was  a
             particularly good university.  I would also have expected  him
             to know all four subjects at which the Appellant had succeeded
             in gaining an 'A' grade at school."

16. This paragraph contains the reasoning and findings of the judge.  I  do
    not accept the assertion that the judge did not consider correctly  the
    test as set out in the case of TD (Yemen) [2006]. In that case, as  set
    out in the headnote:

         "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be  decided  upon  all
         the evidence. Where one parent  is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life. However, where both parents  are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have "sole responsibility".

17. It is clear that what the judge was  considering  in  paragraph  40  is
    whether the sponsor has 'continuing control  and  direction'  over  the
    appellant's upbringing. That is why the judge considered who  made  the
    decisions about which university. I do  not  accept  that  the  judge's
    reference to shared care between the grandmother and sponsor  indicates
    that the judge did not consider 'sole responsibility' correctly.

18. The judge has referred to 4 examples as  to  why  he  has  reached  his
    conclusion - these are examples. A judge does not have to set out every
    detail of the evidence that is accepted or  rejected  as  long  as  the
    reasoning is sufficient to demonstrate why the  judge  arrived  at  the
    conclusion reached. The judge had the benefit of seeing and hearing the
    sponsor give evidence and found him to be  extremely  vague  about  the
    content of the appellant's university course and why the university was
    chosen. Although I accept that this appears to be a highly  specialised
    course the threshold  for  a  finding  that  a  judge's  conclusion  is
    irrational is an extremely high one and a conclusion is not  irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible Edwards - v - Bairstow [1956] AC 14.  However, I do
    accept that the judge  appears  to  have  erred  when  considering  the
    evidence regarding what the appellant is good at at school.  The  judge
    records:

         36. The sponsor was  asked  in  re-examination  what  subjects  the
         appellant was good at, at school, and replied that she had received
         an "A" grade in History and politics. I noted,  however,  that  the
         Appellant's school results at p.33 shows that she also received  an
         "A" grade in Geography and Information Technology.

19. The sponsor was not asked what subjects the  appellant  achieved  an  A
    grade in. That particular finding  of  the  judge  does  appear  to  be
    irrational based on the evidence. If  that  were  the  only  irrational
    finding this would be insufficient to amount to a material error of law
    in this case.

20. With regard to proportionality the judge set out at paragraph 48:

         "48. On the  question  of  proportionality,  I  had  regard  to  my
             previous findings.  Having  considered  all  the  evidence,  I
             found the interference  is  proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved."

21. It is not at all clear how  the  previous  findings  were  balanced  in
    undertaking the proportionality exercise. The judge accepted that there
    was family life between the appellant and sponsor but does  not  appear
    to have considered the effect on their family life of refusal of  entry
    clearance or if he has done so has not set out any  reasoning  in  that
    regard.  Whilst a judge does not have to  repeat  findings  made  where
    they are clearly relevant to consideration of proportionality, in  this
    case the findings were in relation to whether or not  the  sponsor  had
    sole responsibility for the appellant. The appellant was a minor at the
    date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Whilst there do not
    appear to be any welfare issues the judge has not set out what  factors
    he has taken into account in weighing the interference in  family  life
    in  the  balance   when   concluding   that   such   interference   was
    proportionate. This is a material error of law.

22. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

23. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

24. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Hatton Cross before any judge   other  than
    Judge R G Walters  pursuant to section 12(2)(b)  and  12(3)(a)  of  the
    TCEA. A new hearing will be fixed at the next available date.

Decision

The appeal of the appellant against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
is allowed. The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross
before any judge other than Judge R G Walters






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 22 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw





























