
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02446/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 January 2020                    |On 10 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    a r n
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    Respondent to this appeal or members  of  her  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Nazami, Counsel, instructed by Alfred James
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. For ease of reference I shall refer to the  Appellant  in  this  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal  as  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  to  the
    Respondent as the Claimant.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction  in  this  case.  I
    have maintained it in the Upper Tribunal because this  appeal  concerns
    minor children who have been the subject of social services involvement
    and Family Court proceedings.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE ("the judge"), promulgated on  14
    August 2019, in which he allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 25 January 2019,  refusing  her  human
    rights claim.

 4. The Claimant, a citizen of Uganda, had arrived in the United Kingdom in
    August 2002 as a visitor. She overstayed. The human  rights  claim  was
    made on 24 August 2018. In essence, the Claimant's human  rights  claim
    was based on the following matters. She was, and still is, married to a
    Burundi national without status in this country.  She  relied  in  part
    upon her relationship with him. Of  much  greater  significance  was  a
    claim to be the de facto carer for  her  sister's  to  minor  children,
    effectively acting in loco parentis. This was said to  be  because  her
    sister suffered from a significant mental health illness and was unable
    to adequately care for the children. In addition, the sister's  partner
    lived and worked abroad for the great majority of the time.  The  claim
    was that without her presence in the  United  Kingdom,  it  was  highly
    likely that the two minor children would be  taken  into  care  by  the
    local authority, and this  would  be  wholly  contrary  to  their  best
    interests.

The judge's decision

 5. The judge concluded that there would  be  no  danger  to  the  Claimant
    herself if she were to  return  to  Uganda,  nor  would  there  be  any
    significant obstacles to her husband accompanying her ([29]-[30]).

 6. He then turned to the core aspect of the Claimant's  case,  namely  her
    involvement in the care of her sister's children. The judge found  that
    the Claimant and her husband were in effect the  day-to-day  carers  of
    children, notwithstanding the absence of an order from the Family Court
    stating this to be so. The judge regarded  the  Claimant  as  a  wholly
    credible  witness  ([32],  [36],  and  [39])  and  made  reference   to
    corroborative documentary evidence before him, including materials from
    social services, the Family Court (a matter to which I will  return  in
    due course), and medical reports concerning the Claimant's sister.  The
    judge found that the  Claimant  was  the  "primary  care"  of  the  two
    children and that the sister's ability to  provide  adequate  care  was
    "extremely limited". He  made  a  clear  finding  that,  "but  for  the
    presence of the [Claimant] in this household they  [the  two  children]
    would almost certainly have been in full-time  foster  care  under  the
    auspices of a full care order under the  (sic)  Children's  Act  1989."
    Having regard to a Family Court order of December 2017, the  judge  was
    of the view that the Claimant and husband played a  "crucial  role"  in
    the lives of the children.

 7. Having concluded that the Claimant could not succeed with reference  to
    the Article 8-related Immigration Rules, the judge went on to  consider
    whether there were any "exceptional circumstances" in  the  case.  With
    regard to the facts of what he described as a  "highly  unusual  case",
    the judge concluded that the sister's mental fragility (which  included
    the risk of psychotic episodes being triggered by stressful events), he
    concluded that the Claimant's  removal  from  the  household  would  be
    likely to trigger a significant mental health deterioration on the part
    of the sister, with "disastrous" consequences for the two children.  On
    this basis, the appeal was allowed "under Article 8 of the  ECHR"  (the
    judge also  purportedly  allowed  the  appeal  "under  the  immigration
    rules", but that of course is an error, albeit wholly immaterial).

 8. Of real  significance  in  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  a
    procedural step taken by the judge of his own volition and set  out  in
    [18] of his decision. Having noted the absence of up to  date  evidence
    from  social  services  concerning  the  two  children,  he  said   the
    following:

         "I expressed my concern about this but stated that the  appellant's
         representative should make an urgent  request  of  his  instructing
         solicitor to contact [the relevant local authority] to  either  get
         an oral update of the position to be placed in a statement of truth
         before me or get a  letter  from  [the  relevant  local  authority]
         giving their summary of the situation."

 9. Somewhat unfortunately, no formal direction to this effect is  set  out
    at the end of the decision, and nothing further is said as  to  whether
    the Secretary of State's representative  expressed  any  view  on  this
    course of action.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

10. There are three grounds of appeal:  first,  that  the  judge  erred  by
    placing too much weight on the Claimant's own evidence; second, that he
    erred in reaching conclusions that were  not  based  upon  up  to  date
    evidence; third, that the Secretary of State had not had an opportunity
    to see or respond to the post-hearing evidence requested by the judge

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bristow
    on 19 November 2019.

The hearing

12. At the outset of the hearing, it was established  that  the  Claimant's
    solicitors had in fact submitted evidence post-hearing, as requested by
    the judge. A supplementary bundle  of  evidence  relating  to  the  two
    children,  containing  specifically  of  a  document  entitled   "Local
    authority social work evidence template", dated 28 November 2017, and a
    Care Plan, dated 29 November 2017, was sent  in  to  the  Taylor  House
    hearing centre under cover of letter dated 30 July 2019.

13. Ms Everett confirmed that the Secretary of State had not received  this
    evidence. She submitted  that  the  judge  had  acted  with  procedural
    unfairness by failing to direct the Claimant's solicitors to serve  any
    further evidence on the Secretary of State and  by  failing  to  invite
    either further written submissions based on evidence or indeed to  have
    reconvened the hearing for oral submissions.  It  was,  she  submitted,
    very difficult to say that this further evidence  was  immaterial  when
    the Secretary of State and not even had a chance  to  consider  it:  it
    might be that additional issues/questions arose.

14. Ms Nizami submitted that the post-hearing evidence was not "new"  in  a
    sense of it being updated from that which had already been  before  the
    judge. The judge had not made specific reference to  this  evidence  in
    his decision. It was quite possible  that  he  had  not  even  seen  it
    himself before sending his decision for promulgation. It was  submitted
    that the new evidence was immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.

15. At the hearing itself it was near impossible to resolve the question of
    whether the judge might have seen  the  new  evidence  and  potentially
    taken into account when making his decision. In all the  circumstances,
    I reserved my decision on the error of law  issue,  indicating  that  I
    would endeavour to discover whether or not the judge in  fact  had  the
    new evidence before him when promulgating his decision.

Decision on error of law

16. The procedural unfairness issue is put forward in ground 3 and I  shall
    deal with this matter first.

17. The situation arising in this appeal is unsatisfactory. Having taken it
    upon himself to seek  post-hearing  evidence,  the  judge  should  have
    issued  clear  directions  (either  at  the  end  of  his  decision  or
    separately), providing timeframes and, importantly, an opportunity  for
    the Secretary of State to either comment by way of written  submissions
    or request a further oral hearing. This  was  not  done.  In  addition,
    within the body of his decision, the judge has not specifically  stated
    whether  or  not  he  had  received  and  considered  the  post-hearing
    evidence.

18. After the hearing I requested a printout from the ARIA  database  (used
    by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  to  log  all  events
    during the course of an appeal through  the  system).  The  information
    contained therein (which I am satisfied is entirely reliable) indicates
    that although the judge's decision is dated 23 July 2019, it was not in
    fact sent for promulgation until 14 August  2019.  During  the  interim
    period, the post-hearing evidence from the Claimant had  been  received
    at the hearing centre and, it seems, forwarded onto the judge prior  to
    the promulgation date. It is impossible to say for certain  whether  or
    not he in fact received that evidence, or, if he did, whether  he  read
    it prior to sending his decision for promulgation.

19. In order to avoid what would  very  likely  be  relatively  significant
    delays in attempting to either contact the judge directly or  send  out
    the ARIA printout to the parties and ask for comments  thereon,  on  15
    January  2020  I  issued  directions  to  the  parties,  requiring  the
    Claimant's representatives to serve the evidence  in  question  on  the
    Secretary of State and for the Secretary of State to then respond  with
    any submissions on whether the evidence had any impact on the existence
    of a material error of law (the directions are annexed to my decision).

20.  In  the  event,  the  Claimant's  representatives  complied  with  the
    directions, but the Secretary of State did not. There is no evidence to
    suggest that the Secretary of State did not receive the directions.

21. In all the circumstances, I have concluded that I am in a  position  to
    make a decision on the error of law issue without any further delay.

22. In my judgment the  manner  in  which  the  judge  sought  the  further
    evidence from the Claimant was, on the face of it, procedurally unfair.
    What he should have done was to direct that the evidence be  served  on
    the Secretary of State  and  then  to  either  invite  further  written
    submissions  from  the  parties  on  that  evidence  or   to   consider
    reconvening hearing for oral submissions.

23. However, having considered the judge's decision as a whole and read for
    myself the new evidence, I  am  satisfied  that  the  unfair  procedure
    adopted by the judge in respect of that  evidence  played  no  material
    part in his decision on the appeal itself. I say this for the following
    reasons.

24. First, it is in my view very unlikely that the judge actually  saw  the
    new  evidence  prior  to  sending  his  decision  for  promulgation.  I
    appreciate that the ARIA  printout  does  not  decisively  settle  that
    question, but the absence of any reference,  express  or  implicit,  to
    that evidence in the decision is a strong indicator.

25. Second, even if the judge did  see  the  evidence,  the  absence  of  a
    reference to it or even an indication that aspects of the two documents
    were taken account of when reaching the conclusions, satisfies me  that
    the judge did not in fact take  it  into  account.  The  references  to
    documentary evidence upon which the judge did rely relate only  to  the
    bundle that was before him at the hearing. As noted in my directions of
    15 January 2020, the evidence was also not updated, in the  sense  that
    it related back to 2017. Therefore, the  whole  purpose  of  the  judge
    seeking the evidence  was  not  achieved  and  this  is  an  additional
    indicator that it was not taken into account.

26. Third, the Secretary of State  has  had  the  opportunity  to  see  and
    consider the new evidence but has failed to provide any response on the
    question of whether the unfair procedure adopted by the judge  had  any
    bearing on his decision.

27. On this analysis, ground 3 does not disclose a material error of law.

28. There are no errors in respect of  grounds  1  and  2.  The  judge  was
    clearly entitled to take account of the Claimant's own  evidence.  This
    evidence addressed the current circumstances of the  family  unit,  not
    simply historical matters. The judge was fully  entitled  to  find  the
    Claimant to be a credible witness. Further, as the judge himself stated
    within his decision, he did have relevant documentary  evidence  before
    him (quite apart from the post-hearing evidence, even if it was  indeed
    seen by him prior to promulgation). The documentary evidence  contained
    in the  original bundle, although somewhat dated by  the  time  of  the
    hearing, was nonetheless probative, and the judge was entitled to place
    due weight upon it.

29. What I have just said flows into my assessment of ground 2.  The  judge
    was not basing his findings purely on out  of  date  evidence.  He  had
    taken into account the Claimant's  own  evidence  (which  went  to  the
    current position of the family) and was entitled to have found that  to
    be reliable.

30. It follows from the above that the Secretary of State's appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the judge's decision shall stand.

The Family Court documents

31. I have already mentioned the presence of Family Court documents in  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. It does
    not appear  as  though  permission  to  disclose  these  documents  was
    obtained from the  relevant  Family  Court.  If  this  is  so,  certain
    consequences may arise. The Claimant's  solicitors  are  to  provide  a
    written explanation relating to the  disclosure  of  the  Family  Court
    documents.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Direction to the Claimant's legal representatives

     1) No later than 10 days after  this  decision  is  sent  out  to  the
        parties, the Claimant's legal representatives shall file  with  the
        Upper Tribunal (and marked for  the  attention  of  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge  Norton-Taylor)  a  written  explanation  relating   to   the
        production of the Family Court documents to the First-tier Tribunal
        and the Upper Tribunal, addressing in  particular  whether  or  not
        permission to make that  disclosure  was  obtained  by  the  Family
        Court.

Signed      [pic]      Date: 6 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
ANNEX: DIRECTIONS OF 15 JANUARY 2020

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02446/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A R N
                                                                  Respondent


                              DIRECTIONS NOTICE

    1. Following the error of law hearing on 6 January 2020 and further
       information obtained from the Upper Tribunal's database in respect of
       the evidence submitted by Ms A R N to the First-tier Tribunal post-
       hearing, it remains unclear whether the judge in fact saw that
       evidence or, if he did, whether it was taken into account when making
       the decision. It is to be noted that the judge makes no reference to
       the 'new' evidence in his decision and that that evidence was not
       'updated' in the sense intended by the judge when seeking it (see
       [18] of the decision. The evidence in fact dates from late 2017).

    2. In all the circumstances, it is appropriate to issue directions prior
       to a decision on error of law.

    3. It is intended that the Upper Tribunal will make a decision on error
       of law without holding a further hearing.




           Directions

             1) No later than 5 days from the issuance of these directions,
                Ms A R N shall serve on the Secretary of State the
                additional evidence previously submitted to the First-tier
                Tribunal under cover of letter 30 July 2019;

             2) No later than 7 days thereafter, the Secretary of State
                shall file and serve written submissions on the impact of
                this evidence on the question of error of law.


Signed      [pic]      Date: 15 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

