
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02254/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 29 May 2019                     |On : 11 June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 rubi begum
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, instructed by Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Bangladesh,  born  on  1  January  1989.  She
entered the UK on 10 May 2011 with entry clearance as  the  dependant  of  a
Tier 4 Migrant valid until  30  October  2012.  She  applied  for,  and  was
refused, leave to remain as the spouse of a settled person. On 29  May  2015
she applied for leave to remain on family and  private  life  grounds  under
the ten-year partner route, on  the  basis  of  her  family  life  with  her
husband and her British child.

The  appellant's  application  was  refused  on   11   January   2016.   Her
relationship with her partner was accepted but it was  considered  that  the
suitability provisions in S-LTR of Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules
applied on the basis that ETS considered that she had fraudulently  obtained
her  TOEIC  English  language  certificate  by  using  a  proxy  test-taker.
Accordingly it was not accepted that the appellant met the  requirements  of
paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i), although  it  was  accepted  that  she  met  the
requirements  in  paragraph  R-LTRP.1.1(d)(ii)  and  (iii).  The  respondent
considered that the appellant could not meet the requirements  in  paragraph
276ADE(1) on  the  basis  of  her  private  life  and  that  there  were  no
exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of   leave   outside   the
immigration rules.

The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard in the  First-
tier Tribunal on 20 February 2017 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie.
Judge Devittie considered that the respondent had discharged the  burden  of
proving deception and that the appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements
for leave to remain under  the  immigration  rules.  He  accepted  that  the
appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  and  that  she  and  her
husband had two British  daughters,  but  he  considered  that  it  was  not
unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK and that there  were  no
compelling circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the  rules.  He
accordingly dismissed the appeal.

The appellant sought, and was granted, permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal. The appeal came before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Renton  who
found no error of law in Judge Devittie's decision and upheld the  decision.


Permission was then sought to appeal that decision to the Court  of  Appeal.
The grounds before the Court of Appeal were  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
and Upper Tribunal had erred in the application of section  117B(6)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; that the  Upper  Tribunal  had
erred by upholding the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  on  proportionality
and that the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal had  erred  in  relation
to the interpretation and application of paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix  FM
and  the  test  concerning   fraudulently   obtained   TOEIC   certificates.
Permission was granted in the Court of Appeal on all three grounds  and  the
case was remitted by consent to the Upper Tribunal.

The matter then came before me to consider whether  or  not  Judge  Devittie
had made material errors of law in his decision.

Mr West relied on the Court of Appeal judgment in  Secretary  of  State  for
the Home Department v Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 615 in submitting  that
the Secretary of State had failed to meet the burden  of  proving  deception
and the judge had erred by finding that he had. As for the second and  third
grounds, Mr West relied on the cases of EV (Philippines) & Ors  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and KO (Nigeria) &  Ors
v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53  in
regard to the correct question to ask in  assessing  reasonableness,  namely
whether it was reasonable to expect the children to follow the  parent  with
no right to remain to the country of origin. He  submitted  that  the  judge
erred by only considering whether it was reasonable for the whole family  to
leave the UK. Mr West  referred  to  the  respondent's  concession,  in  the
refusal letter at page 3, that the requirements of paragraph EX.1  were  met
and therefore the question of reasonableness  was  satisfied.  He  submitted
that in any event it was not reasonable to expect the two  British  children
to accompany their mother to Bangladesh as it would separate the family  and
it would be a denial of their rights as British citizens,  as  found  in  ZH
(Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC  4.  Mr
West submitted that the respondent was wrong, in the Rule  24  response,  to
compare the appellant's case to that of NS in KO (Nigeria),  as  neither  of
the parents in NS had leave to remain and both were in the UK illegally.  He
also relied on the case of Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  AB
(Jamaica) & Anor [2019] EWCA Civ 661 in submitting that  it  was  irrelevant
to rely on the fact that in reality the children would not  be  expected  to
leave. Finally Mr West relied on the case of MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on  the
application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  &  Anor
[2016] EWCA Civ 705 where it was said that strong reasons were  required  to
refuse leave to remain where a child had been in the UK for seven years.

Mr Lindsay denied that there was any concession in  the  refusal  letter  on
the issue of reasonableness. He submitted that  the  suitability  provisions
were  irrelevant  when  considering  section  117B(6)  and  that  that   was
therefore the only issue. He submitted that the appellant  had  not  claimed
in her statement that it would be unreasonable for the  family  to  relocate
to Bangladesh and the judge was bound to consider the evidence  before  him.
MA had been overruled by KO (Nigeria). The judge's decision was entirely  in
line with KO (Nigeria). The judge had applied the right test and  considered
the matter in the real world. The circumstances were similar to those of  NS
in the case  of  KO  (Nigeria)  and  were  stronger  in  this  case  as  the
appellant's children were younger. In  this  case  the  children  were  only
three and five years and there was no evidence of significant  ties  to  the
UK outside the family home. The case had always been put on the  basis  that
the family would relocate to Bangladesh together and the judge was  entitled
to consider it on that basis. The judge's decision should be upheld.

Mr West reiterated the points previously  made  in  response.  Both  parties
agreed that if I set aside the judge's decision by reason of error  of  law,
I was able to re-make the decision on the papers before me.

Consideration and Findings

I turn first to the  grounds  relating  to  the  suitability  provisions  in
section LTR.1.6. Mr Lindsay submitted that the case of Shehzad, relied  upon
by Mr West, had not been  pleaded  in  the  grounds.  However  the  case  is
clearly relevant to the issues raised and I see no  reason  to  exclude  it,
considering in particular that it is a well-known authority.  I  accept  the
point taken by Mr West in relying upon [30] of the  judgment  in  that  case
and I also note [25] where the Court of  Appeal  emphasised  the  difference
between  cases  categorised  as  "questionable"  and  those  categorised  as
"invalid". At [30] it was said that  "in  circumstances  where  the  generic
evidence is not accompanied by evidence showing that  the  individual  under
consideration's test was categorised  as  "invalid",  I  consider  that  the
Secretary of State faces a difficulty in respect of  the  evidential  burden
at the initial stage." That  is  particularly  relevant  as  Judge  Devittie
proceeded at [10] on the misunderstanding that the evidence  at  Annexure  A
referred to in Hilary Rickshaw's statement was  that  the  appellant's  test
result had been considered invalid, whereas the evidence, which  appears  at
Annex D1 of the respondent's  appeal  bundle,  was  that  the  results  were
questionable not invalid. In light of what  was  said  in  Shehzad,  such  a
misunderstanding was material and fatal to the judge's  decision.  It  seems
to me that the respondent cannot be  justified,  on  the  evidence  in  this
case, to conclude that deception was employed by the appellant and that  the
suitability  provisions  in  S-LTR.1.6  applied.  Other  than  the   generic
evidence there is little  more  from  the  respondent.  The  refusal  letter
refers to an interview of 7 October 2015 where the decision-maker  concluded
that the ETS certificate had been obtained by deception, but  all  that  the
respondent has produced is an "ETS Invalid Test Analysis"  which  in  itself
is unclear and uninformative, provides no details and is  inconsistent  with
the fact that the appellant's test results were  found  to  be  questionable
rather than invalid. In the circumstances, and in light of the  observations
in Shehzad, I can not see how the respondent has met the burden  of  proving
deception.

As for the grounds challenging the conclusions on reasonableness  in  regard
to the children, I agree with Mr West that the judge's  assessment  was  not
in line with the findings in KO (Nigeria). Although that case had  not  been
decided at the time the judge made his decision,  it  dictates  the  way  in
which the law should have been considered and applied.  Although  the  judge
was aware that the appellant's husband and children were  British  citizens,
this did not appear to be a matter taken into consideration  when  assessing
reasonableness  at  [23]  and  [24].  The  relevant  question,  as  Mr  West
submitted,  was  that  set  out  at  [19]  of  KO  (Nigeria),   quoting   EV
(Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2014]
EWCA Civ 874, namely is it reasonable to expect the two British children  to
accompany their mother to Bangladesh?  As  Mr  West  submitted,  that  would
entail consideration of the separation of the family unless  the  father,  a
British citizen, felt compelled to leave with them, and  also  consideration
of the denial of the right of British citizens. I agree with  Mr  West  that
this is an entirely different scenario to that of AN in KO  (Nigeria)  where
neither parent was legally resident in the  UK.  Furthermore,  the  decision
cannot be made on the basis that the  children  would  not  be  expected  to
leave the UK as they could remain in the UK with their father, as  that  was
not the relevant test, as the Court of Appeal held in AB (Jamaica).

In addition there is the matter of  the  respondent's  "concession"  in  the
refusal letter which the judge did not consider. Mr Lindsay  submitted  that
it was not a concession that the requirements of EX.1 were met, but went  no
further than an acceptance that EX.1 was engaged. However  I  cannot  agree.
The  refusal  letter  specifically  accepts  that  the  requirements  of  R-
LTRP.1.1.(d)(iii) are met, namely that paragraph EX.1.  applies.  Given  the
wording of section EX.1, which states  that  EX.1  applies  if  there  is  a
qualifying relationship and it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
to leave the UK, the clear implication is that the respondent accepted  that
it would not be reasonable for the British child  (the  respondent  referred
only to the older child) to leave the UK. Not only  does  that  resolve  the
proportionality exercise in Article 8 outside the  immigration  rules  under
section 117B(6) irrespective of  the  suitability  issue  under  S-LTR,  but
given the observations above in regard to S-LTR.1.6,  it  also  provides  an
answer within the immigration rules, on the  basis  that  the  appellant  is
able to meet all the requirements of R-LTRP.

Accordingly Judge Devittie's decision suffers from material  errors  of  law
and has to be set aside and re-made. Both parties agreed that  the  decision
could simply be re-made on the information and  evidence  already  available
with no need for a  further  hearing.  On  the  basis  of  the  respondent's
concession, when taken together with the conclusion that the respondent  has
not, on the limited evidence available, discharged  the  burden  of  proving
deception, it is clear that the appellant has succeeded in  making  out  her
Article 8 claim both within  and  outside  the  immigration  rules.  In  any
event, the unchallenged facts are that the appellant's husband is a  British
citizen who has lived in the UK since birth, Judge Devittie found  that  the
best interests of the children were to remain in  the  UK  where  they  have
strong family ties aside from their parents and where there  is  a  lack  of
immediate family in Bangladesh, the two children are  British  citizens  and
the appellant's departure from the UK would result in  the  children  having
to depart the UK in order to  remain  with  their  primary  carer.  In  such
circumstances, and in light of the recent case law, it seems to me  that  it
would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  children  to  leave  the  UK   and
accordingly, and for the reasons already given, the decision  in  this  case
can simply be re-made by allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.



Signed:[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 4 June
2019
