
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02301/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 June 2017                           |On 21 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                 Rebecca [U]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood, Counsel, Southwark Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge R G Walters) dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 7 January 2016 refusing leave to remain on the
    basis of her private and family life.

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  1968.   She  entered
    the UK on 13 May 2001 on a visit visa valid until 31 July 2001 and then
    overstayed.  She had left her two children, her son J and  daughter  S,
    with a friend or relative in Nigeria but in 2005 she arranged for  them
    to be brought unlawfully into the UK.  On 31 October 2010 the appellant
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds but her application
    was refused with no right of appeal on 17 August 2010.

3.   There were two reconsideration requests in  2011  and  2012  and  on  9
    March 2015 the appellant submitted  a  human  rights  claim  which  was
    refused and certified on 8 June 2015.  Further submissions were made on
    her behalf in November 2015 and January 2016 and these were accepted as
    a fresh claim, which was refused on 7 January 2016.  The respondent was
    not satisfied that the appellant could meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules for leave to remain on private life grounds under para 276ADE  or
    that the application raised any exceptional circumstances justifying  a
    grant of leave outside the requirements of the Rules.

4.   When setting out  his  findings  of  fact  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant said in her statement that she had come to the UK to work and
    send money back to support her children who were being looked after  by
    a friend and then she arranged for them to be smuggled into the  UK  in
    2005.  She was able  to  work  regularly  until  2008  when  employment
    opportunities diminished.  She lived in a two bedroom flat,  subletting
    the two bedrooms and managed to make some money by childminding.

5.   The appellant's daughter S has been granted limited leave to remain  in
    the first instance for 30 months. There is no communication between the
    appellant and S or between S and J.  On  2  January  2016  J  was  also
    granted limited leave to remain for  30  months  under  para  276BE(1),
    having met the requirements of para276ADE(1)(v) of the Rules as he  was
    aged over 18 and under 25 and had lived in the UK for  more  than  half
    his life.

6.   The judge referred to evidence about  J's  mental  health  noting  that
    there had been contact with the Lewisham Children and Adolescent Mental
    Health Service and a  family  therapist.   A  letter  from  the  family
    therapist dated 18 June 2013 outlined J's history stating that  he  was
    discharged  from  the  Mental  Health  Service  in  January  2013   and
    arrangements had been made for him to be mentored on a  scheme  set  up
    for young people with mental health problems.  There was also  evidence
    in a fax dated 23 February 2017 confirming that J was  under  Secondary
    Mental Health  Services  and  was  presently  quite  dysfunctional  and
    required the constant support of his mother to function at all.   There
    was an assessment report from an independent  social  worker  dated  20
    December 2016 stating that J was fully dependent on his mother for  all
    aspects of his practical and emotional care needs.

7.   The judge found that the appellant had a family life with J as  he  was
    more than normally emotionally dependent upon her and that removing her
    would be an inference with the exercise of her right to respect for her
    private  and  family  life  with  consequences  of  such   gravity   as
    potentially to engage the operation of article 8.  He  found  that  the
    interference  would  be  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  that  the
    interference was necessary in the interests of the  economic  wellbeing
    of the country through the maintenance of immigration control.

8.   He went on  to  consider  the  issue  of  proportionality  taking  into
    account S117A - D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    as amended ("the 2002 Act").  He noted the evidence in a letter  of  24
    November 2015 from a senior community practitioner  with  the  Lewisham
    Assessment and Liaison Service to J's GP that J had taken to his  room,
    had stopped communicating with others and was not following his college
    course following an unfavourable decision by the Home Office about  his
    right to remain in the UK but said that he  had  now  been  granted  30
    months' leave and given the right to work  lawfully.   The  judge  said
    that he would have expected J to have gained some employment by now  if
    only to help his mother who was  extremely  financially  stretched  and
    that she apparently cooked for him, cleaned and worked long hours as  a
    child carer to provide for him.

9.   The judge said there was a further option  open  to  the  appellant  of
    returning alone to Nigeria and in  any  event,  there  was  nothing  to
    prevent J accompanying her.  He apparently had suitable  qualifications
    for admission to a university in the UK and no doubt  could  apply  for
    university in Nigeria or, alternatively, gain employment there.  Having
    considered all the evidence the judge found that the  interference  was
    proportionate to the legitimate public end to be achieved.  The  appeal
    was dismissed on human rights grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

10.  In the grounds of  appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to
    confront the separation of the appellant and J in article 8  terms  and
    had therefore failed to consider a key issue in the appeal, whether the
    breakup of family life would breach the appellant and J's rights  under
    article 8.  It is then argued that  the  judge  erred  by  taking  into
    account the fact that J had not gained employment since  being  granted
    leave to remain and that what he would or would not  have  expected  in
    terms of J's ability to work was not  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  Finally, the grounds argue that the judge  failed  to
    take J's mental health into account in the proportionality  assessment.



11.  Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "3.  Despite the appellant's truly abysmal immigration  record  and
             history of flouting immigration control, it is  arguable  that
             the judge may not have adequately assessed the adverse  impact
             on the rights of her adult child who was found had more than a
             normal emotional dependency on her  given  his  mental  health
             problems.  All grounds may be argued."

12.  Mr Haywood adopted the grounds submitting that the judge had failed  to
    consider all relevant issues in the proper way and had failed  to  take
    material matters into account.  He had failed to take proper account of
    the report from the independent social worker or to consider the effect
    of the appellant being separated from J.  When assessing article 8  the
    judge  appeared  to  have  moved  between  private  and  family   life,
    conflating those issues.  He had failed to consider J's  mental  health
    and his requirements when assessing proportionality.

13.  Mr Kotas submitted that the judge had reached a decision properly  open
    to him.  There had been no evidence from J at the hearing and  at  [37]
    the judge had noted  that  the  appellant's  solicitor,  who  had  also
    represented J, said that he did not attend appointments and he had  had
    great difficulty  getting  signatures  on  documents  which  eventually
    allowed the respondent to grant him leave.  He had spent the four weeks
    before the hearing making phone calls asking J to appear as  a  witness
    but he had not replied.  In so far as family life was  relied  on,  the
    fact that it was precarious was  a  proper  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account: Rajendran (s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138.

Consideration of Whether the Judge Erred in Law

14.  I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  I am not satisfied that he did for the  following
    reasons.  The primary argument is that the judge failed to confront the
    issue of the separation of the appellant and J and failed to take  into
    account his mental health and his dependence upon the appellant.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge was well-aware of this and took these  matters
    into account.  He has set  out  the  contact  between  J  and  Lewisham
    Children and Adolescent Mental Health Service and has referred  to  the
    more recent evidence about J's contact with the Secondary Mental Health
    Services and the assessment report from the independent social  worker.
    The judge accepted that J's emotional dependence on the  appellant  was
    such that there was family  life  within  article  8(1)  and  that  her
    removal would have consequences of such gravity to engage the operation
    of article 8.

15.  It was then for the  judge  to  balance  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of proper immigration  control  in  the  interests  of  the
    economic wellbeing of the country with the impact of  the  decision  on
    the private and family life of the appellant and J.  The appellant  has
    a very poor immigration history.  She overstayed since her visa expired
    in July 2001 and was frank that she had come to the UK to work and send
    money back to her children.  She then arranged for her children  to  be
    brought unlawfully to the UK.  It is correct that she  has  worked  but
    she has had no entitlement to  do  so.   She  is  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules for leave to remain.  There is a very  strong
    public interest in enforcing immigration control against those  who  so
    deliberately seek to subvert the provisions of the Rules.

16.  It is argued that the  judge  failed  to  confront  the  issue  of  the
    appellant being separated from J but that issue is considered in  [51].
    The judge was entitled to make the point  that  J  had  the  option  of
    returning with the appellant to Nigeria and, in the light of  the  fact
    that he apparently had suitable qualifications for  university  in  the
    UK, that he could apply for university in Nigeria  or  gain  employment
    there.  The judge was fully aware of the  evidence  about  J's  current
    mental and emotional situation although there was  no  evidence  before
    the judge directly from J.  I am not satisfied that the judge's comment
    that he would have expected  J  to  have  obtained  employment  by  now
    indicates any error of  law  in  his  approach  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  There is no substance in the argument that the  judge
    failed  to  take  J's  mental  health  into  account   when   assessing
    proportionality.

17.  The judge considered the provisions of S.117A-D of the 2002 Act  noting
    that the appellant's immigration status had been precarious since 2001.
    I am not satisfied that the judge in any way conflated the issues about
    private and family life. As Rajendran  confirms,  precariousness  is  a
    criterion of relevance to family life as well as private life.  On  the
    evidence  before  him  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find   that   the
    interference with the private and family life of the  appellant  and  J
    did not outweigh and  was  proportionate  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control.  His decision was properly open to him
    for the reasons he gave.

Decision

18.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  it  follows  that  the
    decision stands.  No anonymity direction was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.




Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 19 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



