
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02015/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5th October  2017                     |On 6th October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                         the Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     F N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas , Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The sponsor on behalf of the Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals,  with  permission,  against  the
       decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Howard)  who,  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 20th May 2017 allowed the appeal  of
       the Respondent on human rights  grounds.   Whilst  the  Appellant  in
       these proceedings is the Entry Clearance Officer,  for  the  sake  of
       convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they were before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

    2. Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014.
       Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant
       is granted anonymity as a result of  her  medical  circumstances.  No
       report of these proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify
       her.  This direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
       Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
       contempt of court proceedings.

    3. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  She made an  application  for
       entry clearance as a dependent relative  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had sought entry  clearance  as  an
       elderly adult  dependent  relative  as  the  widowed  mother  of  the
       Sponsor. The applicant's husband died in  2005.  In  the  application
       form and accompanying material,  evidence  was  provided  as  to  her
       current circumstances in  Nigeria  which  had  required  her  to,  in
       essence, to spend large periods of time in the United  Kingdom  where
       she could be looked after  by  daughters  all  of  whom  are  British
       citizens living in the United  Kingdom.  It  was  asserted  that  her
       health needs were such as a result of her age that she required long-
       term care which was not available to her in Nigeria.

    4. The application was refused in a decision made on 15th June 2015. The
       reasons given for refusing  the  application  can  be  summarised  as
       follows. The Entry Clearance Officer (hereinafter referred to as  the
       "ECO")  considered  the  application  under  paragraph  EC-DR.1.1  of
       Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  ECO  found  that  the
       suitability entry clearance requirements were met and also  that  the
       financial requirements were met (see decision). Under this section EC-
       DR1.1 (d) the ECO made reference to a letter from the sponsor stating
       that the Appellant had been visiting them in the UK  virtually  every
       year since her husband died in 2005 and that she stayed in the UK for
       about five months on each visit. He also made reference to the letter
       stating that she was lonely in Nigeria and that  she  did  not  "have
       anyone to look after" but during an interview  she  stated  that  the
       Appellant looked after herself that she did not required day  to  day
       care.

    5. The ECO went on to state that in order to meet the  rules  for  adult
       dependent relatives, the Appellant has to be able to demonstrate that
       due to either age, illness or disability, that you require  long-term
       personal care  to  perform  everyday  tasks  and  that  she  had  not
       demonstrated this. The decision letter made reference to her passport
       demonstrating travel as recently as December 2014 and as  she  had  a
       visit visa (issued in 2012 five years) this indicated she was able to
       travel alone and the Appellant provided no  details  or  evidence  to
       show that she was unable to take care  of  herself.  He  refused  the
       application under paragraph E-ECDR 2.4. As to paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 it
       was stated that the Appellant  had  not  submitted  any  evidence  or
       details regarding what care she may need or why she was unable to get
       the care in Nigeria. Thus the application was refused.

    6. The Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
       entry clearance came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Howard) on
       the 11th May 2017.  It is common ground that as a result of  the  new
       appeal provisions that the only right of appeal against that decision
       was on human rights grounds.  In a determination promulgated on  20th
       May 2017, Judge Howard allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds,
       having  considered  that  issue  in  the  light  of  the  Appellant's
       compliance with the Immigration Rule in question.

    7. The Respondent appealed against  that  decision  and  permission  was
       granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McGinty on  the  26th  July
       2007.

    8. Thus  the  appeal  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  ECO  was
       represented by Mr Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer. On behalf of  the
       Appellant, her two daughters, who were her sponsors, appeared at  the
       Tribunal. As the decision of Judge Howard demonstrates, the Appellant
       had no legal representation at the hearing but he heard evidence from
       both of her daughters who advanced the appeal on her behalf. They had
       provided a document dated 22 August 2017 which was intended to  stand
       as a Rule 24 response. Mr Kotas  confirmed  that  he  had  seen  that
       document.

    9. I intend to deal with the grounds in the  light  of  the  submissions
       made by Mr Kotas. In respect of the first ground,  in  which  it  was
       asserted that the evidence did not show elements  of  dependency,  Mr
       Kotas did not seek to advance that ground in the light of the factual
       assessment made by the  judge.  In  any  event,  permission  was  not
       granted on the ground (see paragraph 5 of the grant of permission).

   10. In dealing with the other grounds, Mr Kotas referred the Tribunal  to
       the judges assessment at paragraph 23 of  the  decision  whereby  the
       judge found that the Appellant had met the adult  dependent  relative
       rules and that if it was correct, those  rules  are  the  Respondents
       view of the public interest and in those circumstances it  would  not
       be necessary to consider section 117 considerations any further.

   11. As to the remaining grounds, he submitted that they were  a  "reasons
       challenge" as to whether the judge had  given  adequate  reasons  for
       reaching his decision. In this respect he conceded that  the  reasons
       would have to be so unclear that  anyone  reading  the  determination
       would not know why the  decision  had  been  reached  and  given  the
       findings of fact made in this appeal, that he would  have  difficulty
       in advancing paragraphs 5-6 of the  written  grounds  to  demonstrate
       that the judge had not given  adequate  reasons.  He  highlighted  at
       paragraph 19 that the  judge  heard  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
       sponsor and found that she had not sought to exaggerate the  evidence
       before the Tribunal. Thus  he  accepted  that  the  judge  had  given
       adequate reasons to demonstrate that the Appellant required long-term
       personal care to perform everyday tasks.

   12. As to paragraph 7  where  it  was  stated  that  the  judge  had  not
       "outlined why it would be unreasonable for the Appellant to  relocate
       to a town or city" he submitted that the judge had given  reasons  at
       paragraphs 21  and  22  and  that  the  grounds  were  essentially  a
       disagreement with those findings.

   13. In the light of those submissions it was not necessary to  call  upon
       the sponsors to provide any further submissions than those  in  their
       rule 24 response.

   14. Furthermore in the light of those submissions which were made  fairly
       and properly by Mr Kotas, and in the context of the decision  of  the
       judge, I find that there is no error of law in the determination.  It
       is plain from reading the determination that he found the evidence of
       the Appellant's daughters to be wholly credible and as he observed at
       [19] when giving details and evidence of their mother's health  needs
       that "she did not seek to exaggerate the situation "and that the oral
       evidence given was  consistent  with  the  written  evidence  in  the
       doctor's letter and in the witness statement of Appellant's  sponsor.
       That was an assessment open to the  judge  to  make  having  had  the
       opportunity to hear the oral evidence  that  the  subject  of  cross-
       examination. In this context I remind myself  of  the  importance  of
       oral evidence.

   15. In the well-known case of Piglowska v Piglowski [1999] UKHL 27,  Lord
       Hoffmann said this:

            "... the appellate court must bear in mind the advantage  which
            the first instance judge had in  seeing  the  parties  and  the
            other witnesses.  This  is  well  understood  on  questions  of
            credibility and findings of primary fact. But it  goes  further
            than that. It applies also to the judge's evaluation  of  those
            facts. ..."

       Then there is a quotation from his  own  decision  in  Biogen  Inc  v
       Medeva Ltd [1997] RPC 1:

            "The need for appellate caution in reversing the trial  judge's
            evaluation of the facts is based upon much more  solid  grounds
            than professional courtesy. It is because specific findings  of
            fact, even by the most  meticulous  judge,  are  inherently  an
            incomplete statement of the impression which was made upon  him
            by the primary evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always
            surrounded  by  a  penumbra  of  imprecision  as  to  emphasis,
            relative weight, minor qualification and nuance  ...  of  which
            time and language do not permit exact expression, but which may
            play an important part in the judge's overall evaluation."

   16. In the light of the evidence which he accepted, the judge found  that
       the Appellant could meet the rules (see  paragraph  23)  and  as  the
       appeal was limited to human rights grounds, he considered  Article  8
       against the background of compliance with those rules.

   17. What Mr Kotas submitted is that the written grounds mount a  "reasons
       challenge" against the judges assessment in  this  respect  which  he
       candidly concedes was essentially a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
       findings and therefore is not an error of law. He is  right  in  this
       regard. Looking at the rules, the judge made a number of findings  on
       the evidence as to the issue of  compliance  with  E-ECDR  2.4  which
       required the applicant, as a result of age, illness or disability  to
       require long-term personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks.  As  he
       conceded, the judge did give  adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  at
       paragraph 20 onwards. He expressly referred to "all that I have heard
       and I have seen I am satisfied that as a result of age,  illness  and
       disability the Appellant does  require  long-term  personal  care  to
       perform everyday tasks." It is not necessary for the judge to set out
       every aspect of the evidence that he had regard to and in  this  case
       the judge found the Appellant's daughters to be entirely credible and
       importantly, found that they were not  seeking  to  exaggerate  their
       mother's situation regarding her health needs (see paragraph 19).  He
       also had the benefit of two reports from Dr  O.  Those  reports  lent
       support to the sponsor's account of their mother's health  needs  and
       in particular her age and how it affected her.  It  referred  to  her
       sciatica, her inability to walk, limited movement with constant pain.
       A further letter referred to heart failure and rheumatoid  arthritis.
       The evidence of her daughter was to the effect that she was unable to
       carry out activities such as cooking, struggling bathing and dressing
       and referred to her severe pain (see witness statement paragraph  6).
       She was describing the witness statement  as  vulnerable  and  living
       alone. The judge also made reference at [17] as to  requiring  health
       basic needs such  as  being  lowered  onto  lifted  off  the  toilet.
       Therefore the judge did give adequate reasons this respect.

   18. As to paragraph 5, the grounds assert that the judge failed  to  give
       adequate reasons as to why she could not reasonably  be  expected  to
       remain in Nigeria and with financial assistance. At  paragraph  6  it
       was  asserted  that  the  judge  had  not  outlined  why   would   be
       unreasonable to relocate to a large town.

   19. As set out earlier,  Mr  Kotas  conceded  that  the  judge  did  give
       adequate reasons did not seek to advance those grounds any further. I
       agree with him. The judge expressly found that the required level  of
       care was not available and also that  there  was  no  one  who  could
       reasonably provide it, even with financial help. The  judge  accepted
       the evidence that there was no provision in  the  village  available.
       The judge made reference at [16] to the evidence relating to a  visit
       made where her daughter was attending to all  daily  washing  cooking
       and feeding needs and at  [17] recent evidence as  to  the  level  of
       care required. The recitation in the determination suggests  that  in
       cross-examination she was questioned about whether she could pay  for
       a maid to carry out care (see paragraph [16]) but the evidence before
       the judge was that whilst they existed, they were not up to the task.
       The judge accepted that in the light of her care  needs,  she  needed
       carers and not a maid (see [17] and [21]). At paragraph  21  he  made
       reference to the attempts made to provide and pay for  the  level  of
       care necessary with maids and the judge found "the family have  tried
       maids. They have been unsuccessful for a number of  reasons,  but  as
       already stated, the Appellant needs a carer not a maid." This  refers
       to the evidence given by the Appellant's daughter, as set out in  the
       24 response, but that home care and assistance was attempted but  was
       not successful and caused distress, anxiety and left neglected rather
       than cared for and that housekeepers were  taking  advantage  of  her
       vulnerability. He also found that due to the  remoteness  of  a  home
       such professionals were not readily available (see  paragraph  [21]).
       Therefore, the judge did give reasons for reaching that conclusion.

   20. As to paragraph 7, whilst it is  asserted  that  the  judge  had  not
       outlined why it would be unreasonable for her to relocate to a larger
       town, the judge gave such reasons at paragraphs 21 - 22 as  Mr  Kotas
       conceded. The judge gave consideration  to  whether  or  not  it  was
       reasonable for her to relocate to a large urban centre but found that
       it would not be so reasonable as it would remove her  from  her  home
       and community where she had resided since 1977 (see paragraph 22), he
       found that such a course would require her to live  alone  in  a  new
       home cut off from the community visits daughter.  Therefore  contrary
       to the written grounds, the judge did give reasons as to why he found
       it unreasonable to expect to relocate.

   21.  The  last  issue  relates  to  the  section  117   public   interest
       considerations. However the judge, as set out above gave adequate and
       sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion  that  the  Appellant
       had met the rules. As such the rules are  the  Secretary  of  State's
       view of where the public interest lies and if the  Appellant,  as  in
       this case, can meet the rules, it is a very weighty consideration  in
       any proportionality balance as those factors may necessarily outweigh
       the public interest. Whilst the grounds make reference to  the  judge
       failing  to  properly  take  into  account  all   the   section   117
       considerations, his findings in this regard  are  set  out  at  [27].
       There is no express reference to the  Appellant's  ability  to  speak
       English but it is implicit in his finding at paragraph  27  that  she
       had worked in the UK in the past. The evidence before the  judge  was
       that she had trained and worked in the UK as a nurse for  periods  of
       time and as the 24 response set out, this had been outlined the judge
       that she had undergone such training and spoke English. English is  a
       language  spoken  in  Nigeria  also.  Furthermore  as  to   financial
       independence (S117B (3)), the Entry Clearance  Officer  had  accepted
       that she met the financial requirements and the judge also found that
       her daughter had the financial means to look after her (see paragraph
       [27] and the evidence in the bundle relating to financial resources).
       The only aspect I can see  which  may  have  some  relevance  is  the
       economic well-being of the UK in terms of provision by  the  NHS  for
       any medical problems she may have. However, the judge found that  she
       had not used those facilities whilst in the UK and that the daughters
       had sufficient resources. Nonetheless, in the light  of  the  judge's
       findings, which were adequately reasoned, that  she  met  the  rules,
       this was of such weight in the proportionality balance  that  it  has
       not been demonstrated that this would have outweighed the facts found
       in favour of the Appellant as the judge observed at [27]. It may well
       be that this was not the only outcome possible on the facts  in  this
       particular case but this was, ultimately, a fact based assessment for
       the judge to make. In Mukarkar v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 Carnwath LJ (as  he  then  was)  said
       this:

            "Factual judgments of this kind are often not  easy,  but  they
            are not made easier or better by excessive legal or  linguistic
            analysis. It is of the nature of such judgments that  different
            Tribunals,  without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
            different  conclusions  on  the  same  case   (as   is   indeed
            illustrated  by  Mr  Fountain's  decision  after   the   second
            hearing). The mere fact that one Tribunal has reached what  may
            seem an unusually generous view of the facts  of  a  particular
            case does not mean that it has made an error of law, so  as  to
            justify an appeal  under  the  old  system,  or  an  order  for
            reconsideration  under  the  new.  Nor  does  it   create   any
            precedent, so as to limit the Secretary  of  State's  right  to
            argue for a more restrictive approach on a similar case in  the
            future. However, on the  facts  of  the  particular  case,  the
            decision of the specialist Tribunal should be respected."

       For those reasons I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal, even if it could be characterised as a generous one,  did
       not make an error of law as Mr Kotas has fairly set out. Thus the
       appeal of the ECO shall be dismissed and the decision shall stand.

  Decision:

  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose the  making  of
  an error of law; the decision of the FTT allowing the appeal shall stand.





Signed                              Date: 5/10/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


