
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02404/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               InderPreet kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Popal of Counsel, Sriharans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission  against  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P Carroll, promulgated on 9 September 2019, allowing the
    appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse her leave to remain  on
    the basis of ten years' residence and in consequence refusing  a  human
    rights claim..

 2. The respondent arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2006  with  entry
    clearance as a student, which was renewed  on  several  occasions,  the
    last renewal being until 11 April 2014.  She  applied  within  time  to
    extend that.  That application was refused but she appealed against the
    decision, her appeal rights becoming  exhausted  only  on  28  November
    2016.  She  then  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  long
    residence grounds.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the application on two grounds.   First,
    in relying on Section 322(5)  asserting  that  she  had  used  a  TOEIC
    certificate to which she was not entitled, the second by  reference  to
    paragraph 276B that through use of the TOEIC certificate  she  did  not
    meet the requirements set out in S-LTR suitability of leave to  remain.



 4. On appeal, the judge took into account the evidence  submitted  by  the
    Secretary of State,  in the form  of  a  bundle  comprising  a  witness
    statement specific to the case from Mr Kelvin Hibbs  with  annexes  and
    witness statements from Ms Collings and  Professor  French,  which  are
    common to many ETS cases.

 5. The judge noted that the statement from Mr Hibbs says:

         "as a result of the questionable result the [respondent] was called
         for an interview (see record below) and from this  a  decision  was
         taken that the [respondent] did not sit the test as claimed."

 6. The judge noted in paragraph 1:

         "Not only is there no copy of the 'record'  but  the  reference  to
         'the questionable result' differs from the evidence in Annex  A  in
         which the result is described as invalid, not questionable."

 7. She went on to conclude that is for the respondent to adduce sufficient
    evidence to meet the evidential burden to demonstrate  fraud  and  that
    this had not been done.  She also went on  to  conclude,  having  heard
    evidence from the respondent, that  she  was  satisfied  that  she  had
    undertaken the  test  as  claimed.   The  judge  also  found  that  the
    respondent had lived in the United Kingdom for ten years  lawfully  and
    that she met the requirements of paragraph 276B(i)(a) and  went  on  to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge did not provide sufficient reasons for  concluding  that  the
    respondent had not used  fraud  and  had  not  properly  addressed  the
    evidential burden upon the respondent to offer an innocent  explanation
    in the light of the generic evidence of fraud.

 9. The Secretary of State also said that  a  material  error  of  fact  in
    finding  that  the  respondent  had  demonstrated  ten  years'   lawful
    residence, it being submitted there was no point in the refusal  letter
    there was any acceptance of this.  It was also averred that  the  judge
    had erred in concluding that the respondent  had  successfully  applied
    for extension of leave in 2014 and that the respondent had not taken an
    issue with the validity of the TOEIC at that point.  It is also pointed
    out that the appeal was unsuccessful and she chose  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without valid leave.

10. When the matter came before me it was accepted by Mr Tarlow that  there
    were defects in the evidence, in that there is an inconsistency  in  Mr
    Hibbs' statement.

11. I conclude that in the circumstances identified by the judge where  the
    evidence put forward by the Secretary  of  State  is  inconsistent,  it
    cannot be said properly that the evidential burden has been  discharged
    by the  Secretary  of  State.   In  the  circumstances  and  given  the
    sustainable findings of  fact  about  the  respondent  having  actually
    undertaken the test, I conclude that in  the  particular  circumstances
    and factual matrix of this appeal, that the judge was entitled and gave
    good reasons for  concluding  that  there  had  not  been  the  use  of
    dishonesty or fraud in this case given the inconsistent nature  of  the
    evidence put forward  and  relied  upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Accordingly, it follows that the conclusion that paragraph  322(5)  was
    not made out is sustainable.

12. Turning to the second ground, it is unclear to me what  the  point  the
    Secretary of State is making.  It  is  evident  that  the  respondent's
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom was preserved by the  application
    of Section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.   That  is  because  her
    application to extend leave made in 2014 had been made within time  and
    she had a right of appeal against that decision, which  she  exercised.
    It did however take a significant length of time for it to be  reached,
    but the point is that she had reached ten years'  lawful  residence  by
    the time her leave had expired.  It is also of note  that  she  applied
    for indefinite leave for remain on the  date  her  appeal  rights  were
    exhausted.

13. Given the sustainable finding that there had not been  fraud  used  the
    basis for refusal under S-LTR falls away and there is no other basis in
    which it could be said that the Secretary of State had taken issue with
    whether  the  respondent  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph   276B.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge's decision on this point did
    not involve the making of an error of law either.

14. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge's decision did  not  involve
    the making of an error of law.  Adequate and sustainable  reasons  have
    been given for all the findings of fact and for the conclusion that the
    respondent met all the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The judge
    was entitled to note that there was  no  public  interest  in  refusing
    leave as has been noted by the Upper Tribunal in OA and  Others  (human
    rights; "new matter"; s.120) Nigeria [2019] UKUT 00065 (IAC).  The fact
    that the requirements of the Immigration Rule means were met means that
    the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  rely  on  the  public  interest   in
    maintaining immigration control as set out in Section 117B to defeat an
    argument  that  removal  would  be  disproportionate.   Accordingly,  I
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal and I uphold  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.

 3. If the respondent wishes to make submissions as to costs, these must be
    made within 10 working days of the issue of this decision,  and  served
    on the Upper Tribunal and on the Secretary of State. The  Secretary  of
    state has 10 working days to serve a response on the appellant  and  on
    the Upper Tribunal. In both cases, the submissions  are  limited  to  3
    sides of A4.


Signed                                  Date 26 February 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

