
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02651/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 5 March 2020                     |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     KL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Metzer, counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Peter-John S White, promulgated on  3  September  2019.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien on 23  December
    2019.





Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously and no such application was  made
    on the appellant's behalf. Nonetheless,  the  appellant  is  vulnerable
    owing to his mental health diagnosis this is a matter  regarding  which
    he is entitled to privacy.

Background

 3. On 21 August 2018, the appellant applied to remain in the UK on private
    life grounds, citing  his  mental  health  condition,  namely  paranoid
    schizophrenia. Prior to this, the appellant entered the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully in 2004 and remained here without leave. During  that  time,
    he has acquired a criminal conviction  and  showed  little  regard  for
    immigration law.

 4. By way of a letter dated  7  December  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant's human rights claim. It was  accepted  that  the
    appellant met the suitability requirements in the Rules but not that he
    met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules  nor  that
    there were any exceptional circumstances. Consideration  was  given  to
    Article 3 on medical grounds, however the  respondent  noted  that  the
    appellant's medication was available in Algeria and did not accept that
    his mental health would rapidly deteriorate or that he was at  risk  of
    an early death on return. It was thought that his  circumstances  would
    be no less favourable in Algeria than in the UK.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal decided that the appellant could not  meet  the
    high test imposed in Article 3  cases,  that  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  that  there  were  no   compelling
    circumstances   which    rendered    the    decision    under    appeal
    disproportionate.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds were threefold. Firstly, that the judge failed have  regard
    to a relevant consideration that being that the appellant's family were
    ignorant of his mental health condition; secondly, the judge  erred  in
    his Article 3 and 8 assessments by finding that the appellant's  family
    would assist him in  the  event  of  a  disruption  in  his  supply  of
    medication  and  thirdly,  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  Article  8
    assessment in failing to have regard to  the  evidence  of  significant
    problems in the supply of the appellant's medication in Algeria.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent's  Rule  24  response,  received  on  14  January  2020,
    submitted that the findings were open to the judge. It was  noted  that
    the appellant had not told his relatives in Algeria  of  his  condition
    and that he therefore did not know if they would assist  him  with  his
    medication or treatment.

The hearing

 9. Mr Metzer made the following points.  Against the  background  evidence
    relating to interruptions in the supply of the medication the appellant
    would need, the judge erred in speculating that the appellant's  family
    would  assist  him.  The   background   evidence   also   showed   that
    schizophrenia carries a heavy social stigma, mental illness often  goes
    unreported and patients may be shunned by family.

10. Mr Metzer emphasised that the appellant had said in paragraph 4 of  his
    witness statement, that his  family  did  not  know  about  his  mental
    illness and that he did not want them to find out. The finding that his
    family would be likely to assist him was speculative. The  most  recent
    evidence of an interruption to  medical  supplies  was  November  2017,
    according to the country expert. The only evidence relied upon  by  the
    respondent was a report stating that drugs are available.  That  report
    did not address the accessibility of treatment. Mr Metzer relied on the
    Strasbourg decision of Savran v Denmark (Application no 57467/15) which
    was decided after the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. While he did
    not provide a copy, he contended that  that  it  was  a  similar  case,
    because that claimant, who succeeded, was  prescribed  daily  psychotic
    medication, was not capable of living alone, had no family  to  support
    him and pharmaceutical failure in Turkey was an issue.

11. Mr Metzer further argued that the  judge  did  not  have  regard  to  a
    relevant consideration which was that the appellant wished to keep  his
    medical diagnosis private.  It  was  submitted  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that this was a feature of the appellant's private  life.  The
    judge's finding that the appellant's family would be likely  to  assist
    went against the appellant's wish to keep the matter private. The judge
    erred in not considering whether to give this  matter  any  weight  and
    made no mention of it at all. This was an exceptional  feature  of  the
    appellant's case which may  require  more  than  little  weight  to  be
    attached to it. Mr Metzer contended that it was not  a  common  feature
    that removal could lead to revealing medical history.  This  issue  was
    not a trump card, but a relevant consideration.

12. Lastly, he argued that no weight had been given to the likely  problems
    in relation to medication interruption when the judge  was  considering
    very significant obstacles to integration in Algeria.  The  appellant's
    symptoms were likely to recur and lead to active psychosis.  The  judge
    had merely said that the appellant would go back on his  medication  in
    due course.

13. Ms Everett asked me to find that there was no material  error  of  law.
    The evidence relied on by  the  respondent  was  adequate  to  come  to
    finding that medication was available and that was enough to show there
    was no violation of Article 3. Notwithstanding the judgment in  Savran,
    there  was  a  tension  with  Bensaid.  Furthermore,  Savran  could  be
    distinguished because no family support was available to that claimant.
    In any event the judge was aware of the high threshold and his findings
    were adequate and without error.  As for  the  alleged  error,  in  the
    judge speculating as to family support, the appellant had not  provided
    evidence that his family would reject him or fail to assist him. As for
    the private life argument which it was alleged the judge had not  dealt
    with, the appellant had a right not to disclose his medical  diagnosis,
    however there was no clear legal  principle  here.  While  it  was  the
    appellant's wish to not tell his family of his diagnosis, the  evidence
    did not bear out that on balance all his large family would reject him.
     Lastly, mental illness is recognised and treated in Algeria,  even  if
    the judge had not dealt with that, it ws immaterial.

14. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    made no material error of law and  that  the  decision  was  upheld.  I
    provide my reasons below.

Decision on error of law

15. I will address the grounds in the order and manner in  which  they  are
    set out in the grounds of appeal.  Dealing  firstly  with  the  alleged
    failure of the judge to consider that  the  appellant's  removal  would
    amount to an interference in the appellant's private life  because  his
    family would be likely to find out about his diagnosis, which  he  does
    wish to share with them.

16. The skeleton argument which was before the previous judge put it in the
    following terms at [40],  "the  Appellant's  removal,  which  would  be
    likely to lead to the discovery by his family of his  diagnosis,  would
    constitute a serious interference in his private life under Article 8."



17. It is the case that  the  judge  does  not  mention  this  argument  in
    carrying out the Article 8 balancing exercise. Nonetheless,  I  do  not
    find this to amount to an error, let alone a material one. Neither  the
    skeleton arguments, the grounds of appeal nor the submissions before me
    establish how it is that the appellant's medical history would come  to
    the attention of the appellant's  family  in  circumstances  where  the
    appellant's clear evidence was that he had not told his family  of  his
    diagnosis and that he "does not  want  to  tell  them."  The  appellant
    confirmed that he is in regular contact with his parents and 9 siblings
    who were ignorant of the time he spent homeless and the long period  of
    time when he was being treated on a  psychiatric  ward.  There  was  no
    evidence called as to how the appellant's diagnosis would become  known
    to his family  given  his  steadfastness  in  refusing  to  tell  them.
    Furthermore, the medical evidence  indicated  that  the  appellant  was
    unlikely to seek help when his mental state was in  decline.  Thus,  on
    his own evidence, the appellant would not seek the  assistance  of  his
    family even if unwell. A judge is not required, in giving his  reasons,
    to deal with every argument presented by an advocate in support of  his
    case, applying R and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA civ 982.  In  this  case
    the argument was undeveloped and unsupported  by  evidence  and  it  is
    unsurprising that the judge declined to accord weight to this matter.

18. It is contended that  the  judge  made  a  positive  finding  that  the
    appellant's family would assist him in the event of a disruption to the
    supply of  his  medication.  This  is  an  inaccurate  reading  of  the
    decision. What the judge said, at [16] was this; "it seems to me wholly
    speculative to suggest that no-one in his large,  immediate  family  in
    Algeria would be able or willing to help him  in  such  circumstances."
    Also, at [18] the judge said, "I am not persuaded that I  can  properly
    infer that (the appellant's family) will be of no help  to  him,  given
    the maintenance of close and regular contact which he describes." Thus,
    it is readily apparent, that the judge did not engage in speculation as
    to the likely reaction of the appellant's family,  rather  he  rejected
    the account that the appellant put forward, that his  family  would  be
    either unable or unwilling to assist him. At this point,  it  is  worth
    mentioning that the claimant in Savras did  not  have  the  benefit  of
    immediate family members who could be approached for  support.  It  has
    also been suggested that the judge did not take into consideration  the
    expert country evidence regarding the stigma attached to  schizophrenia
    in Algeria. The judge considers this issue at [11], however he  rightly
    found that this did not amount to evidence that the appellant's  family
    would shun him were he to confide in them. There  was  no  evidence  to
    support that contention. Accordingly, there is no error here.

19. Lastly, it is contended that the judge failed to have  "proper  regard"
    to the evidence of the  significant  problems  in  the  supply  of  the
    psychotropic medication the appellant needs, in  reaching  his  finding
    that  there  would  not  be   very   significant   obstacles   to   his
    reintegration. There was no such failure. This issue  is  addressed  in
    the judge's findings and reasons, at [8],[10] and [16].  At  [16],  the
    judge rightly  notes  that  the  medicine  the  appellant  requires  is
    available, that there was no clear evidence that the  immediate  result
    of his removal  would  be  that  he  would  be  unable  to  obtain  his
    medication owing to shortages and that any such  shortage  may  be  the
    result of subsequent interruption.  Nonetheless, the judge specifically
    addressed  the  likely  consequences  for  the  appellant  should   his
    medication be unavailable at some time in the future and  accepts  that
    he is likely to "suffer a significant decline."




20. The judge  further  accepts  that  if  the  appellant's  mental  health
    deteriorated, he would lose insight into his condition and the  ability
    to seek the help he needed. However, the judge  does  not  accept  that
    this would lead to intense suffering  or  that  any  decline  would  be
    irreversible  in  the  event  of  the  resumption  of  the  supply   of
    medication. He provides sustainable reasons for those conclusions.  The
    judge arrived at findings he was entitled  to  reach  on  the  evidence
    before him.

21. The grounds identify no material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 6 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

