
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02097/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 7 August 2019                     |On 27 August 2019                    |
|Decision given orally                |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                             HABTE DEBAS TEDROS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Hollywood, Andrew Russell & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Eritrea, who was born  in  1973.   He
    had applied for entry clearance to join his wife in the UK who had been
    recognised as a refugee following her successful appeal (together  with
    her two children) in 2013 leading to a status  document  dated  12  May
    2014.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the appellant
    had a subsisting relationship with his wife or that he intended to live
    together permanently with her in the United Kingdom.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox heard evidence from the appellant's  wife
    and concluded she had been unable to demonstrate evidence that  pointed
    to a subsisting relationship.  He wrongly began his decision  with  the
    observation that the sponsor had been granted limited leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.  As  to  the  core  issue  that  he  was
    required to decide, he explained between [19] to [21] of his decision:

         "19. The sponsor is also unable to demonstrate  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant, evidence that  would  point  to  a  subsisting,  or
             indeed any relationship with the Appellant while they were  in
             Sudan.  There is no evidence before me today to  suggest  that
             the relationship was under  some  pressure  or  handicap  that
             meant they had to keep a low profile to  such  a  degree  that
             support documentation would  and  was  always  unavailable  to
             them, such that would support the claim to have lived together
             while in Sudan.

         20.  On the evidence before me  today  I  cannot  accept  that  the
             Appellant has demonstrated even to the  lower  standard,  that
             his relationship with the sponsor is as claimed.  I note  that
             her [sic] there is a lack of DNA evidence.   This  is  not  an
             essential requirement.  Had there been other support by way of
             documents, that could  be  relied  upon,  that  may  help  the
             Appellant get over the obvious hurdle in demonstrating that he
             is related to the children, as claimed.   Such  documents  are
             not available before me today.  The hurdle that the  appellant
             must cross has been  increased  in  size  when  the  sponsor's
             credibility is also called into question, albeit to a  limited
             extent.

         21.  The Appellant has produced an original  test  certificate  for
             tuberculosis.  That is attached to the Appellants  papers  are
             [sic] at page 14.  The issue date  is  14  February  2018.   I
             understand  the  Respondent  has  yet  to  see  the   original
             certificate.  It may be that a fresh certificate will have  to
             be produced and presented to the Appellant if any fresh  claim
             is made."

    The judge continued at [22]:

         "22. I am satisfied on  the  evidence  before  me  today  that  the
             Appellant has not demonstrated, even to  the  lower  standard,
             that he was in a relationship with the sponsor, as claimed for
             any period of time prior to her arrival in the United Kingdom.
              I am satisfied on the evidence before me today, to the  lower
             standard, that he is not related as claimed to  the  sponsor's
             children.  The  Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  those
             documents that could  have  been  produced  [in]  an  original
             format are available for inspection prior to  today's  hearing
             by  the  Respondent  and  therefore   cannot   be   taken   as
             satisfactory proof that  he  is  related  as  claimed  to  the
             sponsor's  children.   The  information   contained   in   the
             screening interview for the sponsor is not enough on its  own.
             When supported with additional  documentation  it  would  then
             become support of.  The Appellant is therefore not entitled to
             Entry Clearance and such Entry Clearance should not be  issued
             to the Appellant as confirmation of his  right  to  enter  the
             United Kingdom."

 3. The grounds of challenge questioned  the  correctness  of  the  judge's
    approach to the standard of  proof  and  the  judge's  error  that  the
    decision in an asylum appeal by the sponsor was not before him  whereas
    in fact it had been.   The  judge  had  failed  to  make  any  findings
    regarding the appellant's children's testimony.  It is  also  contended
    that it was difficult to follow the  judge's  reasoning  regarding  his
    treatment of evidence of  telephone  calls.   The  judge  had  made  no
    findings regarding the appellant's partner's statement and the evidence
    of Sara Habte (and  from  the  appellant's  son).   There  was  also  a
    challenge to the judge's approach to Article 8 by reference to [25]  of
    the judge's decision as follows:

         "25. The Immigration Rules now include  provisions  for  applicants
             wishing to remain in the United Kingdom based on their  family
             or private life.  These rules are located at Appendix  FM  and
             Paragraph 276ADE respectively.  Should the Appellant wish  the
             UK Immigration Rules Authority to consider an  application  on
             this basis then the Appellant should make a  separate  charged
             application using the appropriate specified application forms,
             for the 5-year partner route, or for the 5-year parent  route,
             or the 10-year partner or parent route, or the 10-year private
             life route.  As the Appellant has not made a valid application
             for Article 8 consideration, consideration has not been  given
             as to whether the Appellant's removal from the UK would breach
             Article 8 of the  ECHR.   I  also  have  not  considered  such
             removal within an Article 8 ECHR context.  It is to  be  noted
             that the decision not to  issue  a  Residence  Card  does  not
             require the Appellant to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  if  the
             Appellant could otherwise demonstrate that they have  a  right
             to reside under the Regulations."

 4. In granting  permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane
    considered that for the  many  reasons  outlined  in  the  grounds  the
    judge's decision disclosed  arguable  errors,  with  reference  to  the
    arguably confusing descriptions of the standard of proof, the relevance
    of the appellant's  children's  evidence  in  an  earlier  appeal,  the
    failure by the judge to take into account the decision in that  earlier
    appeal, and the judge's failure to make findings on the  evidence  from
    the children that was before him, including the oral  evidence  of  the
    eldest child.

 5. Mr Diwnycz readily accepts that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  on  the
    basis of these grounds of challenge, and in my judgment he was right to
    do so.  In addition to a statement by the sponsor dated 3 May 2018, the
    judge heard evidence from the sponsor's daughter, Sarah Habte, dated  3
    May 2018 in which she sets out her memory of the role of  her  father's
    life in Sudan before their flight, and also the  written  statement  of
    Alexander Habte which refers to his young age at the time of events  in
    Sudan.

 6. The judge explains at [8] of his decision that he had  given  full  and
    careful consideration to all the  documents  attached  to  the  appeal.
    However, it is difficult to discern from the judgment that in substance
    he did so.  He did not make findings on the evidence  of  the  children
    and as to the testimony of the sponsor he  explained  at  [18],  and  I
    quote:

         "18. The Appellant's sponsor apologises for her previous  on  [sic]
             truthful activity at a previous  immigration  hearing.   There
             are no circumstances or evidence placed before me  today  that
             would  allow  me  to  look  behind  the  findings   of   Judge
             Hutchinson, [even] if they were before me. It is not  disputed
             that a negative credibility finding  however,  has  been  made
             against the sponsor.  That must be tempered, as  noted  above,
             by the Respondent's granting of Limited Leave to Remain  since
             that hearing.  With regard to these original certificates  the
             Respondent has not had the opportunity of inspecting them  and
             therefore little weight may be attached to them."

 7. The judge in fact had before him a copy (although the  first  page  was
    missing) of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hutchinson.
    He had found the sponsor not credible in respect of many aspects of her
    claim but nevertheless concluded that although she may be  exempt  from
    national service and thus would not face a risk  as  a  consequence  on
    return to Eritrea the children who were appellants to that appeal would
    nevertheless be at risk.  It was on this  basis  that  the  appeal  was
    allowed.

 8. The negative credibility findings by Judge Hutchinson  related  to  the
    sponsor's  asylum  account  rather  than   to   her   specific   family
    circumstances, which were the subject of the appeal before  Judge  Fox.
    It is unclear to me why the judge felt compelled to  consider  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE since neither provision had any bearing on this
    case.  The failure by the judge to explain what  he  made  of  all  the
    evidence before him, including  in  particular  the  testimony  of  the
    children, was a material error that requires the  decision  to  be  set
    aside, and I therefore do so.

 9. As to re-making the decision,  Mr  Diwnycz  candidly  acknowledges  the
    force of the testimony of the children as set out in their  statements.
    Whilst he did not have any note by the Presenting Officer in the First-
    tier Tribunal of what was said in evidence he  did  not  challenge  the
    evidence in the children's statements.  Mr Diwnycz also indicates  that
    he is content for the appeal  to  be  allowed  on  the  basis  of  that
    evidence.   I consider that he is correct to do so.

10. The nub of the matter is whether the relationship between  the  sponsor
    and the appellant is subsisting.  The eldest child's  statement  refers
    to her limited memories of the time the family lived together in  Sudan
    and provided an account of what she is able to recall from those  early
    years.  The sponsor explained in her statement how she  has  maintained
    contact  with  her  husband.   She  has   candidly   acknowledged   her
    untruthfulness in  relation  to  the  asylum  claim  but  there  is  no
    challenge by Mr Diwnycz to the  evidence  she  gave  and  the  material
    relied on in support of  continuing  and  recent  contact  between  the
    parties.  Accordingly, I am satisfied that the appellant has  made  out
    his case in relation to the matter in issue under paragraph 352A of the
    Immigration Rules.

11. The Entry Clearance Officer refused also with  reference  to  paragraph
    320(8A) regarding a failure by the appellant to produce  a  certificate
    issued by an approved clinic showing that he was free  from  infectious
    tuberculosis.  It is accepted and it was acknowledged by Judge Fox that
    this was produced by the time of the hearing before him.

12. In order for the appellant to succeed in this appeal  it  is  necessary
    for him to demonstrate that there is a disproportionate interference by
    the Secretary of State with his rights under Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.  In the light of  the  matters  as  accepted  by  Mr
    Diwnycz there is no dispute to  the  family  that  exists  between  the
    appellant,  sponsor  and  his  children  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    accordingly I am satisfied that Article 8 is engaged.  The decision  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer interferes with that right, and  the  issue
    to be decided is whether that interference is proportionate in all  the
    circumstances.

13. Paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules sets out  the  public  interest
    being the Secretary of State's position, in  relation  to  applications
    for leave to enter as  the  partner  of  a  refugee.   Aside  from  the
    tuberculosis  issue,  the  aspect  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    contended the appellant had not met was paragraph 352A(v):

         "(v) Each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other
             as  their  partner  and  the  relationship  is   genuine   and
             subsisting."

14. Given that this requirement has been met, in my  judgment,  that  deals
    satisfactorily with the  public  interest.   Accordingly,  in  all  the
    circumstances, it would be a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    appellant's rights under article 8 for him to be precluded from  coming
    to the United Kingdom to achieve family unity.

15. By way of summary therefore, the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Fox is set aside for error of law.   I  re-make  the  decision  on  the
    unchallenged evidence that was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 20 August 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawsonl






















