
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02960/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2020                    |On 20 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               LOKESH CHIPPADA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 3 October 2019, I found  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born on 11 April 1986 and is a male  citizen
         of India. By a decision dated 30 January 2019, he was refused leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom by reason  of  long  residence.  He
         appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,   in   a   decision
         promulgated on 22 July 2019, dismissed the  appeal.  The  appellant
         now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The judge has produced a thorough and detailed decision. It is
         challenged by the appellant on the basis that the judge relied upon
         the case of R ( on the application of Masum Ahmed  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1070  which  had  not
         been cited in argument before  him  and  which  the  appellant  now
         claims he is  able  to  distinguish  on  the  facts  from  his  own
         circumstances. Mr Waheed, who appeared before the  Upper  Tribunal,
         submitted that Ahmed was, in essence, a 'rules-based  decision'  in
         which reference had not been made to the Secretary of  State's  own
         policy,  Long  Residence  Version  15.0  (April  2017).   Likewise,
         although the judge had before him the Secretary of State's  policy,
         he appears to  have  made  no  reference  to  it  in  reaching  his
         decision. Mr Waheed submitted that,  on  the  particular  facts  as
         found by the judge,  the  appellant  may  have  benefited  from  an
         application of the policy notwithstanding the fact that  he  failed
         to meet the strict letter of the relevant Immigration Rules.

         3.   Mr Tarlow, who appeared for the Secretary of State before  the
         Upper Tribunal, submitted that there was no material error  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

         4.   It is clear from what the judge states at [52] that he  placed
         considerable weight upon the decision in Ahmed. It  is  also  clear
         that, by relying upon the case but failing to give the  appellant's
         representative any opportunity to make submissions in respect of it
         and,  in  particular,  to  explain  why  the  present   appellant's
         circumstances were not covered by the ratio of the  judgement,  the
         judge may have deprived the appellant of  a  fair  hearing  of  his
         appeal. For this reason, I set aside the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal. However, I  see  no  reason  to  set  aside  the  judge's
         decision not to uphold the refusal under paragraph 320(1)  for  the
         reasons which he gives at [54]. I briefly discussed disposal of the
         appeal with the representatives at the  initial  hearing  and  they
         agreed that, if the decision were to be  set  aside,  it  would  be
         necessary for there to be a resumed hearing at which  both  parties
         may make submissions in respect of the relevant jurisprudence  and,
         in particular, the  application  and  relevance,  if  any,  of  the
         Secretary  of  State's  policy.  I  therefore  make  the  following
         directions:

         DIRECTIONS

         A.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 22 July
         2019 is set aside. The only issue remaining to be determined in the
         Upper Tribunal concerns the application to the facts  as  found  by
         the judge  of  any  relevant  jurisprudence  including  R  (on  the
         application of Masum Ahmed  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1070 and also the Secretary  of  State's
         policy, Long Residence  Version  15.0  (April  2017).  The  judge's
         finding that paragraph 320(1) does not apply in the instant  appeal
         shall stand.

         B.   Both parties shall file at the Upper Tribunal and send to  the
         other party a skeleton argument addressing the issues remaining  to
         be determined in this appeal no later than 10  days  prior  to  the
         resumed hearing.

         C.   The resumed hearing shall take  place  before  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Lane at Field House on a  date  to  be  fixed  not  before  1
         November 2019. No interpreter. 2 hours allowed.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  decision
         will be remade in the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at
         or following a resumed hearing on a date to be fixed. The attention
         of the parties is drawn to the directions at A-C above."

 2. My primary concern at the initial hearing was that the judge had placed
    heavy reliance  upon  the  case  of  Ahmed  without  having  given  the
    appellant's  representative  an  opportunity  to  make  submissions  in
    respect  of  it.  Having  considered  the  oral  submissions  are  both
    representatives at the resumed hearing, including their submissions  in
    respect of Ahmed, I am satisfied that the  appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State should be dismissed.

 3. The agreed facts are that the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on
    11 October 2008 with entry clearance  as  a  student.  He  applied  for
    further leave to remain which was refused by  decision  dated  20  June
    2011. The appellant made an appeal against that decision outside the 14
    day period permitted but he withdrew the appeal on 25 October 2011.  He
    made a further application for leave to remain on 2 December  2011,  an
    earlier application having been lost by in the post. The appellant  was
    then granted leave to  remain  until  28  March  2014.  Thereafter,  he
    applied in time for further leave to remain as an entrepreneur  migrant
    and his application was granted until 28 March 2017. The appellant  was
    granted further leave to remain till 18  April  2019.  The  appellant's
    leave was curtailed on 16 March 2018 to expire  on  22  May  2018.  The
    appellant then applied in time for further leave to remain outside  the
    Immigration Rules and that application was subsequently  varied  to  an
    application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long
    residence. The application was refused by a decision dated  30  January
    2019. It is that decision which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The appellant submits that the respondent has failed to follow his  own
    policy as regards long  residence  (Version  15.0,  April  2017).  This
    policy provides that 'when refusing an application on the grounds  that
    was made by an applicant who had overstayed by more than 28 days before
    24 November 2016, [the respondent's officer] must consider any evidence
    of  exceptional  circumstances  which  prevented  the  applicant   from
    applying within the first 28  days  of  overstaying.'  Given  that  the
    respondent had exercised discretion on the same facts when granting the
    application which the  appellant  resubmitted  in  December  2011,  the
    appellant submits that the respondent should  properly  have  exercised
    discretion in  the  appellant's  favour  by  finding  that  exceptional
    circumstances had prevented the appellant showing 10  years  continuous
    lawful residence.

 5. The appellant does not disagree that, during the period  20  June  2011
    until he was granted leave to remain on 27 January  2012,  he  did  not
    reside lawfully in the United Kingdom. What  is  also  clear  is  that,
    following  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  Ahmed,  the   saving
    provisions of the Immigration Rules (in particular, 39E (Exceptions for
    Overstayers) do not convert periods of  overstaying  which  are  to  be
    disregarded as regards the lodging of leave to remain applications into
    periods  of  continuous  lawful  residence.   The   appellant   cannot,
    therefore, enjoy any relief from  the  provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. Further, the Court of Appeal in Ahmed said this  in  respect  of
    the Secretary of State's policy:

    (8) If and insofar as reliance is placed on the SSHD's "Long Residence"
    Guidance (Version 15.0) published on 3rd  April  2017,  this  does  not
    avail the Appellant. We note that "Example 1" and "Example 2"  on  page
    16 of  the  Guidance  say  that  "gaps  in  lawful  residence"  can  be
    disregarded because "the rules allow for a period of overstaying of  28
    days or less when that period ends before 24 November 2016". This  does
    not accord with the true construction of  paragraph  276B  as  set  out
    above, although it may reflect a policy adopted by the  SSHD.  However,
    it is axiomatic that the intention of the  Rules  is  to  be  discerned
    "objectively from the language used" not from e.g.  guidance  documents
    (per Lord Brown in Mahad (Ethiopia) v. Entry Clearance Officer [2010] 1
    WLR 48 (2009) at paragraph 10). The SSHD may wish to look again at  the
    Guidance to ensure that it does not go any further than a statement  of
    policy.

 6. As the Court of Appeal notes, the Immigration Rules and the policy  are
    not consistent.  Even  if  discretion  were  to  be  exercised  in  the
    appellant's favour under the  policy,  this  would  not  mean  that  he
    satisfied the provisions in the Immigration Rules for  long  residence;
    only compliance with the Rules would weigh as a factor in favour of the
    appellant in the Article 8  proportionality  assessment.  Further,  the
    fact that the Secretary of State chose to grant leave to remain to  the
    appellant after a period of overstaying cannot mean that the  Secretary
    of State is obliged to  find  that  exceptional  circumstances  existed
    which prevented the applicant from applying within the first 28 days of
    overstaying. The examples in the policy  refer  to  'travel  or  postal
    delays which meant the applicant or their representatives not  able  to
    submit the application in time' I  take  that  provision  to  refer  to
    problems which might prevent an applicant by, for example,  reasons  of
    sickness from submitting an application in time as indicated in Example
    3 which is quoted in the appellant's grounds of appeal. Moreover, I  do
    not consider, as asserted in  ground  3,  that  the  treatment  by  the
    Secretary of State of this appellant is so inconsistent as to  threaten
    the administration of fair immigration control. Ultimately, and for the
    reasons articulated by the Court of Appeal in Ahmed, there was a  break
    in the appellant's continuous lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom
    which meant that he did not satisfy the provisions in  the  Immigration
    Rules. Consequently, the appellant was unable to  assert  than  he  has
    satisfied the provisions of the Immigration Rules as a factor  weighing
    in his favour in the Article 8 ECHR appeal. As a result,  the  succinct
    disposal of the human rights appeal which was provided  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at [57] is unimpeachable. Indeed, other than the  failure
    of the judge to give the appellant's representative the opportunity  to
    make submissions in respect of Ahmed, I agree with the entirety of  the
    First-tier   Tribunal   judge's   approach   and   analysis.   In   the
    circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  30
    January 2019 is dismissed.




    Signed                              Date 14 January 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
