
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02139/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21 March 2019                      |On 02 April 2019                      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer - warsaw
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Zenash [G]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and in  particular  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Sills,  to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 17 January 2017 to refuse  an  application  for  entry
    clearance made on 1 September 2016. This had subsequently been  subject
    to an Entry Clearance Manager's decision to uphold that decision on  13
    April 2017.


History of the appeal proceedings

2.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's refusal to  accept  that  the  appellant  qualified
    under  the  family  reunion  provisions  of  the   Immigration   Rules,
    specifically under paragraph 352A of those Rules, and under  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) for  leave  to  enter
    the UK (the settlement application/appeal). This had been on the  basis
    that the appellant had formed a private or family life in the UK with a
    Mr [T], an Eritrean national, who had been granted  refugee  status  in
    2015.  The  appeal  against  that  decision  came  on  for  hearing  in
    Birmingham on 5 February 2018. Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Sills
    allowed the appellant's appeal following that hearing.  In reaching his
    decision, the judge decided to consider a draft  decision  in  parallel
    appeal proceedings against a decision by the respondent  to  refuse  an
    application by the appellant for asylum and humanitarian protection  in
    the UK  (the  asylum  application/  appeal).   This  was  made  by  the
    appellant on entry into the UK on or about 9 June 2017.  The  appellant
    claimed to be a Pentecostal Christian  having  left  Eritrea  in  about
    2003.  Although the respondent did not originally accept that  she  was
    Eritrean, importantly, the respondent later accepted  that  she  was  a
    Pentecostal Christian.

3.   It seems that the appeal against the respondent's  refusal  of  asylum,
    dated 4 December 2017, came  on  for  hearing  before  Judge  Perry  at
    Birmingham on 25 January 2018, i.e. only ten days before the hearing of
    the appeal to the FTT in this appeal on 5th February 2018.

4.   Judge Sills, when he came to consider the settlement appeal decided  to
    look at the draft decision of the First-tier Tribunal reached following
    the hearing by Judge Perry on 25  January  2018.  Having  consulted  an
    attendance note prepared by Mr Corden, who represented  the  respondent
    at the hearing of the asylum appeal on 25 January 2018, it was  decided
    that the settlement appeal ought to be allowed. At  the  hearing  on  5
    February 2018, at which the respondent was represented by a  Miss  Owen
    and the appellant was unrepresented and made no appearance,  Miss  Owen
    indicated that she had no objection to the Judge Sills having sight  of
    Judge Perry's draft decision before reaching his decision. Judge  Sills
    did not record the fact  that  Judge  Perry's  decision  was  a  draft.
    However, he said (at paragraph 7) that as Judge Perry had accepted  the
    appellant's claim that she was a refugee her settlement appeal ought to
    be allowed.  But, it is also important to note that by  the  date  that
    the judge came to decide the settlement appeal, the  parentage  of  the
    child that the appellant had with Mr [T], had been  ascertained  to  be
    that of the appellant and Mr [T].


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

5.   The respondent subsequently appealed Judge  Sills'  decision,  pointing
    out in the grounds that although the relationship between the appellant
    and  the  sponsor  had  been  accepted,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    materially erred by relying on  a  decision  which  had  not  yet  been
    promulgated.  It was respectfully submitted that it  was  perverse  for
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  accept  a  decision  which  may   become
    vulnerable to change and yet still rely on it as a starting point.  The
    error was material as it led  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  find  that
    family life existed, but Appendix  FM  under  the  "ten-  year  partner
    route" was not  satisfied  and/or  that  the  family  life  the  public
    interest outweighed that family  life  in  any  event.   Permission  to
    appeal was sought on that basis.

6.   On 14 May 2018 Judge Mailer decided that it was arguably premature  and
    inappropriate for Judge Sills to rely on  Judge  Perry's  finding  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr [T]  and  their
    child, when it was not clear at that  time  that  the  appellant  would
    indeed be granted refugee status. The grounds stated correctly that the
    judge had relied on an unpromulgated decision. It is said that to do so
    was perverse, and in the  light  of  the  premature  reliance  on  that
    decision there was  an  arguable  error  which  warranted  the  further
    consideration by the Upper Tribunal. Judge Mailer  gave  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal because the errors of law  were  at  least
    arguable.

7.   Miss Cunha submitted to the Upper Tribunal that there was an  error  of
    law in Judge Sills'  decision  insofar  as  he  was  concerned  with  a
    decision which had not yet been promulgated.  Furthermore, he had taken
    into account a decision in an asylum case  which  was  not  necessarily
    determinative of the settlement appeal.  No good reason had been  shown
    for departing from the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision.  However,
    further enquiries were made before I reached my decision. As  a  result
    of those enquiries Ms Cunha was able to provide a copy of Judge Perry's
    decision which I have now had an opportunity to read. It  appears  that
    although the respondent had not  originally  disputed  the  appellant's
    Eritrean nationality, he had had accepted her Pentecostal Christianity.
    However, there has subsequently been a finding in her  favour  in  that
    Judge Perry has accepted her Eritrean nationality also.  That  decision
    was promulgated on 15 March 2018 having been date stamped by the  judge
    26 January 2018 and appears to be in substance the same or very similar
    in its conclusions as the draft version referred to by Judge Sills.


Conclusions

8.   Now that Judge Perry's decision has been promulgated, it  can  be  seen
    that the appellant has been granted refugee status with effect from  15
    March 2018.  Furthermore, she lives with Mr [T] and  their  child.  His
    paternity is not now disputed, as a result of the DNA evidence referred
    to, nor is her status as a refugee  in  issue,  there  having  been  no
    appeal against Judge Perry's decision. In the circumstances, it is  not
    now argued before the Upper Tribunal that there is a material error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The  procedural  error,
    in considering a draft decision which had not been promulgated, has not
    caused any injustice to either party to this appeal.


Decision

9.   In the circumstances I find that that there is  no  material  error  of
    law and have decided to dismiss the respondent's appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and leave in place the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal and  I  make
    no anonymity direction.


Signed                                  Date 29 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made in this case and I make no fee award


Signed                                  Date 29 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury















