
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02346/2015
     HU/02348/2015
     HU/02350/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2017                           |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                              Kansi Maya Gurung
                             Jagan Kumari Gurung
                              Jagan Shri Gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms N Nnamani, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are all nationals of Nepal  whose  dates  of  birth  are
    respectively 13 June 1984, 27 November 1986 and 13 May  1988.   All  of
    them are the daughters of the sponsor, Mr Lal Prasad Gurung, who is  an
    ex-Gurkha soldier who was issued with entry  clearance  on  27  October
    2009 and settled in the UK on 29 November 2009.  It is  agreed  between
    the parties that  but  for  what  is  now  regarded  as  the  "historic
    injustice" concerning former Gurkha residents  the  appellants'  father
    would have been entitled to apply for settlement at  a  time  when  the
    three appellants were all minor children and that he  would  have  done
    so.  It is not contested that at that time he indisputably  had  family
    life with the three appellants and that they  would  have  applied  and
    been granted settlement along with him at  that  time.   The  law  with
    regard to the treatment of the now adult children  of  Gurkha  veterans
    who would but for the "historic injustice" have been  entitled  to  and
    would have applied for settlement when they were eligible is  now  that
    the fact of the historic injustice alone is not sufficient  to  entitle
    them to leave but where it is shown that there has been a  continuation
    of family life after the date when otherwise  the  whole  family  would
    have applied for settlement and that that  family  life  has  continued
    until the date of decision, their Article 8(1) rights  to  family  life
    are engaged and it will usually be the case that the weight to be given
    to the fact of the  historic  injustice  is  sufficiently  high  as  to
    outweigh the weight normally to be given to the  need  to  ensure  that
    immigration is fairly controlled.  The most important  issue  in  these
    cases is to determine whether or not a child applicant who  falls  into
    this category still enjoys a family life with his or her Gurkha veteran
    father.

 2. Accordingly, as was common ground  between  the  parties,  the  appeals
    turned essentially on the issue of  whether  or  not  these  appellants
    enjoyed family life with their father at the  time  of  decision.   The
    respondent having concluded that they did  not,  their  appeal  against
    this decision was heard at  Taylor  House  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cassel on 9 March 2017  and  in  a  surprisingly  brief  decision
    amounting to some six pages in all which was promulgated  on  24  March
    2017 Judge Cassel dismissed the appeals.  The basis of his decision was
    that he did not accept that there was extant family  life  between  the
    appellants and their father.  Having so  found,  he  did  not  need  to
    consider proportionality because Article 8 not being engaged there  was
    no other basis upon which their appeal could be allowed.

 3. The question of whether or not  family  life  has  continued  to  exist
    between adult children and their  parents  has  been  considered  in  a
    number of cases of which the leading cases are probably Kugathas [2003]
    EWCA Civ 31 and now Rai [2017] EWCA Civ  320,  both  decisions  of  the
    Court of Appeal.  Affirming what was said in Kugathas at paragraphs  37
    to 39 of Rai the Court of Appeal  effectively  upheld  the  submissions
    made by the applicant's Counsel in that case (set out at paragraph  36)
    in which it was argued that "the concept to  which  the  decision-maker
    will generally need to pay attention is 'support'  -  which  means,  as
    Sedley LJ put it in Kugathas, 'support' which is 'real' or  'committed'
    or 'effective' ...".  It is common ground that financial support on its
    own is not sufficient to show family life but financial support  is  an
    important aspect of the support which must be real and  there  must  be
    dependence on that support.

 4. When granting permission to appeal in this  case,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page, setting out the reasons for granting permission, stated  as
    follows:

    "The grounds of appeal are arguable given the paucity of  reasoning  in
         the judge's decision at paragraphs 17 -  24  of  the  decision.   A
         number  of  points  are  raised  in  the  application  but  it   is
         unnecessary to go through them  all  in  detail.   The  overarching
         complaint is that the judge has not  considered  material  evidence
         fully and the judge's findings are inadequate.  Complaint  is  made
         that the judge has not  found  whether  it  is  accepted  that  the
         appellants had been studying between 2010 and 2015 and whether they
         were emotionally dependent upon their sponsor.  Complaint  is  made
         that the judge has failed to consider  the  large  number  of  pre-
         decision payment transfer receipts included at pages 209 -  218  of
         the appellants' bundle and erroneously  focused  upon  postdecision
         transfer receipts at pages 32 - 54 of  the  bundle  without  having
         regard to the early receipts.  Plainly, the assessment of financial
         dependency was material to the consideration of the issues  in  the
         appeal".

 5. On behalf of the appellants before me, Ms Nnamani referred to the clear
    evidence of financial support which had been given to these  appellants
    before the decision in order to demonstrate that the  finding  made  by
    the judge at paragraph 19 that  "the  evidence  that  was  produced  of
    payments to the three, with one apparent exception produced at page 32,
    all postdate the decision made by  the  ECO  and  there  is  simply  no
    credible evidence of financial dependency at any other time" was simply
    wrong.  This submission is unanswerable, and Mr Tufan  was  obliged  to
    accept in the course of  his  submission  that  this  finding  was  not
    sustainable.  Ms Nnamani also submitted that the judge failed  to  make
    adequate findings as to family life because his findings  (set  out  at
    paragraph 24) were simply that "on the balance of probabilities I  find
    that the appellants have  not  discharged  the  burden  upon  them"  to
    establish family life, and the only  reference  that  is  made  to  any
    emotional dependency is that there was contact by  phone  which  showed
    "nothing more than the ordinary concern and affection between a  father
    and his adult children".  There was in fact, as recorded  at  paragraph
    20, a letter signed by each of these three appellants (which  does  not
    appear to have been kept within the  file  and  of  which  neither  the
    appellants' Counsel nor Mr Tufan now have a copy) which  did  refer  to
    their dependence on the sponsor but  the  judge  specifically  gave  no
    consideration to this letter stating instead that "bearing in mind  the
    guidance in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439  STARRED  it  is  for  the
    appellants to show that a document lodged can be relied on  and  it  is
    for the Tribunal to decide whether reliance can be placed on  it  after
    considering the evidence in the round"  in  accordance  with  which  "I
    place little weight on this letter".  While the judge has correctly set
    out the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed he cannot on any view  be  said
    to have properly considered the evidence in the round,  given  that  he
    failed to take into account  the  considerable  evidence  of  financial
    support  having  been  given  pre  the  decision  as  accepted  by  the
    respondent.  Mr Tufan, while not conceding the point, did  accept  that
    in light of this error in the decision his  difficulty  in  seeking  to
    persuade the Tribunal to uphold the decision was increased.

 6. In my judgment it is clear that the judge had not adequately considered
    the question of dependency and  the  issue  of  whether  or  not  these
    appellants have maintained family life with their  parents  since  they
    left  Nepal  to  settle  in  this  country  has  not  adequately   been
    considered.  There is a fair amount of evidence of financial dependency
    and whether or not they remain emotionally dependent on  their  parents
    needs to be adequately considered.  Accordingly it is necessary to  set
    aside Judge Cassel's decision, which will now have to  be  remade.   As
    the decision does not contain proper findings of fact it  must  be  set
    aside in its entirety and there are no  findings  contained  within  it
    which can properly be maintained.  It follows that  the  decision  will
    have to be remade afresh and for this reason the appropriate course  is
    to remit it back to the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at  Taylor  House,
    to be reheard by any judge other  than  Judge  Cassel  and  I  will  so
    direct.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cassel  as  containing
material errors of law and direct that the  appeal  be  remitted  to  Taylor
House to be heard by any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Cassel.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
     Date: 14 March 2018




