
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02364/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 12 August 2021                          |On: 3 September 2021          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                 paul thomas
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Agho, of Bridges Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was  Microsoft  Teams.  A
      face-to-face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Mr  Thomas's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  his  human
      rights claim.

   3. For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereinafter  refer  to  the
      Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr Thomas as  the  appellant,
      reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Liberia,  born  on  23  March  1970.  He
      entered the UK illegally on 22 September 2004 and was refused leave to
      enter. He claimed asylum the same day, but his claim was refused on  8
      March 2005 and an appeal against the refusal decision was dismissed on
      8 May 2005. He made further submissions  which  were  rejected  on  11
      November 2009.

   5. On 27 September 2012 the appellant applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
      remain outside the immigration rules on the basis of his private  life
      and in particular his medical condition, namely being partially blind,
      and on the basis of having no family or  friends  in  Liberia  and  of
      being at risk on return from the Liberian authorities. His application
      was refused on 19 March 2014.  The  appellant's  appeal  against  that
      decision was dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Drabu on 29
      July 2015 on the basis that he had provided no evidence to show a lack
      of medical facilities in Liberia  and  that  he  had  not  provided  a
      credible account of his support system in the UK or of the absence  of
      family and friends in Liberia.

   6. On 7 November 2019 the appellant made a  human  rights  claim  on  the
      basis of his private life, again in relation to his medical condition,
      but  with  additional  evidence  about  the  availability  of  medical
      treatment in Liberia and the impact of removal upon him as a result of
      his medical condition. His claim was refused on 29 January 2020 on the
      grounds that he did not  meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
      paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules on the  basis  of  family
      and private life. The respondent did not  accept  that  the  appellant
      would face very significant obstacles to integration if he returned to
      Liberia or that there  were  exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a
      grant of leave outside the  immigration  rules.  The  respondent  gave
      consideration to  the  appellant's  medical  conditions,  of  advanced
      primary open angle glaucoma, left central retinal vein  occlusion  and
      left cystoid macular oedema, but did not consider that his removal  to
      Liberia would meet the Article 3 threshold in that regard or that  his
      condition amounted to compassionate circumstances for the purposes  of
      Article 8.

   7. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Brannan on 1 February 2021.  The  judge  had
      before him recent medical evidence from a  consultant  ophthalmologist
      at Moorfields Eye Hospital confirming the  appellant's  condition  and
      asserting that the relevant medical expertise would not  be  available
      to  him  in  Liberia.  The  judge  noted  that  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant's medical condition was accepted by the  respondent  and  he
      concluded that, as a result of  his  eyesight,  the  appellant  needed
      assistance with the activities of daily living as  well  as  any  more
      complex activities outside the home and that he would not have  access
      to suitable healthcare in Liberia. The judge rejected the findings  of
      the previous judge, Judge Drabu, as to the appellant's lack of  family
      and friends in Liberia, finding that  he  had  erred  in  law  in  his
      findings in that regard, and concluded that the appellant had provided
      credible evidence that he had no such support  network.  He  therefore
      accepted that the appellant would have no support network  in  Liberia
      and was likely to lose the little eyesight he currently  retained  and
      he considered on that basis that there were very significant obstacles
      to  the  appellant's  integration  to  Liberia  for  the  purposes  of
      paragraph 276ADE(1). The judge also found that the appellant's removal
      to Liberia would breach his Article 3 rights, not on the basis of  his
      blindness but because of the dangers he may face in Liberia  owing  to
      his inability to see, such as being run over because of his  inability
      to see cars and roads, which he considered was sufficient to meet  the
      threshold set out in AM (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department  [2020]  UKSC  17.  The  judge  accordingly   allowed   the
      appellant's appeal on Article 3  and  8  human  rights  grounds  in  a
      decision promulgated on 15 February 2021.

   8. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  Judge  Brannan's
      decision on two grounds: firstly that the judge had erred  in  law  by
      failing to adhere to the principles in Devaseelan [2002]  UKIAT  00702
      when departing from the previous decision of Judge Drabu  in  relation
      to his findings on the availability of support in Liberia from  family
      and friends and by finding the Judge  Drabu  had  erred  in  law;  and
      secondly that the judge had erred in law by  finding  that  the  legal
      threshold set out in AM (Zimbabwe) had been met on what was  a  purely
      speculative basis.

   9. Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  both
      grounds and the matter then  came  before  me  for  a  remote  hearing
      conducted through Microsoft Teams.

  10. Both parties made submissions before me.  Ms  Everett  relied  on  the
      grounds and the grant of permission but agreed that the second  ground
      was stronger than the first. She submitted, with regard to the  second
      ground, that the judge had misapplied AM (Zimbabwe) by applying it  on
      an entirely speculative basis. Mr  Agho  submitted  that,  whilst  the
      judge was wrong to say that Judge  Drabu  had  erred  in  law  in  his
      decision, he had nevertheless applied the guidance in  Devaseelan  and
      had made his own findings on the  evidence  before  him  after  taking
      Judge Drabu's decision as a starting point. The decision allowing  the
      appeal on Article 8 grounds should therefore be  upheld.  As  for  the
      decision on Article 3, he agreed with Ms Everett  and  submitted  that
      the appellant was content to succeed on Article 8  grounds  alone.  He
      had no objection to me upholding the Article 8 decision and  re-making
      the Article 3 decision  without  a  further  hearing,  dismissing  the
      Article 3 grounds.

Discussion and conclusions

  11. As I indicated to the parties at the conclusion of the hearing, I  was
      minded to uphold Judge Brannan's decision in relation to Article 8 but
      to set aside his decision in relation to Article 3 and to re-make that
      part of the decision by dismissing the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

  12. With regard to the decision under Article 3, Mr  Agho  quite  properly
      accepted Mr Everett's argument that the decision had been made  on  an
      entirely speculative basis. Having found that the appellant could  not
      meet the Article 3 threshold, as set out  in  AM  (Zimbabwe),  on  the
      basis of his medical condition, the judge  clearly  erred  in  law  by
      interpreting AM (Zimbabwe) as allowing for the threshold  nevertheless
      to be met on the speculative basis of the appellant facing dangers due
      to his blindness such as being run over by a car. The judge failed  to
      provide any proper basis for concluding that the  relevant  Article  3
      threshold set out in AM (Zimbabwe) was met and ought, on the  evidence
      before him, to have dismissed the appeal on Article 3  grounds.  There
      is no further evidence adduced in  that  regard  and  accordingly  the
      judge's decision under Article 3  is  set  aside  and  I  re-make  the
      decision by dismissing the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

  13. I do not consider that that  impacts  in  any  way  upon  the  judge's
      findings on Article 8. With regard to those findings  it  was  clearly
      not open to the judge to find that Judge Drabu had erred in law in his
      decision. Judge Drabu's decision, as made at the  time  it  was  made,
      clearly stands and Judge Brannan plainly erred in law in his  findings
      at [49] to [51] in that respect. However, it was open to Judge Brannan
      to depart from Judge Drabu's conclusion on the appellant's credibility
      in respect to his family and other ties to Liberia, on  the  basis  of
      the evidence before him. That is what he did at  [56],  when  he  took
      Judge Drabu's decision as a starting point  but  then  considered  the
      evidence before him. That was entirely consistent with the guidance in
      Devaseelan and Judge Brannan was entitled to  accept  the  appellant's
      account of his lack of support in Liberia. Accordingly any error  made
      by Judge Brannan at [49] to [51]  was  immaterial,  in  light  of  his
      properly made findings at  [56]  to  [60].  The  judge  was  therefore
      entitled to conclude that there were very significant obstacles to the
      appellant's integration in  Liberia  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
      276ADE(1) of the immigration rules  and  was  entitled  to  allow  the
      appeal on Article 8 grounds on that basis.

DECISION

  14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  on  Article  3  involved  the
      making of an error of law and is set aside. The decision is re-made by
      dismissing the appeal on Article 3 grounds. The decision to allow  the
      appeal on Article 8 grounds stands, or alternatively, the decision  is
      re-made by allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds  for  the  reasons
      given by Judge Brannan.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 August
2021
