






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
HU/02866/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |             Decision and Reasons        |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 4 March 2019                  |             On: 13 March 2019           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Mohammad Amzad Hossan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hydar, legal representative

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.

   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin  promulgated  on  21  November  2018,
      dismissing the claimant's appeal  against  the  secretary  of  state's
      decision dated 2 January 2018, refusing his application for  leave  to
      remain in the UK on human rights grounds.

   3.  In  refusing  the  claimant's  application  the  secretary  of  state
      contended that he had submitted a  false  TOEIC  certificate  for  the
      previous applications made on 26 June 2012 and 14 February 2013.




      The proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal




   4. In his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, the  claimant  adopted
      his written statement dated 6 November 2018. He asserted that  he  has
      never cheated or attempted to deceive or give  false  information.  He
      personally attended and took the TOEIC exams on  two  dates:  19  June
      2012 and 7 July 2012. He has been a genuine  student  in  the  UK  and
      successfully completed a BSc (Hons) degree in Business  Computing  and
      Networking in 2015.

   5. He noted that he had completed an IELTS test prior to arriving in  the
      UK and was granted entry clearance and admission to study on the basis
      of such qualification [4].

   6. He arrived in the UK in September 2009. He  took  courses  at  various
      colleges where he ultimately obtained a degree in  Business  Computing
      and Networking.

   7. He took the TOIEC test at Sevenoaks College after it  was  recommended
      to him by a friend and he confirmed that  the  College  had  available
      test dates as he needed to take it urgently.

   8. He attended the college and paid �150. It took him two hours to travel
      there. The tests were on two days and were held in the afternoon.

   9. The speaking test took between 45-50  minutes  and  the  writing  test
      between 35-40 minutes. He was required to describe a picture  for  the
      speaking test and give his opinion on a sentence; in the writing  test
      he was required to fill in blanks and give his opinion  on  using  new
      media. He used the same computer for both tests, with headphones.

  10. He collected his certificate a couple of weeks later when he was given
      the scores. He  wrote  to  ETS  after  the  refusal  notice  from  the
      respondent and received a letter referred to at page 40 in reply.

  11. The claimant produced a letter sent to him by  ETS.  That  letter  was
      sent in response to his earlier communication which he sent  by  email
      to them. It was asserted in their response, that ETS is  obligated  to
      report test scores that accurately reflect  the  performance  of  test
      takers. ETS therefore routinely  reviews  testing  irregularities  and
      questions test results believed to be earned under  abnormal  or  non-
      standard circumstances. As confirmed by relevant Policy,  the  reviews
      of scores by ETS  are  confidential.  The  claimant  agreed  to  these
      policies and procedures when he registered for the TOIEC test.

  12. ETS stated that because the validity of his test results could not  be
      authenticated, those scores from the test taken on  19  June  2012  at
      Sevenoaks College have been cancelled.

  13. In cross examination, the claimant stated  that  he  knew  about  this
      allegation when he received the first refusal letter in 2015.  He  was
      not granted a right of appeal and issued judicial review  proceedings.
      At that stage he had not asked for an audio of the test. He did  write
      to ETS on 19 September 2018 and received the letter in reply  which  I
      have summarised and which he produced at page 40 of the bundle.

  14. In his evidence he stated that he had to have a test certificate at B2
      level for his Tier 4 sponsor application. This was the  first  English
      language test that he had taken in the UK.

  15. Judge Colvin noted that the secretary of state  relied  on  the  usual
      generic evidence that had been put forward in  such  cases  [17].  She
      referred to the decision in SM and  Qadir.  She  directed  herself  in
      accordance with the court of appeal decision in SSHD v  Shezad  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 615 where the court gave guidance on what  the  secretary  of
      state has to do in order to prove fraud in ETS cases where the results
      of a test are allegedly "invalid".

  16. At [19-20] Judge Colvin set out the claimant's evidence.  He  accepted
      that he did not specifically request a copy of the audio recording and
      the letter from ETS does not refer to it being available. He  accepted
      he had legal representation during  the  judicial  review  proceedings
      which commenced after the refusal in October 2015. However, his  legal
      representation for the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  only
      arranged a day prior to the hearing.

  17. She referred to the various "case decisions" including SM and Qadir at
      [22]. She noted that in  subsequent  cases,  the  secretary  of  state
      submitted more evidence both generic and specific including the expert
      report of Professor French. She directed herself in accordance with MA
      (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450. The evidence which  would  be
      sufficient to enable a Tribunal to conclude that  there  has  been  no
      deception is likely to be an intensely fact specific matter -  Beatson
      LJ in Shehzad, supra at [23].

  18. She set out the generic as well as the specific evidence in  the  Look
      up Tool relating to the claimant. She was satisfied that the secretary
      of state had "narrowly" discharged the  evidential  burden  so  as  to
      shift the burden to the claimant to show that he had  not  cheated  by
      providing a plausible innocent  explanation  [27].  She  set  out  the
      evidence he gave in this respect to the Tribunal. She amended the date
      at [27] from 28 June 2016 to to 28 June 2012.

  19. She also assessed the claimant's demeanour and  presentation.  He  had
      not been evasive; he had exaggerated his answers. His main reason  for
      choosing Sevenoaks College was plausible. He had  shown  a  reasonably
      good proficiency in English at this time in 2012 through the  previous
      IELTS certificate, the other TOEIC test taken at the same time and his
      admission in 2012 and subsequent completion in 2015 of  a  three  year
      degree course.

  20. In the  circumstances,  Judge  Colvin  concluded  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities that he has given a plausible explanation for why he did
      not cheat, albeit accepting  that  his  omission  actively  to  pursue
      obtaining a copy of the audio recording "gives rise to some  concern,"
      but noted as well that  the  secretary  of  state  has  similarly  not
      produced the audio evidence.

  21. In the circumstances, she was satisfied that the  secretary  of  state
      had not discharged the legal burden  of  proof  of  showing  that  the
      claimant committed deception with regard to the TOIEC  test  taken  in
      June 2012. He  accordingly  met  the  suitability  requirements  under
      Appendix FM of the Rules.

  22. She went on to allow the appeal under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention to the extent that the claimant be provided with a  60  day
      period of discretionary leave to remain in order to permit him to make
      a fresh application for leave to remain if he so wishes.




      The error of law hearing




  23. On 3 January 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Martin granted  the  secretary
      of state permission to appeal. She noted that this was  a  case  where
      the secretary of state alleged that the claimant had used a proxy in a
      TOEIC test. It was arguable that Judge Colvin applied the  wrong  test
      in deciding the appeal and has not considered whether the claimant may
      have chosen to use a proxy for reasons  other  than  an  inability  in
      English.

  24. Ms Cunha on behalf of the secretary of state relied on  the  secretary
      of state's grounds seeking permission to appeal.  She  submitted  that
      the Judge failed to give adequate  reasons  for  her  findings  "on  a
      material matter."

  25. She referred to the decision in Shehzad,  supra.  Whilst  he  Tribunal
      accepted that the evidential burden fell upon the claimant to offer an
      innocent explanation, "...that had not been adequately addressed."  It
      is not clear why evidence from the claimant which the Tribunal  relied
      on would preclude the use of a proxy test taker during  the  test.  He
      has simply stated that he did not use a proxy and therefore this  does
      not displace the evidence of  the  secretary  of  state  which  stands
      absent an innocent explanation.

  26. In reaching the  "material  finding",  Ms  Cunha  submitted  that  the
      Tribunal relied on the claimant's English language  ability.  However,
      the test is not whether the claimant speaks English  but  whether,  on
      the balance of probabilities, he has employed deception.

  27. There may well be reasons why a person who is able to speak English to
      the required level would nonetheless cause or permit a proxy candidate
      to undertake an ETS test on their behalf or otherwise to cheat.

  28. She referred to MA (Nigeria) [2016] UKUT 450  at  [57]  where  it  was
      noted that "in the abstract of course" there is a range of reasons why
      persons proficient  in  English  may  engage  in  TOEIC  fraud.  These
      include, inexhaustively, lack of confidence, fear of failure, lack  of
      time and commitment and contempt for  the  immigration  system.  These
      reasons could conceivably overlap in individual  cases  and  there  is
      scope for other explanations for deceitful conduct in this sphere.

  29. Ms Cunha referred to [28] where the Judge  noted  the  fact  that  the
      claimant has shown a reasonably good proficiency in  English  in  2012
      through the previous IETLS certificate and the other TOEIC test  taken
      at the time of his admission that year. She also took into account the
      completion in 2015 of a three year degree course.  She  was  concerned
      that the claimant had not actively pursued obtaining  a  copy  of  the
      audio recording. He only sought to ask ETS for a copy of the  test  in
      2018 when he knew about this before.  He  accepted  that  he  had  not
      specifically submitted a request to  ETS  for  a  copy  of  the  audio
      recording. Nor did the letter from ETS refer to its being available.

  30. Ms Cunha submitted that the Judge failed however  to  have  regard  to
      this evidence when drawing her conclusions at [29].  That  constituted
      the error of law: Her emphasis was on his explanation that he knew how
      to speak English, having regard to his background until then. Although
      the Judge was aware that there were problems in his  evidence  as  set
      out at [28], she failed to address those concerns. She failed to  have
      regard to the fact that he did not seek to make  any  approach  or  to
      remedy the situation before 2018. Further, the  Home  Office  had  not
      disputed the reading and written test. This was only in respect of the
      audio test that it was asserted he had used a proxy.

  31. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Hydar submitted that contrary  to  these
      assertions, the Tribunal did apply the correct test. She  referred  to
      the claimant's evidence at [4-6] of the decision and from [19-20]. She
      thus had regard to his witness statement produced to the Tribunal; his
      evidence in chief and the cross examination. The secretary of  state's
      evidence was set out.  She referred to the applicable case law.

  32. He contended that the Judge has not  simply  taken  into  account  the
      ability of the claimant to speak English.  He gave evidence  regarding
      the circumstances leading up to the taking of the test as well as  the
      actual taking of the test.

  33. He submitted that the fact that another person's voice was found on  a
      student's TOEIC audio file, as  in  this  case,  could  rationally  be
      considered to be some evidence that the student might have engaged  in
      a TOEIC fraud, but it does no more than raise a case to answer and  it
      is certainly not  highly  probative  of  fraud,  let  alone  virtually
      conclusive.

  34. In reply, Ms Cunha submitted  that  the  Judge  did  not  mention  the
      claimant's reasons for failing to seek to clear his name. The  reasons
      given were insufficient.

      Assessment

  35. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has properly directed herself as to  the
      relevant decisions informing the claimant's appeal. She noted that  in
      a case such as this, evidence which would be sufficient  to  enable  a
      Tribunal to conclude that there has been no deception is likely to  be
      an intensely fact specific matter.

  36. She was satisfied in the circumstances that the secretary of state had
      discharged the evidential burden of showing dishonesty. In considering
      whether the claimant had provided a plausible,  innocent  explanation,
      she has set out his oral evidence and  cross  examination  before  the
      Tribunal at [4-6]. The college where he claimed to have taken the test
      was recommended to him by  a  friend.  He  needed  to  take  the  test
      urgently and it was confirmed that there was an available test date.

  37. He set out the evidence relating to the payment of the necessary  fee.
      She noted that he also described how he travelled to the  test  venue.
      The test was taken over two days, in the afternoon, and  commenced  at
      12.30. There were some 15 people taking the test.  He  also  described
      the content of both the speaking and writing test.

  38. At [19] she again referred to his evidence: He relied on the fact that
      he had no need to use a proxy, having regard  to  his  proficiency  in
      English shown by his various qualifications. This included  taking  an
      IETLS English language test in Bangladesh in 2009. She again  set  out
      his oral evidence at [20] relating to events on the day  of  the  test
      itself.

  39. She took into account that he has written to ETS requiring the grounds
      for assessing his test as invalid. She noted however that the  request
      was only made recently, in September 2018. The reply he received  from
      ETS stated that  the  validity  of  his  test  results  could  not  be
      authenticated and that he should refer any additional queries  to  the
      Home Office rather than ETS.

  40. The claimant accepted that he did not specifically request a  copy  of
      the audio recording. She also noted that the letter from ETS  did  not
      refer to its not being available. She took into account  that  he  had
      legal representation during the judicial review proceedings  following
      the first refusal letter in 2015 and that he only  arranged  with  the
      current representatives the day prior to the hearing.

  41. Judge Colvin was concerned with his omission actively  to  pursue  the
      obtaining of a copy of the audio recording. However,  she  also  noted
      that the secretary of state  has  similarly  not  produced  any  audio
      evidence.

  42. It has been contended that the Judge came to her  conclusions  without
      any reasoning as to why she accepted the claimant's omission. Further,
      she simply referred to the fact that he was able to speak English well
      and that he had been given a plausible explanation of why he  did  not
      need to cheat.

  43. Had that been the only evidence relied on, there would have been be no
      proper basis for the conclusion that the secretary of  state  has  not
      discharged the legal burden of proof  of  showing  that  the  claimant
      committed deception in relation to the taking of  the  test.  However,
      the Judge took into account more than that.  She has also  taken  into
      account  his  evidence  from  his  witness  statement,  regarding  the
      circumstances surrounding the taking of  the  test  and  his  detailed
      evidence he gave of the two days on which the tests  were  taken.  She
      also had regard to his recollection of the content of the test.

  44. When cross examined he stated that he knew about the  allegation  when
      he received the first refusal letter dated  December  2015.  That  was
      followed by judicial review proceedings as he had not been  granted  a
      right of appeal. He did not ask for an  audio  of  the  test  at  that
      stage. He confirmed that it was only on  19  September  2018  that  he
      wrote to ETS. This was the first English language  test  that  he  had
      taken in the UK.

  45. During a short  cross  examination,  he  was  not  tested  as  to  his
      description of the circumstances prevailing at the time  he  took  the
      tests at the test centre.

  46. In the circumstances, the  Judge  did  not  exclusively  rely  on  the
      claimant's English language ability in concluding that  the  secretary
      of state had not discharged the burden of showing that  the  appellant
      had committed deception with regard to the test taken in June 2012. In
      finding that the claimant was credible she  also  had  regard  to  her
      assessment of his demeanour and presentation, noting that he  was  not
      evasive and did not exaggerate his answers.

  47. Having considered all the evidence she went on to find  at  [29]  that
      there was nothing put forward by the secretary of state to show  on  a
      balance of probabilities that his explanations are to be  rejected  as
      she found him  to  be  a  credible  witness  [29].  As  part  of  that
      assessment she factored in  his  failure  to  obtain  a  copy  of  the
      recording, which did give rise to some concern, but noted that neither
      had the secretary of state produced it.

  48. Judge Colvin has give sustainable reasons for her conclusion that  the
      secretary of state had not shown on the balance of probabilities  that
      the claimant had committed deceit.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.










      Signed                             Date 11 March 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

