

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
        Appeal no: HU/ 02414/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                         |Decision & reasons Promulgated |
|On   12 July 2017                          |On 13 July 2017                |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                 Abraham [P]
                                                                   appellant

                                     and



                                                                  respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:  Benjamin Hawkin  (counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co, Harrow)
For the respondent: Mr S Staunton

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Reidy Flynn), sitting at Taylor House  on  5  September
    2016, to  an appeal against a deportation order, signed 8 January 2015,
    by a citizen of Ghana, born 12 April 1959. The appellant came  here  as
    an asylum-seeker in 1995: his appeal against refusal was dismissed, but
    in 1996 he married a woman settled here: in 2000 he was given leave  to
    enter on that basis, and in 2002 indefinite leave  to  remain;  but  in
    2005 his application for British citizenship was refused.  Since  then,
    the appellant and his wife have had five children in this country.


 2. The decision under appeal came about  because  in  2013  the  appellant
    pleaded guilty to serious offences of immigration fraud, for  which  he
    was sentenced to a total of four years' imprisonment. This brought  him
    into the category of a 'serious offender'  (see  NA  (Pakistan)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 140), to whom the provisions  of  paragraph  399  (a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and s. 117C (6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 applied. The relevant provisions were set out  in  full
    by the judge at paragraphs 63 and 64, and there is no  need  to  repeat
    them here.

 3. The appeal turns on the way the judge dealt, or did not deal  with  the
    requirements of those provisions, which demand consideration of whether
    there were 'very compelling circumstances', in the  case  of  paragraph
    399 (a), 'over and above those described in paragraphs 399  and  399A',
    and in the case of s. 117C (6), 'over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2'.

 4. The judge made a very  comprehensive  and  careful  assessment  of  the
    facts, and said at paragraph 65 "It is  common  ground  that  the  only
    issue in this appeal is whether there are very compelling circumstances
    over and above those set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A". The basis  on
    which she allowed the appeal appears at her paragraphs 97 - 99. At  97,
    she  found  that  the  appellant's  family  circumstances,  which   she
    summarized "... cumulatively amount to very compelling  circumstances".
    At paragraph 98, she found that the appellant met the  requirements  of
    s. 117B; but the point at which she treated the relevant provisions, as
    identified at 2, was paragraph 98.

 5. What the judge said there was this:

       I also find that he has satisfied Section 117C (5) (6) since  he  has
       demonstrated that his family's circumstances are very  compelling.  I
       should make it clear that it is the very serious effect  his  removal
       to Ghana will have on his wife and children, not  on  the  appellant,
       that has led me to this conclusion.

 6. The correct approach is set out in NA (Pakistan)  at paragraph 37:

       In relation to a serious offender, it will often be sensible first to
       see whether his case involves circumstances of the kind described  in
       Exceptions 1 and 2, both because the circumstances so  described  set
       out particularly significant factors bearing upon respect for private
       life (Exception 1) and respect for  family  life  (Exception  2)  and
       because that may provide a helpful basis on which an  assessment  can
       be made whether there are "very compelling  circumstances,  over  and
       above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2"  as  is  required  under
       section 117C(6). It will then be necessary to look to see whether any
       of the factors falling within Exceptions 1 and 2 are of  such  force,
       whether by themselves or taken in conjunction with any other relevant
       factors not covered by the circumstances described  in  Exceptions  1
       and 2, as to satisfy the test in section 117C(6).

 7. The judge made findings of fact which it is  not  suggested  would  not
    have entitled her to come to the conclusion she did, if that  had  been
    properly explained. Equally, I do not think it  could  reasonably  have
    been suggested that this would have been the inevitable result of doing
    so. None  of  the  judge's  findings  of  fact  were  unreasonable,  or
    irrelevant; but the Secretary of State, and the public,  were  entitled
    to specific consideration of the 'over and above' requirement.

 8. This appellant was not  only  a  serious  offender,  but  one  who  had
    exploited his settled status to commit immigration fraud on  behalf  of
    others. Each of the excepted provisions relevant to the basis given  by
    the judge for her decision (paragraphs 399 and 399A of the  Rules,  and
    Exception 2 in s. 117B (5) refers to the unduly  harsh  effect  of  the
    appellant's deportation on a partner  or  child  with  whom  he  has  a
    'genuine and subsisting relationship'. There needs  to  be  a  reasoned
    conclusion about what was over and above that effect, on the basis  set
    out in NA (Pakistan), for a lawful decision in a case of this kind.

 9. Since the judge's findings of fact can stand, the  parties  are  agreed
    that there is no obstacle to this point to be  resolved  at  a  further
    hearing before her.

Appeal
Further hearing before Judge Flynn
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
