
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/02008/2017

                                                HU/02014/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th January 2019                     | On 15th February 2019              |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                       Mr BABLU DEY (FIRST appellant)
                    Mrs SHARMISTA dev (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born respectively on 5th  May
    1973 and on 10th December 1982.  They both have  extensive  immigration
    histories.  The first Appellant first entered  the  United  Kingdom  on
    11th January 2002 and the second Appellant on 18th October 2009.  Their
    applications for leave to remain on human rights grounds based  on  the
    ten year partner route and  on  their  private  and  family  life  were
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 20th January 2017.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart sitting at Taylor House on 10th April  2018.
    In a decision and reasons promulgated on 18th May 2018 the  Appellants'
    appeals were dismissed.

 3. On 31st May 2018 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 15th August 2018 Immigration Judge  Lambert  refused  permission  to
    appeal.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged on 3rd September 2018.

 4. On 26th November 2018  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Chapman noted the grounds  amounted  to  a
    considerable challenge to the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    sought to set out a substantial number of material errors of  law.   It
    was contended in the Grounds of Appeal:

      i) that the  judge  erred  in  applying  the  incorrect  test  to  her
         consideration of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules  (insurmountable
         obstacles rather than very significant obstacles);

     ii) in making an erroneous finding of fact that  the  second  Appellant
         had overstayed the  last  three  years  when  he  made  an  in-time
         application to vary his leave to remain on 7th September 2015;

    iii) in finding that  non-compliance  with  the  Rules  is  relevant  to
         consideration of Articles 3 and 8, when this is  not  the  case  in
         respect of Article 3  and  the  Rules  are  largely  irrelevant  to
         consideration of whether there will be a breach of human rights;

     iv)  in  failing  to  properly  address  the  best  interests  of   the
         Appellants' child;

      v) in failing to make a credibility finding in respect of the evidence
         of the second Appellant;

     vi) in failing to engage with or make sufficient findings in respect of
         Article 3;

    vii) in finding that Dr Thompson's  opinion  that  the  first  Appellant
         might consider suicide is speculation;

   viii) in finding at paragraph 54 that the first  Appellant's  illness  is
         not life threatening, contrary to the evidence;

     ix) in finding at paragraph 54 that the first Appellant's inability  to
         travel on a plane is not relevant to consideration  of  Articles  3
         and 8 and is a matter for the Respondent, when the forced placement
         of the first Appellant on a plane would have  serious  implications
         on his mental health which would be in breach of his human  rights.






 5. In considering those Grounds of Appeal Judge  Chapman  considered  that
    they raised arguable errors of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, in particular the first seven Grounds of Appeal.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel, Mr Karim.  Mr Karim is familiar with this matter.  He appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal and he is also the author of the Grounds
    of Appeal.  The second Appellant personally attends.  I am advised that
    the mental health of the first Appellant is such that he is  not  in  a
    position to be present.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Walker.

Submission/Discussion

 7. I am considerably assisted in this matter by the  approach  adopted  at
    the outset by Mr Walker who advises that the second Ground of Appeal is
    not challenged and that the judge has erred in making  a  finding  that
    the second Appellant was an overstayer when in fact  this  is  not  the
    case and an in-time application had been made.  He is of the view  that
    this may well have coloured the considerations of  the  judge  and  may
    also have been a contribution to errors, particularly  with  regard  to
    the credibility findings in respect of the second  Appellant  and  with
    regard to whether or not there has been compliance with  the  Rules  in
    relation to Articles 3 and 8.  In such circumstances he is prepared  to
    concede that there are material errors of law  and  he  would  have  no
    objection to the matter being remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for re-hearing.

 8. Mr Karim indicates that clearly on his clients' behalf he  is  grateful
    for the approach adopted by the Secretary of State and submits that the
    strongest grounds upon which he seeks to rely are the first and  second
    grounds raised by Judge Chapman.  He too  considers  that  the  correct
    approach is for the matter to be returned  for  a  complete  re-hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. There are a substantial number of assertions made  in  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  Some are clearly stronger than others, however the finding  by
    the judge that the second Appellant was an overstayer is it is conceded
    not only an error of fact but as a result of the  manner  in  which  it
    perhaps understandably clouds the approach adopted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge leads on  to  being  an  error  of  law.   The  question
    thereafter remains as to whether that is material and  I  am  satisfied
    that it is because it affects and taints the whole  approach  to  which
    the judge has adopted towards consideration of the human  rights  claim
    and with regard to the credibility findings  to  be  made  against  the
    second Appellant.  In addition, it  is  accepted  that  the  judge  has
    applied the wrong legal test to a consideration of paragraph 276ADE(vi)
    of the Rules.  This too is a material error of law and both  the  above
    cited grounds are, as Mr Karim emphasises, the two  main  grounds  upon
    which he seeks to rely.

12. In such circumstances I find there are material  errors  of  law.   The
    correct approach is to remit the matter back  for  complete  re-hearing
    with none of the findings of fact  to  stand.   There  is  one  further
    aspect upon which I would comment.  There is reference made within  the
    grounds to the  emphasis  given  to  the  mental  state  of  the  first
    Appellant.  He does not attend before me today nor do I understand from
    Mr Karim is it clear as to whether he will be able to attend before the
    First-tier Tribunal on the re-hearing.  Mr Karim however does assure me
    that he will  be  in  communication  with  the  Appellants'  instructed
    solicitors, that a decision will be taken and that the matter  will  be
    raised with the Secretary of State prior to the matter  being  restored
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.  The following directions are to apply.

      1) On finding that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         contains material errors of law  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.


      2) The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
         Birmingham on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of
         two hours.


      3) That the appeal is  to  be  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Bart-Stewart.


      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         such further subjective and/or objective evidence upon  which  they
         seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.


      5) That the first Appellant's solicitors do notify  the  Secretary  of
         State and the Tribunal as to whether the mental health of the first
         Appellant means that he  will  be  in  a  position  to  attend  the
         remitted hearing and if he is unable to attend  that  they  produce
         medical evidence in support of that.


      6) In the event that  an  interpreter  is  required  at  the  restored
         hearing, then it is for the Appellants'  instructed  solicitors  to
         notify  the  Tribunal  of  the  language   requirements   of   that
         interpreter within seven days of receipt of these directions.


No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date:  24th January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date: 24th January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

