
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02695/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 June 2021                               |                              |
|                                              |On 24 June 2021               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                            AREZOO MOHAMMADBEIGI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not mADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Ali, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by Microsoft Teams
      (V). A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing. I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party expressed any
      concern, with the process.

   2. The appeal (both in  respect  of  error  of  law  and  re-making)  was
      conceded by Ms Everett, and therefore my decision will be very brief.

   3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who entered the UK in June 2016  as
      a spouse. Her leave ended on 6 March 2019. On 4 March 2019 she applied
      for further leave, but this was refused.  She  appealed  against  that
      decision, but then withdrew the appeal on 5 November 2019 and  made  a
      new application on 26 November 2016.

   4. In a decision dated 8 February 2020 the respondent accepted  that  the
      appellant satisfied all the requirements for  leave  to  remain  other
      than the requirement to have valid  leave  when  the  application  was
      made.

   5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  her  appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew ("the judge").  In
      a decision promulgated on 11 February 2021, the  judge  dismissed  the
      appeal. The judge found that the only reason  the  appellant  did  not
      satisfy the Immigration Rules was that that the application  was  made
      when she no longer had leave. The judge  found  that  application  was
      made seven days late, having regard to the period allowed by paragraph
      39E of the Immigration Rules.

   6. One of the issues before the judge was whether the appellant would  be
      granted entry clearance as a spouse if she were removed  from  the  UK
      and applied  for  entry  clearance  from  Iran.  The  judge  found  at
      paragraph 34 that she could not be certain and this issue  could  only
      be decided with certainty if an application for entry clearance was in
      fact made.

   7. Ms Everett conceded at the hearing that the judge's  approach  to  the
      question of whether the appellant would be granted entry clearance  if
      she made an application from Iran was misconceived, because the  judge
      did not have to be "certain" of this; she just  had  to  be  satisfied
      that,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  the  appellant  would  be
      successful with such an application.

   8. On the basis of this  conceded  error,  I  proceeded  to  re-make  the
      decision. Ms Everett stated that she was unable to provide any  public
      interest argument for dismissing the appeal. I agree with Ms  Everett.
      The only relevant public interest in this case is the public  interest
      in the maintenance of effective immigration  controls.  The  appellant
      entered the UK lawfully as a spouse and sought to extend her leave  as
      a spouse in time. A mistake  with  documentation  regarding  financial
      eligibility was made and the appellant  submitted  a  new  application
      which  the  respondent  accepted  established   that   the   financial
      eligibility requirements were met. Given the  absence  of  an  adverse
      immigration history and the (prompt) efforts made by the appellant  to
      comply with the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  it  does  not
      promote  the  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
      immigration controls to require  her  to  leave  the  UK  to  make  an
      application to re-enter which is, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
      certain to succeed. I therefore allow the  appeal  as  there  are  not
      public interest considerations outweighing the  appellant's  right  to
      respect for the family life she enjoys with her husband in the UK.

Notice of decision

   9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and is set aside. I re-make the decision by allowing  the
      appeal.


|                                  |                                  |
|Signed                            |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|D. Sheridan                       |                                  |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan     |                                  |
|                                  |Dated: 16 June 2021               |





















