
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02556/2017
                                                               HU/02558/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2019                    |On 08 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                               HASSENALLY [O]
                              HOOROONNAISHA [N]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal issued on 7 May 2018 dismissing their appeal against  the
    respondent's decision of 25 January 2017 refusing them further leave to
    remain on human rights grounds.



Background

2.    The appellants, who  are  husband  and  wife,  are  both  citizens  of
    Mauritius.  The first appellant's date of birth is 9 January  1944  and
    the second appellant's 3 December 1955.  They first came to the UK with
    entry clearance as visitors on 11 September 2003.  On 2  February  2004
    they applied for indefinite leave to remain as  the  parents  of  their
    daughter who is present and settled in the UK.   This  application  was
    refused and an appeal dismissed on 22 August 2005.  Their appeal rights
    were exhausted on 31 August 2005.  On  9  December  2005  they  made  a
    further application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  compassionate
    grounds outside the Rules.  This was refused on 26 May 2009  and  their
    appeal against that decision was dismissed on 29 July 2009.

3.    On 14 February 2012 the appellants  made  a  further  application  for
    leave to remain relying on article 8 which was refused on 19 March 2013
    with no right of appeal.  They  took  judicial  review  proceedings  to
    challenge that  refusal,  leading  the  respondent  to  reconsider  the
    application, which was again refused on 4 June 2014 but this time  with
    a  right  of  appeal.   The  appellants   duly   appealed   but   again
    unsuccessfully, their appeal being dismissed  on  22  July  2015.   The
    appellants made the application leading to the  present  appeal  on  18
    November 2016, which was refused on 25 January 2017.

4.    The appellants initially came to the UK in September 2003  to  support
    their daughter, whose marriage had broken down because of her husband's
    violent and harassing behaviour which continued  into  2004  and  2005.
    The  appellants  remained  in  the  UK  to  continue  supporting  their
    daughter, helping her to raise her children, their granddaughters,  and
    becoming part of her household.

5.     In  recent  years  the  first   appellant's   health   has   declined
    significantly. He has become confused, frustrated and violent at  times
    and by 2017 he had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's  disease.   He  also
    has inoperable lung cancer and receives regular hormone injections from
    his GP and remains under the care of the  Oncology  Department  of  the
    Royal Free Hospital.  His day-to-day care needs are met by his wife and
    his children.  Two of the appellant's sons, who were living in  France,
    have now moved to the UK to live  in  the  same  household  with  their
    parents, their sister and her children.

6.    The current application was refused by the respondent for the  reasons
    set out in Annex A of the decision letter.  In  short,  the  respondent
    was not satisfied that the appellants could bring themselves within the
    Rules, that there were exceptional circumstances justifying  the  grant
    of leave outside the Rules or that returning them  to  Mauritius  would
    breach the U.K.'s obligations under either article 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

7.    The judge accepted  the  medical  evidence  produced  that  the  first
    appellant had both lung cancer and dementia, and,  in  consequence,  he
    needed day-to-day care at home.  He found  that  family  life  for  the
    purposes of article  8  continued  between  the  appellants  and  their
    daughter and granddaughters.  He also accepted that the appellant's two
    sons were now living with the appellants, a new development  since  the
    previous First-tier Tribunal  decision  in  July  2015  and  that  they
    provided some of the care he needed and, to  that  extent,  the  second
    appellant relied on their assistance. He found  that  there  were  more
    than emotional ties between the appellants and their two sons but  also
    a dependency giving rise to family life for the purposes of article 8.

8.    The judge found that  removing  the  appellants  would  amount  to  an
    interference with their existing family life so as to engage article 8,
    the decision was in  accordance  with  the  law  and  would  be  for  a
    legitimate purpose within article 8(2).  The judge then considered  the
    issue of proportionality.  He took into account the best  interests  of
    the children noting that this only related to the younger child who was
    17, the older child being 19.  The appellants had  arrived  in  the  UK
    when the younger child was only two and had lived in the same household
    with her ever since.  In terms of  maintaining  the  stability  of  the
    existing family relationships, he was satisfied  it  would  be  in  the
    younger child's best interests for the appellants to remain in the  UK.
    He also accepted that it would not be reasonable  or  proportionate  to
    expect the appellant's daughter  to  relocate  to  Mauritius  with  her
    daughters to maintain the existing family life with the appellants.

9.    He then considered  the  provisions  of  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 noting  that  the  appellants  did  not
    claim to be financially independent and were  not  fluent  in  English.
    They had been illegally present for the majority of their 15  years  in
    the UK and had not made any attempt  to  leave,  despite  losing  three
    previous appeals.  He said that the appellants' long illegal  residence
    further strengthened the public interest in their removal.  However, he
    accepted that they had a private life here worthy of some weight in the
    proportionality exercise, but the majority of this time had  been  when
    they were here unlawfully and even when they did  have  leave,  it  was
    precarious.

10.   The appellants had said  that  they  had  no  home  to  return  to  in
    Mauritius and insufficient resources to support themselves.   He  noted
    that in a previous decision it was accepted that they no longer  had  a
    home in Mauritius, but he found that they had not shown that they could
    not obtain suitable accommodation or were without sufficient  resources
    to do so.  He had not been given a complete  picture  of  the  finances
    that might be available to help them from their children in the UK.

11.   The judge considered the first appellant's health to be an element  of
    his physical and moral integrity for the purpose of  his  private  life
    under article 8 but found that it did not any material  weight  to  the
    arguments in the appeal.  No evidence had been produced  to  show  that
    there  was  any  material  disparity  between  the  medical   treatment
    available in Mauritius and that which he was presently receiving in the
    UK.  He said that there were at least two ways in which elementary  on-
    line research into the healthcare system in Mauritius could  have  been
    carried out, yet no such evidence had been filed.  It was  argued  that
    even if such services were available in Mauritius, the first  appellant
    would prefer to be cared for by  his  family  in  surroundings  he  was
    familiar with.  Whilst the judge understood  why  he  would  have  that
    preference, he did not find that it added much to  the  proportionality
    exercise, if sufficient quality care was otherwise available.

12.   He noted that s. 117B(4)(b) provided  that  little  weight  should  be
    given to the arguably closer family life established with a  qualifying
    partner by a person when in the UK illegally and said that  the  family
    life in the present appeal could not be afforded greater  weight,  even
    allowing for the dependency  that  existed.   He  did  not  accept  the
    argument that the first appellant would be unduly  affected  by  moving
    away from his daughter's home to  accommodation  in  Mauritius,  saying
    that there was no expert medical evidence on this point.

13.   He referred to  the  Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in  Ribeli  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer, Pretoria [2018] EWCA Civ 611.   Whilst  he  accepted
    that it would not be reasonable for the appellant's daughter to  go  to
    Mauritius because she was needed here by her children, it would not  be
    unreasonable for either or both of the appellants' sons to go there  as
    neither claimed to have any dependants in the UK.   He  regarded  their
    situation as entirely analogous to  that  of  the  sponsor  in  Ribeli.
    They had a choice to make about where they wished to live and work.

14.   In summary, the judge found that it would  be  proportionate  for  the
    appellants to return to Mauritius, their sons could accompany  them  if
    necessary whether on a short-term  or  more  permanent  basis  and  the
    appellants had access to resources to  re-establish  themselves  there.
    For the sake of completion, he considered  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules and found, for the reasons already given, that there were no very
    significant obstacles to the appellants' re-integration into Mauritius.



Grounds of appeal and Submissions

15.   In the grounds of appeal, ground  1  argues  that  the  judge  made  a
    flawed assessment of the importance of the first appellant being  cared
    for by his immediate family and  in  particular  by  reference  to  the
    specialist's letter from the Royal Free Hospital cited  at  [55]  which
    referred to a significant  fear  factor  if  the  first  appellant  was
    outside the confines of his immediate family.  It is  argued  that  the
    first appellant's immediate family  has  consisted  of  his  wife,  his
    daughter, his two granddaughters and his two sons and that the  medical
    evidence specific to the first appellant stressed the support  provided
    by his immediate family and his great reluctance to leave the house and
    his unwillingness to consider a day centre.  It is further argued  that
    the judge erred in law by speculating at [85] that  it  might  be  that
    being back in Mauritius where he had lived all his life to the  age  of
    61 would be of some comfort to the first appellant.

16.    Ground  2  argues  that  the  judge  misdirected   himself   in   his
    consideration of s.117B(4)(b),  which  stipulated  that  little  weight
    should be given to a relationship formed with a qualifying partner when
    residence was unlawful by saying that family life in the present appeal
    could not be afforded greater weight than that, even allowing  for  the
    dependency that existed.  It argues that the factors listed in s.117 do
    not purport to cater for every instance of private and family life  and
    that it is well established in European as well as  domestic  case  law
    that the knowledge of an appellant's unlawful immigration status was  a
    relevant  matter  in  the  balancing   exercise   when   assessing   an
    interference with  that  appellant's  family  life  with  a  qualifying
    partner but there was no such principle established in  cases  where  a
    dependency had been shown between family  members  due  to  mental  and
    health reasons.

17.   In ground 3 it is argued that the judge 's application  of  the  Court
    of Appeal judgment in Ribeli was flawed. The Court was  concerned  with
    an entry clearance appeal where the sponsor was not already caring  for
    the applicant.  In the present appeal, the judge found that  there  was
    an element of  dependency,  the  parties  concerned  did  not  live  in
    different countries and the sponsor  had  not  exercised  a  choice  in
    remaining in the UK while their father developed his medical conditions
    and the ensuing caring needs in Mauritius.  The comparison in  approach
    drawn by the judge was inappropriate and, so it is argued, amounted  to
    a material error of law.

18.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that to remove the first appellant from  the  care
    of his children would negatively  impact  on  his  physical  and  moral
    integrity.

19.   Ms Ienger adopted the grounds in her  submissions.   She  argued  that
    the judge had erred in law in his approach to  the  assessment  of  the
    medical evidence by failing to take  proper  account  of  the  evidence
    referred to at [55] and had been wrong to say at [80]  that  the  first
    appellant's physical and moral integrity would not be  interfered  with
    by him returning to Mauritius.  She argued that the judge's approach to
    the medical evidence was fatally flawed and undermined  his  assessment
    of proportionality.  The judge,  so  she  argued,  had  misapplied  the
    judgment in Ribeli.  In the  present  appeal  the  family  were  living
    together in the UK, whereas in Ribeli the sponsor was in the UK and the
    dependent relative in South Africa.

20.   Mrs Jones submitted that there was no  substance  in  ground  1.   The
    judge had taken into account all the evidence and  reached  a  decision
    properly open to him.  He was entitled to note that there was a lack of
    evidence  which  could  reasonably  have  been   provided   about   the
    availability and quality of  medical  and  social  care  in  Mauritius.
    Further, the judge was entitled to conclude that  the  first  appellant
    would not be unduly affected by moving away from his daughter's home to
    accommodation in Mauritius and to make the  point  that  there  was  no
    expert medical evidence  on  this  point.   So  far  as  ground  2  was
    concerned, it was simply not arguable, so she submitted, that the issue
    of unlawful immigration status would not be relevant in the  assessment
    of proportionality in  cases  where  dependency  had  been  established
    between  family  members  due  to  medical  and  health  reasons.   She
    submitted that the judge had not erred in his application  Ribeli.   It
    was open to him to take the view that the situation of  the  appellants
    in this appeal was entirely analogous to that of the sponsor in  Ribeli
    and that the first appellant's sons had  a  choice  of  to  make  about
    whether they would return to Mauritius with their parents.



Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

21.   Ground 1 argues that  the  judge  made  a  flawed  assessment  of  the
    importance of the first appellant being  cared  for  by  his  immediate
    family which undermines his findings that there would  be  no  material
    interference with the first appellant's physical and moral integrity by
    returning him to Mauritius.  The passage in the medical evidence relied
    on is from the letter from the Royal Free Hospital dated 28 March  2018
    where the consultant refers to the first appellant having a significant
    fear factor if he is outside the  confines  of  his  immediate  family.
    That comment appears in the following context:

         "the  main  issue  is  unfortunately  his  progressive  Alzheimer's
         disease with memory loss and there is now a significant fear factor
         if he is outside the confines of his immediate family".

22.   The judge accepted  the  medical  evidence  provided  that  the  first
    appellant had both inoperable lung cancer and Alzheimer's  disease  and
    that the treatment for each was limited to managing the  symptoms.   He
    also accepted that article 8 was engaged on  both  family  and  private
    life grounds. The issue he  had  to  assess  was  whether  removal  was
    proportionate balancing the public interest and the impact  of  removal
    on the family and private life of the appellants and their family.

23.   He dealt  with  the  issues  arising  from  the  proposed  removal  to
    Mauritius in [75]-[81].  He accepted that the appellants no longer  had
    a home in Mauritius but found that they had not proved they  could  not
    obtain suitable accommodation and did not  have  sufficient  resources.
    He said at  [76]  that  he  had  seen  some  bank  statements  for  the
    appellants' two sons in the UK, but their daughter  had  not  disclosed
    any such statements.  He was, therefore, entitled to  comment  that  he
    had not seen a complete picture of the finances that might be available
    from the children in the UK to assist their parents.  He also commented
    at [77] that he had not been provided with reliable evidence  of  other
    financial resources that might be available. He also noted at [78] that
    the  evidence  of  financial  support  from  other  quarters  had  been
    inconsistent, referring to a previous tribunal decision  in  which  the
    judge had recorded that there was  written  evidence  from  the  second
    appellant's four brothers who lived in France that they were supporting
    the appellants both financially and morally and the judge had held that
    there was no reason why such financial support could not  continue  for
    the appellant in Mauritius [79].

24.   The judge was also entitled to take into account  the  fact  that  the
    appellants had not produced any country background evidence to show any
    material  disparity  between  the  available  medical   assistance   in
    Mauritius and the treatment he was receiving at present and that  there
    was no evidence to show that he could not access suitable treatment  if
    returned to Mauritius.   There  had  been  references  to  unsuccessful
    attempts to access the Mauritius Alzheimer's Society  website  but  the
    judge was entitled to comment that this was not the  only  source  from
    which evidence could reasonably be obtained.   Further,  there  was  no
    evidence of the availability  of  social  care  in  Mauritius,  whether
    provided privately or through the state, to assist the second appellant
    to care for the first appellant in his day-to-day life.

25.   He took into account the claim that the first appellant  preferred  to
    be cared for by his family and in surroundings he  was  familiar  with,
    but he was entitled to take the view that this preference did  not  add
    much to the proportionality exercise, if sufficient  quality  care  was
    otherwise available from others.  The judge also commented at [85] that
    being in Mauritius might be of comfort to the first appellant and  that
    comment is understandable in the light of his previously expressed wish
    not to die in the UK.

26.   The judge also considered the extent to which the  appellants'  family
    and in particular  their  children  could  reasonably  be  expected  to
    continue providing care. Whilst  he  accepted  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the appellants' daughter to go to  Mauritius,  he  found
    that it would be reasonable for either or both of their sons to do  so.
    Neither claimed to have any dependents in the UK,  the  strongest  ties
    were that they had business here and their relationship to their sister
    and their daughters but there was  no  claim  of  dependency  in  those
    relationships.  If they did return to Mauritius with their parents, the
    first appellant would continue to be  with  members  of  his  immediate
    family, even if not all of them.

27.   I am satisfied that when considering  private  life,  the  judge  took
    into account  the  first  appellant's  physical  and  moral  integrity,
    specifically considering which members of his family  could  reasonably
    be expected to return with him to Mauritius, the  medical  evidence  of
    the significant fear factor if the  first  appellant  was  outside  the
    confines of his immediate family and the importance of being cared  for
    by his family but, when assessing proportionality, these were   factors
    to be balanced with the public interest factors in the context  of  the
    evidence as a whole. In summary, I am not satisfied that  ground  1  is
    made out.

28.   Ground 2 argues that  whilst  unlawful  immigration  status  would  be
    relevant when  assessing  an  interference  with  family  life  with  a
    qualifying partner, no such principle has  been  established  in  cases
    where the dependency arose due to medical and health reasons.  There is
    no substance in this ground.  The fact that  a  dependency  arises  for
    medical and health reasons as opposed to arising because of a  marriage
    or partnership and is not specified  in  S  117B  does  not  mean  that
    unlawful residence cannot properly be taken  into  account.   The  fact
    that the provisions of s.117 are not  exhaustive  does  not  mean  that
    factors relevant to the public interest such as unlawful and precarious
    residence are to be left out of  account:  Rajendran  (s117B  -  family
    life) [2016] UKUT 88.

29.   Ground 3 argues that the judge erred in his assessment of  Ribeli  and
    was wrong to regard the position between the parties in  that  and  the
    present case as entirely analogous.   There  are  factual  distinctions
    between the two cases: Ribeli is an  entry  clearance  case  where  the
    dependent relative lived in South Africa and the  sponsor  in  the  UK,
    whereas in the present appeal  the  sponsors  and  the  appellants  are
    currently living in the UK.  However, it is clear that  the  judge  was
    not seeking to rely on Ribeli as a factual precedent but as identifying
    and  confirming  the  relevant  principles   and   illustrating   their
    application in that particular appeal.

30.   In Ribeli, the Court of Appeal at [68] repeated  the  well-established
    principle that in a family relationship between two adults there had to
    be something more than normal emotional ties in order to engage article
    8.  The judge accepted that that was the situation in this appeal.   In
    [69] the Court then identified as a crucial point that in that case the
    applicant's daughter could reasonably be expected to go back  to  South
    Africa to provide the emotional support her mother needed  as  well  as
    practical support and that whether she went back or not was a matter of
    choice.  She was  entitled  to  exercise  that  choice  but,  in  those
    circumstances, the Upper Tribunal could not be faulted for having found
    on the facts of the case that the decision was proportionate [70].

31.   The judge in the present case was entitled to  consider,  as  he  did,
    whether it would be reasonable for the appellants' children  to  return
    with him to Mauritius.  He accepted that it would not be reasonable for
    the appellant's daughter to return but reasonable to expect one or both
    of his sons to do so.  He took account of the principles  and  approach
    set out in Ribeli and applied them to the facts of  the  present  case.
    It was for him to assess whether removal would be proportionate in  the
    light  of  the  appellants'  particular  circumstances  and  I  am  not
    satisfied that he misunderstood or misapplied Ribeli.

32.    This  is  a  case  where   there   are   considerable   compassionate
    circumstances arising from the first appellant's  mental  and  physical
    condition.  However, those factors  had  to  be  balanced  against  the
    public interest.  The judge was entitled to take account  of  the  fact
    that the appellants had not only been precarious residents  during  the
    time of their visit visa but, subsequently for some 14 years, had  been
    unlawfully resident.  He accepted that the first appellant's mental and
    physical condition was as set out in the medical evidence and  he  took
    into account the fear factor of  being  outside  the  confines  of  his
    immediate family, but he would be returning with his wife and the judge
    found that it would be reasonable to expect one or both of his sons  to
    return  with  them.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  finding   on
    proportionality was properly open to him.

33.   The grounds do not satisfy me that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
    approach to and assessment of this difficult case.  He  considered  all
    relevant matters and reached a decision properly open  to  him  on  the
    evidence for the reasons he gave.

Decision

34.   The First-tier Tribunal did  not  err  in  law  and  the  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 17 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
