
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02898/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2020                           |On 20 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                           Suresh Reddy Garakurthi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Bagral, Counsel instructed by Ellisons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 31 January 2018 the appellant, a citizen of India, applied for leave
    to remain in the UK under Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules,
    having accrued 10 years of lawful continuous residence. On 29 January
    2019 the application was refused on the basis that in two previous
    applications for leave to remain (made in 2011 and 2013) the appellant
    had provided information about his earnings that was inconsistent, to a
    significant extent, with information provided to HMRC. The respondent
    reached the view that the appellant had been dishonest and on that
    basis refused his application under paras. 276B(ii)(c), 276B(iii) and
    322(5) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Beg. In a decision
    promulgated on 29 May 2019 the judge dismissed the appeal. The judge
    found that the appellant had been dishonest by intentionally submitting
    false earnings information to the respondent and she agreed with the
    respondent that Paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules was
    applicable.  Paragraph 322(5) provides that leave to remain should
    normally be refused in circumstances where:

         "the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C), character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security"

 3. Having considered the grounds of appeal and submissions by Ms Bagral
    and Mr Melvin I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
    not sustainable because the judge appears to have either misconstrued,
    or failed to engage with, a material part of the appellant's case.

 4. One of the arguments made by the appellant was that although he did not
    file a self-assessment tax return in the 2010/11 tax year, his income
    was declared in a corporation tax return filed in 2012 and he paid the
    correct amount of tax, such that when the position was later corrected
    in 2015 it was confirmed that no further tax was due for the 2010/11
    tax year.

 5. At paragraph 20 the judge stated:

         "It is common ground that the appellant failed to declare his total
         income for the years 2010 and 2011 and therefore failed to pay the
         correct tax due and used those accounts to support applications for
         leave to remain.  Furthermore, the appellant failed to submit a
         company tax return for the period ending November 2011 in 2012."

 6. Paragraph 20 contains two mistakes that indicate that the judge failed
    to appreciate that it was the appellant's claim that in the 2010/11 tax
    year the correct tax was paid and that his income was correctly
    declared in a corporation tax form. The first is that judge stated that
    it was "common ground" that the appellant failed to pay the correct tax
    in the 2010/11 tax year when, as is clear from Ms Bagral's skeleton
    argument in the First-tier Tribunal, it was a part of the appellant's
    claim that he paid the correct tax.




 7. The second mistake in paragraph 20 is that the judge stated that the
    appellant did not submit a company tax return for the period ending
    November 2011 when in fact he did.  This was included at page 103 of
    the appellant's bundle and is referred to in Ms Bagral's First-tier
    Tribunal skeleton argument.




 8. Mr Melvin argued that even if these mistakes amount to an error of law,
    the error is not material because the judge made adverse credibility
    findings that have not been challenged and which are sufficient to
    justify the conclusion reached about the appellant being dishonest.
    Whilst I agree with Mr Melvin that the judge made several sustainable
    negative credibility findings, the error I have identified is material
    because it indicates that the judge decided the case under the
    misapprehension that the appellant accepted that the correct tax was
    not paid and that he did not accurately declare his income to HMRC in
    2010/11 when in fact it was the appellant's case that the correct
    amount of tax was paid and his income was declared in his corporation
    tax filing.


 9. In the light of this material error of law the decision of the First
    tier Tribunal cannot stand and will need to be remade in its entirety.
    It is not necessary to address the other grounds of appeal.

10. Given that the error of law identified above relates to the findings of
    fact, the appeal will need to be considered afresh with no findings
    preserved. Having regard to para. 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of
    the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and
    Upper Tribunal, I have decided that the appeal should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

 1. The appeal is allowed.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error on a point of
    law and is set aside.

 3. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh by
    a different judge.

|                                      |                               |
|Signed                                |                               |
|                                      |                               |
|[pic]                                 |                               |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan         |Dated: 24 March 2020           |

