
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/02897/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2018                        | On 05 March 2018              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G G
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Collins, instructed by J McCarthy Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (to whom I shall refer hereafter as  the  appellant,  as
    she was before the First-tier  Tribunal)  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  (to  whom  I
    shall refer hereafter as the respondent, as she was before  the  First-
    tier Judge) dated 15 January 2016 refusing her application for leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of  established  private  and
    family life.

2.   The appellant is a national of Armenia who was born in 1952.   She  had
    previously been in the United Kingdom on visit visas in 2008, and again
    from October 2013 to  October  2015  and  it  seems  made  the  current
    application in time.  She seeks to remain in the United Kingdom on  the
    basis of her relationship with her daughters, LG, who is married with a
    son, and HG.  The judge noted that the appellant has lived with LG  and
    her husband and child since the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom
    in May 2015.  She also sees HG two to three times a week.
3.   There was evidence before the judge of health problems  experienced  by
    the appellant.  She had had some healthcare in the  United  Kingdom  as
    well.  The appellant was in receipt of a pension in Armenia but it  did
    not cover her expenses and  money  had  to  be  sent  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  HG gave evidence to the effect that her mother could not live
    on her own and she herself had constantly to call neighbours  when  her
    mother did not pick up the phone and her mother would  forget  to  take
    her medication.  On the last occasion when she had gone back to Armenia
    she had refused to eat and had to be hospitalised.  She had never lived
    in a care home.  She had previously had a carer who beat her and  as  a
    consequence HG said her mother would refuse to have another carer.  The
    incident had been reported to the police.

4.   LG's husband AT gave evidence.  In a letter he had said his  mother-in-
    law would lapse into long term depression as a result of the separation
    from her grandson and might well attempt to self-harm.

5.   In her evidence LG was unsure  whether  there  was  in  fact  any  paid
    Social Service care in Armenia.  She had had contact with the  Armenian
    Association of Social Workers and spoke to the  deputy  head  who  said
    that they dealt exclusively with children.  LG referred to episodes  of
    extreme depression which her mother experienced and the medication  her
    mother had taken and her contact with the Compass Wellbeing  Centre  to
    which she had been referred by her GP to  seek  psychological  support.
    She said that her mother had cataracts and needed surgery in both  eyes
    and had extreme fluctuations in her blood  pressure  and  she  believed
    that the stress of permanent return to Armenia would send her  mother's
    pressure into dangerous levels.  Following her rushing  her  mother  to
    the hospital after she was found bleeding at home she was advised  that
    her mother had to be vigilant and stay at home alone.

6.   There were also issues relating to the appellant from LG's  work.   She
    is employed as an analyst covering economics  and  politics  of  former
    Soviet states including Armenia.  She had  been  critical  of  Armenian
    politics and had received a veiled threat from  a  panel  member  at  a
    conference and was contacted by the Armenian Embassy in  London  asking
    if she had written or commented on Armenia  in  a  negative  way.   She
    believed that she had been labelled as a western  spy.   She  had  been
    warned to be careful of criticising Armenia as times had changed.   She
    did not think she would be able to travel freely to Armenia on  account
    of these incidents.

7.   The judge  found  that  the  appellant  suffers  from  diabetes,  blood
    pressure, a heart condition and depression.  She had been  awaiting  an
    appointment with a psychiatrist.  The witnesses were all  found  to  be
    credible.  (It is worthy of note in passing that the appellant did  not
    give evidence).  The judge accepted that appellant had  had  home  care
    which resulted in her being abused in her own home  and  that  she  was
    desperate for this situation not to recur.  The  judge  found  she  was
    unable to live on her own now that she had her  ailments,  particularly
    if there is a removal which is seen as permanent as she was  likely  to
    lose the will to live and there was  a  risk  of  self-harm.   She  had
    previously starved herself and had to be hospitalised for the same.
8.   The judge accepted that LG had attracted adverse interest as  a  result
    of the views she had expressed in the media and there had been pressure
    brought to bear on her and her reluctance  to  travel  to  Armenia  was
    completely justified.  The judge found that she would not  be  able  to
    visit the appellant should the  appellant  be  required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and nor would it be appropriate for the same reasons for
    her  to travel to Russia in order to facilitate visits with her mother.
     The judge found that the appellant would be a target for  the  adverse
    interest in her daughter by  the  state.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant would be socially and emotionally isolated.  Though she might
    well have her daughter's house to continue living in and she spoke  the
    language and was culturally connected with Armenia, she was vulnerable,
    old and reliant upon others to administer medicines to her  and  within
    her particular circumstances there were very significant  obstacles  to
    her integrating into life in Armenia as she could not manage to live on
    her own which would be the position there.  The judge found that she is
    a vulnerable person and susceptible to abuse and adverse  targeting  by
    state authorities.  As a consequence the appeal was allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

9.   The judge went  on  to  consider  Article  8,  considering  the  Razgar
    guidance, and accepting there was dependency on her daughters over  and
    above  that  normally  anticipated  between  parents  and  their  adult
    children.  The judge found that the appellant  has  established  family
    life with her daughters and  grandson  in  the  United  Kingdom.   With
    regard to the issue of proportionality  the  judge  took  into  account
    section 117B of the 2002 Act.  He noted that the  appellant  speaks  no
    English and is not fully integrated into life in the United Kingdom but
    into the life of her family.  She is not of independent  means  and  is
    completely dependent on her daughters.  Her family and private life had
    been established during a time when her immigration status was  clearly
    precarious, but on  arrival  she  already  had  family  life  with  her
    daughters and grandson.  There was no  support  available  for  her  in
    Armenia.  Her distress was apparent and this  was  a  genuine  fear  of
    being sent to Armenia to die on her own because there was  no  one  for
    her there and she was completely dependent on her daughters.

10.  The judge found that the system was  not  abused  in  this  case.   The
    appellant and her daughters were fully aware of the  Immigration  Rules
    and that she had been sent back to Armenia previously.  There had  been
    a change of intention only following her arrival and the extent of  her
    depression was fully appreciated  and  the  significant  issue  of  the
    adverse interest in LG arose much after the appellant's arrival in  the
    United  Kingdom.   He   found   that   the   balancing   exercise   was
    overwhelmingly in the  appellant's  favour  and  that  her  removal  to
    Armenia would amount to a disproportionate interference in her  private
    and family life.  The appeal was accordingly allowed.

11.   The  respondent  sought,  and  was  granted,  permission   to   appeal
    essentially on the  basis  as  summarised  by  the  judge  who  granted
    permission that it was alleged that he had  made  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's  medical  conditions  which   were   unsupported   by   any
    appropriate evidence; he had not properly applied the factors  referred
    to in Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  and
    the judge had been too quick to accept the appellant's case as  to  why
    continuing to live in Armenia was not feasible for her.

12.  In addition a respondent's Rule 24 notice was received challenging  the
    arguments made in  the  grounds  and  contending  that  the  judge  had
    approached all the issues before him  lawfully  and  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal should be dismissed.

13.  In his submissions Mr Clarke noted that the medical  evidence  did  not
    exclusively deal with the appellant's physical ailments.  The fact that
    the letter at G1 referred to her losing her appetite did not mean  that
    she was a victim of self-harm.  That appeared to come from the  son-in-
    law's evidence.  There was not enough to show a risk of self-harm as  a
    material fact to be taken into account.

14.  As regards the claimed adverse interest on the  part  of  the  Armenian
    authorities, it seemed that the work of LG had led  to  problems.   The
    judge  referred  to  a  risk  of  targeting  of  the  appellant  as   a
    consequence.  This was analogous to a finding in respect of asylum, and
    on the authorities  where  such  distinct  matters  were  raised   this
    amounted to a new matter, and  this  was  in  effect  an  asylum  claim
    although not asylum findings but it was allowed  in  a  factual  matrix
    relevant to Article 8.  It was unclear what standard of proof had  been
    applied.  It was not open to the judge to make findings such  as  those
    at paragraph 28 as it was a new matter.

15.  There was no corroborating evidence concerning the claimed  assault  by
    the carer, for example, a report to the police.  This would be material
    to the reasonableness of finding other care in Armenia and has also led
    on to the oddity of what the judge  said  at  paragraph  36  about  the
    system not being abused.  The appellant had had NHS  treatment  but  it
    was known she had come on a  visit  visa.   In  an  in-time  Article  8
    application there was a requirement of no recourse to public funds  for
    five years and there was a lot of medical evidence about her use of the
    NHS.  It was odd therefore to find  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    system  had  not  been  abused.   The  determination  was  lacking   in
    reasoning.  The determination was unsafe.

16.  In his submissions Mr Collins argued that the grounds were  misleading.
     The judge had made findings on the oral and written evidence.  It  was
    not a matter of an asylum claim  in  respect  of  LG  but  evidence  of
    developments.  The judge had found the evidence to be credible.

17.  There had been medical evidence before  the  judge  including  evidence
    from a hospital stay in Armenia.  The abuse by the carer  was  accepted
    by the respondent in the decision letter.  There was  no  challenge  to
    any Article 8 findings beyond  what  was  said  in  the  grounds  about
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The judge carried out  the  proper  balancing
    exercise.  The medical evidence was all to be found in the respondent's
    bundle together with the statements from the daughters  and  a  further
    statement from LG.  The judge set out the burden and standard of  proof
    at paragraph 19 and made findings thereafter.  The judge had  carefully
    balanced the  relevant  factors  in  the  Article  8  evaluation.   The
    findings under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) were fully open to the judge.
18.  By way of reply Mr Clarke argued that although it  was  the  case  that
    the abuse was not challenged, another person  could  be  employed.   As
    regards risk to LG, she had not said that she  could  not  go  back  to
    Armenia but that she could not visit regularly.  This  contrasted  with
    the judge's findings.

19.  I reserved my determination.

Discussion

20.  On the issue of the medical evidence, a number  of  items  of  evidence
    can be seen in the respondent's bundle.  There is a medical  report  on
    the appellant referring to hospital treatment received between  20  and
    27 January 2015 in Armenia including  diagnoses  of  bronchial  asthma,
    Type 2 diabetes and cardiac hypertension.  There is an account  of  her
    medical history at G1 referring to a diagnosis of retrograde depressive
    disorder medium severity episode and depressive anxiety symptoms.  This
    followed admittance to hospital on 11 December 2014 and  release  on  2
    January 2015.  There is also at G8 an excerpt from an  ambulatory  card
    dated 6 May  2015  concerning  deteriorations  in  her  conditions  and
    treatment for astheno-depressive symptom and the need for assistance of
    her relatives and continuous treatment.  There are  also  cardiographic
    results from 21 January 2015 referring to  such  matters  as  sclerotic
    aorta,  enlarged   left   ventricular   concentrated   overgrowth   and
    hyperkinesis of the anterioseptal wall  of  the  left  ventricle.   The
    judge accepted that she was awaiting an appointment with a psychiatrist
    in the UK.

21.  In light of this evidence it is perhaps surprising to see reference  in
    the grounds of appeal to the absence of any medical  evidence  provided
    by the appellant to demonstrate her claims of ill health.  Quite  apart
    from all this documentary evidence it was open to the judge  to  accept
    the oral evidence of the witnesses, which he did.  It is relevant  also
    to note LG's evidence that she was not sure that there was paid  Social
    Service care in Armenia, although the fact that a  carer  was  employed
    previously suggests that some form of care is available.  However,  the
    evidence was that the appellant refused to have another carer in  light
    of her earlier experience, and again it was open to the judge to accept
    this.  I agree with the point made in the  response  that  it  was  not
    necessary for the appellant to institute legal proceedings against  the
    former carer to prove that that harm had occurred.  It was  again  open
    to the judge to accept the evidence in  this  regard.   It  is  clearly
    right that there is medical assistance available in  Armenia,  and  the
    judge did not suggest that that was not the case, but concentrated with
    regard to the paragraph 287ADE(1)(vi) issue  on  the  question  whether
    there are very significant obstacles to the appellant integrating  into
    life in Armenia.  In that regard clearly the  health  problems  of  the
    appellant were relevant and also her psychological state.

22.  Of further relevance to  that  is  the  issue  of  the  problems  being
    experienced by LG and  the  potential  implications  of  that  for  the
    appellant.  It is right to note as Mr Clarke pointed out  that  LG  did
    not say that she would be unable to visit the appellant in Armenia  but
    rather that she would not be able to visit regularly.  Nevertheless, it
    is clear from her evidence that because of the concerns she  has  about
    the adverse interest  in  her  that  this  would  be  relevant  to  the
    frequency of her visits to Armenia and her ability therefore to support
    her mother.  This is quite apart from the fact that of  course  she  is
    the mother of a young child.

23.  I do not think that the judge  can  properly  be  described  as  having
    wrongly interpreted the appellant's case through the lens of an  asylum
    claim as is suggested in the grounds.  If  it  was  a  new  matter,  as
    suggested by Mr Clarke no objection was taken by the Presenting Officer
    at the hearing.  It was a piece of relevant evidence  which  the  judge
    was entitled to take into account when assessing whether or  not  there
    were very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  into
    Armenia.  Clearly if the appellant's daughter was either  not  able  to
    visit or only able to visit less frequently than might otherwise be the
    case, that is relevant to the evaluation of the appellant's ability  to
    meet the requirements of this particular test.

24.  Bringing these matters together, although it is not a  conclusion  that
    I think every judge would have come to, I consider  that  the  evidence
    before the judge and which was found credible, was such as  to  justify
    the conclusion that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Armenia bearing in  mind  the  factors  in
    particular set out at paragraph  27  of  the  judge's  decision,  which
    contains a balanced evaluation of the relevant points.

25.  In the alternative, I think it was open to the judge also to allow  the
    appeal under Article 8.  Appropriate consideration  was  given  to  the
    relevant issues with regard to proportionality, the judge having  found
    that there was family life between the appellant and her daughters  and
    grandson in the United Kingdom.  Though it is right to point out, as Mr
    Clarke does, that it seems slightly curious to say the system  was  not
    abused in a situation where there  has  been  use  of  National  Health
    facilities by a person without status in the United Kingdom, overall  I
    consider it was open to the judge to find that the proportionality side
    of the balance fell in the appellant's favour and as a consequence that
    the appeal fell to be allowed under Article 8 also.

26.  For these reasons therefore I conclude that the judge did  not  err  in
    law in his decision, and the decision allowing the appeal stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 01 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
