

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/02515/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|on 24 October 2019                      |    on 4 November 2019             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                MUNTAZ AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Woodhouse of Sultan Lloyd Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated on 1 July  2019  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
        relied upon by the appellant as an exception  to  the  decision  to
        deport him from the United Kingdom pursuant to UK Borders Act 2007.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20  March  1974  who
        entered the United Kingdom lawfully on 20 March 1998 as the  spouse
        of a B, a British national. On 28  April  1999  the  appellant  was
        granted indefinite leave to remain. The couple have  four  children
        born in December 1995, January 1999, July 2000 and  November  2008,
        meaning only the youngest, [M], was a minor  at  the  date  of  the
        hearing before the Judge.
     3. The appellant is the subject of an order for his  deportation  from
        the United Kingdom following a  conviction  on  27  April  2018  of
        Possession of Bladed Article for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  14
        months imprisonment. The applicant was also convicted of Failing to
        Surrender (Bail Offence) in relation to his Crown Court  trial  for
        which he received a one-month period of imprisonment, totalling  15
        months.
     4. The Judge's sentencing remarks noted the first offence  related  to
        the possession of a bladed article in a  public  place,  namely  at
        Attwood Close, in Birmingham. The Sentencing  Judge  records  being
        satisfied that the appellant threatened a Mr Ali with a knife,  but
        that threat was not made in such a way that there was an  immediate
        risk of serious  harm  to  another.  The  details  of  the  offence
        recorded by the Sentencing Judge is as follows:


             "As to the background, the incident on 26 May, there was  some
             hostility between you towards Mr Ali and his family  who  were
             neighbours in Attwood Close in Washwood   Heath.  At  about  5
             o'clock that evening, Mr Ali and his wife and  some  of  their
             children walked past your front  door  in  order  to  visit  a
             neighbour.


             Mr Ali described how he could see you stood on  your  doorstep
             as they walked past number 8 where  you  were  then  resident,
             holding  the  large  pink  handled  knife  which   was   later
             recovered, at that  time  cleaning  your  nails  with  it  but
             looking at Mr Ali as you did so.  Mr  Ali  told  his  wife  to
             ignore you and to carry on walking and they  walked  down  the
             street.


             On the evidence, you came out of your house, down the pathway,
             and started to follow behind them. You still had the knife and
             when Mr Ali turned round to see why you were  following  them,
             you are gripping the handle tightly, saying,  "You're  fucking
             with me.  I'll fuck with you".


             You were plainly in an angry mood  and  you  were  threatening
             him, saying, "I will do it. What are you gonna do?"  You  were
             an arm's length away and Mr Ali feared that you may stab  him.
             You did not do so.


             Another neighbour came out, confronted you, ask what you  were
             doing with a knife and told you to put it down.  You  wouldn't
             listen to him and so that neighbour grabbed you in an arm lock
             and was able to wrestle you to the ground, making you  release
             your grip from the  knife  and  was  able  to  throw  it  some
             distance away under a silver car.


             That neighbour told you that if you calmed down he  would  let
             you go. You did calm down and so he released you. But you then
             ran straight to the car and got the knife again. The neighbour
             managed to grab you again and,  together  with  Mr  Ali,  they
             wrestled you to put you down on the ground again.


             You were still gripping the knife.  They were trying to disarm
             you and in the course of that Mr  Ali  received  cuts  to  his
             hand. It  was  a  small  nick  but  it  can  be  seen  on  the
             photographs on the system. They had to keep you  down  on  the
             ground  until  the  police  arrived  whilst  you  were   still
             struggling.


             Mr Ali described having been scared, having never been in this
             sort of situation before, having thought  you  were  going  to
             stab him and plainly being frightened by the episode. His wife
             and children had been present and watching. She described  you
             having been very angry, threatening them with  the  knife  and
             saying that you would do whatever  "I'm  going  to  show  you.
             Watch watch".


             She describes her kids having been at the front door. She  had
             previously taken the toddler out of the way when  the  trouble
             started  but  she  described  them  panicking  with  the  kids
             screaming and crying, watching  what  was  going  on  and  she
             described that, thereafter, they were terrified to leave their
             house.


     5.  The  Sentencing  Judge  noted  the  appellant  had   no   previous
        convictions and that since the event he and his wife had  separated
        but found an immediate custodial sentence appropriate and justified
        in all the circumstances.
     6. The Judge in the decision  under  challenge  noted  the  Sentencing
        Judge found the offence fell into Category A for 'culpability'  and
        Category 1 for 'harm'. The Judge also notes  the  Sentencing  Judge
        stating: "your behaviour was at a time when  you  were  aware  that
        young children were present and watching  and  your  actions  cause
        serious alarm and distress and it therefore puts  you  in  category
        1".
     7. The Judge notes the Crown Court also made a Restraining Order for 5
        years to protect Mr Ali and his family  prohibiting  the  appellant
        from contacting Mr Ali and his family or living there  or  visiting
        their home and not to go to his address.
     8. The Judge considered the OASys assessment in which it was noted the
        appellant appeared to be putting the blame for the offences  on  Mr
        Ali claiming that he was defending himself as he had been assaulted
        and went to his property to get the knife  to  defend  himself  and
        denied  threatening  anybody.  The  Probation  Officer  noted   the
        appellant had not accepted responsibility for the offence and blame
        the victim and had shown no remorse or victim  empathy.  The  Judge
        noted in a witness statement of 7 June 2019 the  appellant  claimed
        that he had made a mistake unintentionally, stating he was a  human
        being and that he got angry.
     9. The Judge concludes at [20] that the appellant's  conduct  impinges
        on the public domain in a real sense.
    10. The Judge considers the appellant's family and children from  [23].
        The youngest was at the date of decision 11 years of age but at the
        date of the hearing the appellant did not live with either his wife
        or three  younger  children.  The  appellant  lived  with  his  old
        daughter and her husband.
    11. The Judge reminds himself it was necessary to consider  whether  it
        would be unduly harsh for the minor child to live  in  Pakistan  or
        unduly harsh for the child to remain in the United Kingdom  without
        the appellant, [26], in which the Judge also notes  the  respondent
        accepted it will be unduly harsh for the child to live in  Pakistan
        but not unduly harsh for the child to remain in the United Kingdom.
    12. The appellant is described as being a 'guiding hand' in  the  lives
        of  children  and  that  his  absence  from  their  lives  will  be
        devastating. At [28] the Judge writes "if the appellant had  played
        any meaningful role, in terms of  his  upbringing,  in  [M's]  life
        there ought to be evidence of adverse impact on [M's]  life.  There
        are myriads of ways of ascertain and demonstrate any adverse impact
        on [M's] life. There is no  expert  report,  for  example  from  an
        independent  qualified  Social  Worker,  to  demonstrate  that  the
        absence of the appellant has had adverse  impact  on  [M]  and  the
        adverse impact is likely  to  be  exasperated  by  the  appellant's
        deportation.
    13. The Judge  concludes  at  [30]  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
        appellant's adult children have  demonstrated  that  they  have  an
        emotional attachment to the appellant.
    14. At [31] the Judge writes "I find the appellant has not demonstrated
        that he has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with
        [M].
    15. At [32] the Judge considers the position if  he  is  wrong  in  his
        finding the appellant  does  not  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        parental relationship with [M] and  goes  on  to  consider  whether
        deportation will be unduly harsh for the child.
    16. The Judge states it cannot be disputed that the best  interests  of
        [M] is to grow with both his parents. Commenting upon the evidence,
        including written statements from the appellant's  adult  children,
        the Judge finds at [34] "however, none of them  have  provided  the
        Tribunal with any evidence of a single issue in  [M's]  life  which
        could only be dealt with the appellant. The  appellant  has  served
        his prison sentence. He is on licence. He does not live  with  [M].
        There is no evidence that without the  presence  of  the  appellant
        [M's] development has been adversely affected".
    17. The Judge notes [M] has his mother in the UK with whom  he  resides
        together with his two older siblings. The  Judge  finds  the  child
        will continue to have the support of his mother if the appellant is
        removed. The Judge finds at [35]: "in the instant appeal I have not
        been provided with evidence which would lead me to a  finding  that
        exceptional circumstances exist which are strong enough to override
        the public interest". Leading  to  it  being  found  at  [37]  "...
        Therefore, I find the appellant has not demonstrated,  on  balance,
        deporting the  appellant  would  be  disproportionate  interference
        because it would have a significant detrimental  effect  upon  [M].
        The appellant has not demonstrated, on balance, his deportation  is
        likely to be unduly harsh for [M] to remain in the UK  without  the
        appellant".
    18. The Judge finds at [38] that even if accepting there  is  love  and
        devotion between the appellant and his adult children  evidence  of
        dependency was distinctly absent.
    19. From [40] the Judge considers family life  with  his  partner.  The
        appellant remains married to B, a British national, for whom it was
        accepted by the respondent it will be unduly harsh for her to  live
        in Pakistan. The appellant was separated from his wife due  to  the
        incident that led to his conviction and the Judge  notes  in  their
        respective witness statements they give  two  different  addresses.
        Although both the appellant and his wife claim the reason for  this
        was the Restraining Order imposed by the Sentencing  Judge  it  was
        found this was not the case  as  they  were  already  living  apart
        before the Restraining Order was made. At [48] the Judge finds that
        although still legally married the appellant and B  are  not  in  a
        genuine and subsisting relationship. It is found  that  neither  is
        involved in the lives of the other.  The  Judge  finds  B  has  not
        provided cogent evidence that it has  been  unduly  harsh  for  her
        living apart from him whilst  the  appellant  has  been  imprisoned
        [49].
    20. The Judge analyses section 117 C the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
        2002 between [50 - 61] before concluding the respondent's  decision
        is proportionate in dismissing the appeal [63 - 64].
    21. The appellant sought permission to appeal claiming misdirection  in
        relation to the cases referred to by the Judge,  that  the  Judge's
        assessment of the appellant's family life is flawed. Permission  to
        appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier  Tribunal  on
        26 July 2019, the operative part of the grant been in the following
        terms:


             3.   Grounds of appeal (GOA)1: At paragraph 27,  the  citation
                  of JB (India) and the comment that "a  greater  degree  of
                  dependency beyond emotional  ties  is  required  before  a
                  finding of family life could be established,  is  arguably
                  not apt where the parental relationship is  between  adult
                  and minor child.


             4.    At  paragraph  32  the  FTTJ  states:  "however  in   ZH
                  (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, held  they  [best  interests  of
                  children] can be outweighed by the  cumulative  effect  of
                  other considerations. The Supreme Court went  on  to  hold
                  the very strong weight to be given to the public  interest
                  in deporting foreign criminals is  not  diluted  when  the
                  rights of children are affected". I am unable to associate
                  those  latter  comments  with  the  decision  in  The   ZH
                  (Tanzania) is that case  concerned  removal  of  a  father
                  diagnosed with HIV rather than a father facing deportation
                  as a foreign criminal.


             5.   For these reasons, I conclude  that  it  is  arguable  by
                  reference to the Grounds of Appeal  that  there  may  have
                  been error of law in the Decision  as  identified  in  the
                  application. I grant permission to appeal.



Error of law


    22. The Court of Appeal have recently given guidance to  judges  to  be
        wary of citing pages of  unnecessary  decisions  from  other  cases
        which do not appear to bear any relation  to  the  issues  actually
        being considered in a current case. Whilst it is correct the  Judge
        has set out a number of cases in the decision under challenge it is
        not made out the Judge materially misdirected himself by making the
        decision in this appeal based upon a material  misunderstanding  of
        relevant legal principles.
    23. The issue in the case, in light of the respondent's concession that
        neither the appellant's wife nor his children could be expected  to
        go to Pakistan with him as to do so  would  be  unduly  harsh,  was
        whether it was unduly harsh for these family members to  remain  in
        the United Kingdom if the appellant was deported.
    24. Mr Woodhouse  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  submitted  the  Judge
        disregarded the evidence regarding the family ties  and  challenged
        the weight given to the evidence. It  is  asserted  the  Judge  was
        wrong to conclude there was  no  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with [M] and claimed the assessment by  the  Judge  of
        the appellant's family life was flawed.
    25. Relevant case law in relation to the question of whether there is a
        subsisting parental relationship includes SSHD  v  VC  (Sri  Lanka)
        [2017] EWCA Civ 1967 in which it was said (in the  context  of  the
        older immigration rules relating to deportation  i.e.  where  there
        was an exception where there was no family member  other  than  the
        foreign criminal available to care for the child in the UK) that to
        have a "genuine and subsisting parental  relationship"  the  parent
        must have a "subsisting" role in personally providing at least some
        element of direct parental care to the child.  The Court of  Appeal
        also held that  each  of  the  words  "genuine",  "subsisting"  and
        "parental" referred to a separate  and  essential  quality  of  the
        relationship.
    26. In SR (subsisting parental relationship  -  s  117B  (6)  Pakistan)
        [2018] UKUT 00334 the tribunal held that a parent who was unable to
        demonstrate for the purposes of the immigration rules that they had
        been taking an active role in a child's upbringing might still have
        a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with them as long as
        the relationship involved an element of direct parental  care.   On
        the particular facts 3 yr old child - unsupervised contact 3  hours
        per fortnight established for 6  months   -  necessary  element  of
        direct parental care found.
    27. In SSHD v AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ  661  Singh
        LJ held that the tribunal in SR should not  have  transplanted  the
        passages from VC (Sri Lanka) about the old paragraph 399 to a  very
        different context and different wording of the statute.  The  words
        "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" were  words  of  the
        English language and no further gloss should be put on them.   King
        LJ gave some useful pointers in her judgment. Where  a  parent  was
        seeing a child on a regular basis in an unsupervised setting it was
        hard to see how he could not have the necessary  relationship;  but
        equally an order for direct contact was not conclusive; the  parent
        might  only  take  up  the  contact  unreliably  or   infrequently.
        Although it might be more likely  that  a  tribunal  conclude  that
        there is no relationship of the right quality where there  is  only
        indirect contact, that is not inevitable.  It might be  that  there
        has been a long gap in contact and this is a  reintroduction  or  a
        parent is showing commitment to indirect contact  necessary  before
        direct contact can be reintroduced. Where a family court has made a
        final order limiting contact  to  indirect  contact,  the  tribunal
        should look closely at the reasons for this.  The  Family  Protocol
        should be used.
    28. The appellant lived in the family home until he was prevented  from
        doing so following his arrest and, after release from prison, as  a
        result of a Restraining Order. The evidence does not  suggest  that
        during the time the appellant was living in the family home he  did
        not have a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  all
        the children whilst they were minors including [M] who  remained  a
        minor at the date of the hearing. The Judge does not appear to have
        engaged with the above case law and the test set out  therein  when
        looking at whether there was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with [M].
    29. The Judge at [31] refers to evidence that the appellant's wife  has
        been offered alternative accommodation  which  was  waiting  to  be
        finalised. Although that had not  been  completed,  such  that  the
        appellant and his wife were unable to live together at the date  of
        hearing before the Judge, Mr Woodhouse  provided  evidence  showing
        that alternative accommodation  had  been  secured  away  from  the
        former matrimonial home which is within the  area  covered  by  the
        Restraining Order.
    30. The more likely finding the Judge was required to make in  relation
        to  [M]  is  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship with his child. Similarly there appears merit  in  the
        appellant's argument, supported by his wife, that they remain in  a
        genuine and subsisting marital relationship.
    31. In either case the test that the Judge was required to consider  is
        that of whether deportation would be unduly harsh.
    32. The Judge at [32] considers the position in the alternative  as  if
        it had been found the appellant is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        parental relationship with [M]. The Judge  clearly  considered  the
        evidence available with the required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny
        before concluding at [37] "... Therefore, I find the appellant  has
        not demonstrated, on balance,  deporting  the  appellant  would  be
        disproportionate interference with family  life  because  it  would
        have a significant detrimental effect upon [M]. The  appellant  has
        not demonstrated, on balance,  his  deportation  is  likely  to  be
        unduly harsh for [M] to remain in the UK without the appellant  (SS
        (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550.
    33. The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53  held  that
        when looking at unduly harsh the focus was only on the position  of
        the child.  "Unduly  harsh  does  not  equate  with  uncomfortable,
        inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather it  poses  a
        considerably more elevated threshold.   "Harsh"  in  this  context,
        denotes something  severe  or  bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of
        pleasant or comfortable.  Furthermore, the addition of  the  adverb
        "unduly" raises an already  elevated  standard  still  higher"  was
        approved, as was the reasoning in MAB (para  399;  "unduly  harsh")
        USA [2015] UKUT 00435 (IAC).  The  Supreme  Court  noted  that  the
        assumption was that there was an "due" level of harshness; a  level
        which may be acceptable or justifiable in  context.   "Undue"  went
        beyond that.  The relevant context was set by section 117C(1)  that
        is the public interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
        One was looking for a degree of harshness going beyond  what  would
        necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
        a parent.
    34. Having considered the evidence the Judge concludes that it had  not
        been established  it  was  unduly  harsh  for  either  [M]  or  the
        appellants wife to remain in the United Kingdom if he is  deported.
        This has not been shown to be finding infected  by  arguable  legal
        error. The evidence does not establish a degree of harshness  going
        beyond what would necessarily be involved for any  child  or  adult
        faced with the deportation of a parent or their partner.
    35. Whilst the appellant disagrees with  the  Judge's  conclusions  and
        would prefer to remain in the United Kingdom the appellant fails to
        establish arguable legal error material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal. The finding the respondent's decision is  proportionate
        has not been shown to be finding infected by arguable  legal  error
        sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in
        relation to this appeal.

Decision

    36. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    37. The First-tier Tribunal made not an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
        of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30 October 2019
