
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/02732/2017
                                                               hu/02734/2017
                                                               hu/02737/2017
                                                               hu/02742/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 October 2018                            |On 14 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                    mr SS
                                   mrs NK
                                    mr VS
                                   miss GK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Akhtar Ali Gondal, Legal representation,
                    Berkshire Law Chamber
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. There are four appellants in this appeal.  The first and second
    appellants, born respectively on 7 June 1979 and 7 March 1971, are the
    parents of the other two appellants who were born on 31 December 2006
    and 20 September 2011.

 2. The appellants are citizens of India.  In addition, the fourth
    appellant was granted British nationality on 18 April 2018 (two days
    after the hearing of the decision which is now being appealed).  The
    first three appellants arrived in the UK as visitors on 18 October
    2010.  The fourth appellant was born in and has lived her whole life in
    the UK.

 3. The appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK under Article 8
    ECHR.  On 23 January 2017 the appeal was refused.  The appellants
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where the appeal was heard on 16
    April 2018 at Hatton Cross by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hussain.



 4. In a decision promulgated on 7 June 2018 the appeal was dismissed.  The
    judge found that the first and second appellants came to the UK as
    adults and could not establish that there were substantial obstacles to
    their returning to India.  The judge found that they had exaggerated
    the difficulties they would face in India.

 5. The judge's analysis of the third and fourth appellants is very brief.
    The entirety of the assessment is set out in paragraphs 23 and 24,
    where it is stated:

         "23. In relation to the third appellant, the Secretary of State
             noted that whilst he was 9 years old when applying, he had
             only lived in this country for five years.  As a result, this
             appellant was unable to meet to any of the requirements of
             paragraph 276ADE(1).  At the hearing it was pointed out that
             the appellant had reached ten years of residence on 10 October
             2017.  That may be the case but [to] the Immigration Rules
             clearly state that the relevant age is at the date of
             application.

         24.  In the case of the fourth appellant, she had only lived in
             this country for four years and therefore did not meet any of
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules either.  Two days
             after the hearing, the tribunal received a letter from the
             appellant's solicitors to the effect that this child had been
             granted British nationality.  That position does not in my
             view alter the appellant's position under the provision of
             276ADE in question."

 6. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred by failing to
    consider the best interests of the children and by failing to recognise
    that the fourth appellant, as a British citizen, is a "qualifying
    child".

 7. After hearing submissions from Mr Gondal on behalf of the appellant and
    Ms Isherwood on behalf of the respondent I delivered my decision that I
    found there to be a material error of law.

 8. When a Tribunal makes a decision which affects children it is necessary
    for the best interests of those children to be considered.  This appeal
    affects the lives of two children (the third and fourth appellants) but
    contains no assessment of their best interests.  The absence of a best
    interest assessment is a material error of law which renders the
    decision unsafe such that it will need to be considered afresh.

 9. A further error arises from the failure to consider Section 117B(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act").
    Both the third and fourth appellants were qualifying children under
    Section 117D(1) of the 2002 Act (the third appellant had been in the UK
    for more than seven years at the time of the hearing and the fourth
    appellant is a British Citizen).  It was therefore necessary for the
    judge to address whether it would be reasonable to expect them to leave
    the UK.  There is no such analysis in the decision.

10. Given the extent of further fact-finding that will be needed to remake
    this decision (and in particular that up-to-date evidence regarding the
    third and fourth appellants will be required in order for their best
    interests and the reasonableness of expecting them to leave the UK to
    be properly evaluated) this is an appeal where it is appropriate for
    there to be a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.  I therefore have
    decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
    of fact preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law
and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh before
a different judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 7 November 2018               |

