
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU020832016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 June 2017                           |On 23 June 2017                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    MEHTAB MAHEBUBBHAI UMARJI BHAI PATEL
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms K. Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:          Ms A. Nizami, Counsel instructed by Nasim &
Co. Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed the decision made by the Secretary of State  on
    12 January 2016 to refuse leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  person
    with limited leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.  The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied  that  she  met  the  'Eligibility'   requirements   of   the
    immigration rules because her partner was not a British  citizen  or  a
    person who was settled in the UK at the date of  the  application.  She
    concluded that there was insufficient evidence to show  'insurmountable
    obstacles' to the couple continuing their family life in India for  the
    purpose of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules.  The
    appellant did not meet  the  private  life  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules because there was no evidence to
    show 'very significant obstacles' to  her  integration  in  India.  The
    respondent concluded that there were no 'exceptional circumstances'  to
    justify granting leave to remain on human rights  grounds  outside  the
    immigration rules.

3.     First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Carlin   ("the   judge")   allowed   the
    appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 16 November  2016.  The
    judge noted that the respondent was unrepresented and that there was no
    dispute as to the facts of the case [8]. The appellant's representative
    accepted that she could not meet the requirements  of  the  immigration
    rules [9]. As such, the judge went on to assess  whether  the  decision
    amounted to a disproportionate breach of the appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 outside the rules. He referred to the wording  of  Article  8
    and the five-stage approach outlined by the House of Lords in R v  SSHD
    ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 [13]. The judge  acknowledged  that  the
    decision pursued the legitimate aim of maintaining an effective  system
    of immigration control. The judge then went on to  make  the  following
    findings relating to proportionality (questions (iv)  and  (v)  of  the
    Razgar test).

            "15. The burden is on the respondent to show, on  a  balance  of
           probabilities, to show that the interference in any family  life
           is proportionate. However, the appellant has the  responsibility
           of adducing evidence that lies within his remit and of which the
           respondent is unaware as to any relevant matters which may  have
           a bearing on the issue.

            16.  There are a number of authorities that hold that if  it  is
           reasonable, in any  particular  case,  for  family  life  to  be
           enjoyed elsewhere, then there will have  been  no  violation  of
           Article 8. In AS (Pakistan) v. SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  1118,  the
           Court of Appeal made it clear that the question of  whether  the
           life of a family  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
           elsewhere is  part  of  the  considerations  of  proportionality
           (point (v) in the Razgar test).

            17.  In Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39, it  was  accepted  by
           the House of Lords that it is permissible to take  into  account
           the impact of the removal of the appellant on other  members  of
           her family such as her husband and her daughter.

            18.  The impact of the removal of  the  appellant  from  the  UK
           would be serious in  that  inevitably  the  appellant's  husband
           would lose contact with his  daughter  for  a  period  of  time.
           Whilst it is arguable that the appellant's husband would be able
           to maintain contact  with  the  appellant  by  means  of  modern
           technology, this clearly does not apply  in  relation  to  their
           daughter. Given the age of  the  daughter,  only  face  to  face
           contact would enable  the  appellant's  husband  to  maintain  a
           father/daughter relationship with his daughter.

            19.  By virtue of EB (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41,  the  test,  in
           considering whether family life can  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  is
           whether it is reasonable to expect the  appellant's  husband  to
           leave the UK with her.

            20.  I was of the view that the appellant's  husband  could  not
           reasonably be expected to leave the UK with the appellant.  This
           was for two reasons. Firstly, the appellant's husband has  built
           up a private life in the UK, in that he has full-time employment
           earning a sufficient income to be able to obtain a  mortgage  to
           purchase his own property. Secondly, as submitted by Ms  Nizami,
           it is reasonable to expect the appellant's husband to  be  given
           leave to remain in the UK in the foreseeable future. This  would
           have the effect of regularising the appellant's position.

            21.  For all of these reasons, it is  disproportionate  for  the
           appellant to be removed from the UK.

            22.  In coming to this  conclusion,  I  took  into  account  the
           provisions contained in s.117 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
           and Asylum Act 2002 and in particular the  factors  set  out  in
           s.117B. It was clear and not in dispute that both the  appellant
           and her husband speak English. It  is  also  clear  and  not  in
           dispute that the  appellant  and  her  husband  are  financially
           independent. On considering s.117 in its totality, I was of  the
           view that there was nothing in the wording of the provision that
           led me to the conclusion that it was in the public interest  for
           the appellant to be removed from the UK."

4.    The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision on the following grounds:

       i) In assessing the case outside the immigration  rules  the  First-
          tier Tribunal failed to apply the proper legal  test.  The  judge
          failed to consider whether there  were  sufficiently  'compelling
          circumstances' to demonstrate a breach of Article 8:  SSHD  v  SS
          (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 referred.

      ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to give proper weight  to  private
          life  accrued  while  the  appellant's  immigration  status   was
          precarious with reference to section 117B of the The Nationality,
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002")  and/or  erred  in
          speculating  about  the  future   immigration   status   of   the
          appellant's husband.


     iii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to conduct an  adequate  balancing
          exercise  and  failed  to  take  into  account  public   interest
          considerations. No consideration was given to the fact  that  the
          appellant did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules,
          the fact that  her  husband  was  not  settled  in  the  UK,  her
          immigration history or the family's social and cultural  ties  to
          India.

Decision and reasons

5.    After having heard  submissions  from  both  parties  I  gave  summary
    reasons for concluding that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  involved
    the making of an error of law. Both parties agreed that the appropriate
    course of action was for the appeal to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

6.    Although the judge made proper reference to  the  five-stage  test  in
    Razgar, there is nothing in his findings to indicate that he recognised
    the stringent nature of the test required to show a breach of Article 8
    of the European Convention in circumstances where an appellant does not
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  At  the  date  of  the
    hearing the relevant principles were outlined by the Court of Appeal in
    SS (Congo). There is nothing to indicate that the judge applied, or had
    in  mind,  the  need  for  the  appellant  to  show  that  there   were
    sufficiently 'compelling circumstances' outside  the  rules  to  engage
    Article 8.

7.    Nor is there any indication that the judge applied, or  had  in  mind,
    the relevant legal  test  as  to  whether  there  were  'insurmountable
    obstacles' to the couple continuing their family life in India. At  the
    date of the hearing the relevant test was  outlined  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal decision in Agyarko v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 440.

8.    The recent Supreme Court decision in the same case did not  alter  the
    stringent nature of the test: see R (on the application  of  Agyarko  &
    Ikuga) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11. The Supreme Court noted that the position
    has changed since the House of Lords decided Huang v SSHD  [2007]  UKHL
    11. At that time the immigration rules  did  not  incorporate  specific
    human rights provisions and were deemed to be a starting point  for  an
    assessment under Article 8. Since  2012  the  immigration  rules  state
    where the Secretary of State considers a fair balance will be struck in
    cases involving private and family life issues under Article 8.

9.    In cases involving human rights issues under Article 8, the  heart  of
    the assessment is whether the decision strikes a fair  balance  between
    the due weight to be given to the public  interest  in  maintaining  an
    effective system of immigration control and the impact of the  decision
    on the individual's private or family life. In  assessing  whether  the
    decision strikes a  fair  balance  a  court  or  tribunal  should  give
    appropriate  weight  to  Parliament's  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assessment of the strength of the general public interest as  expressed
    in the relevant rules and statutes: see Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016]  UKSC
    60.

10.   The First-tier Tribunal's reference to the decisions in AS  (Pakistan)
    and EB (Kosovo), and  the  judge's  apparent  emphasis  on  a  test  of
    'reasonableness' [16 &19], did not reflect the current legal  position.
    Whilst it was  open  to  the  judge  to  consider  the  ties  that  the
    appellant's partner had to  the  UK,  and  the  effect  that  potential
    separation might have on the appellant's daughter if he chose to remain
    here, there were a number of relevant  matters  that  were  simply  not
    considered.

11.    While  the  judge  referred  to   some   of   the   public   interest
    considerations in section 117 NIAA 2002 [22] there  appears  to  be  no
    recognition of the weight to  be  placed  on  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining  an  effective  system  of  immigration  control   and   no
    assessment  of  what  weight  should  be  placed  on  that   issue   in
    circumstances where it was accepted that the appellant did not meet the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  There  is  little  evidence  to
    suggest that relevant matters were weighed  against  one  another  with
    reference to the correct legal tests to ascertain where a fair  balance
    should be struck on the  facts  of  this  particular  case.  For  these
    reasons I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  the
    making of an error of law and should be set aside.

12.   Ms Nizami informed me that there have  been  further  developments  in
    the case. The appellant's partner has now been granted Indefinite Leave
    to Remain and an application has  been  made  for  their  child  to  be
    naturalised as a British citizen. In view of these further developments
    both parties agreed that the appropriate course of action was to  remit
    the appeal for a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  the
    meantime, the appellant can  consider  her  position  and  put  forward
    further evidence. It will also  provide  time  for  the  respondent  to
    consider her position in light of these further developments.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
    of law

The decision is set aside and the appeal remitted for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 22 June 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

