
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
hu/02996/2015

                                                 hu/03000/2015

                                                 hu/03007/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th July 2016                        |On 27th July 2016                   |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

             Mr GHANSHYAMKUMAR SHANABHAI PATEL (FIRST appellant)
            MRS ANITABEN GHANSHYAMKUMAR PATEL (SECOND appellant)
             MISS DHRISTY GHANSHYAMKUMAR PATEL (THIRD appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Vencatachellum, Counsel for M-R Solicitors,
London


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

    The Appellants are citizens of India born on 16th June  1975,  1st  May
    1980 and 10th June 2007 respectively.  The first and second  Appellants
    are married and the third Appellant  is  their  child.   They  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 6th July 2015 refusing their
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  human  rights
    grounds in terms of Article 8 of the ECHR.  The  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Green  on  15th  January  2015  who
    dismissed the  first  and  second  Appellants'  appeals  on  Article  8
    grounds.  He allowed the third Appellant's appeal on the  grounds  that
    the Respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law as  Section
    55 of the 2009 Act has not been properly considered and the  Respondent
    is required  to  make  a  lawful  decision  in  respect  of  the  third
    Appellant's rights.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kelly on  20th  June  2016.
    The permission states that the grounds  of  application  appear  to  be
    predicated upon the assumption that the Tribunal allowed the appeal  on
    the grounds that "the removal of the third Appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom would be unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1988"
    (the only Ground of Appeal open to it pursuant to  Section  84  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended by  Section  15
    of the Immigration Act 2014).   The  permission  states  that  if  that
    assumption is correct the application is misconceived  because  despite
    the suggestion to the contrary it was not open to the Tribunal to allow
    the appeal on any other basis.  In particular it was not  open  to  the
    Tribunal to allow the appeal on the ground that  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent  was  "otherwise  not   in   accordance   with   the   law".
    Alternatively there is a lack of clarity  concerning  the  ground  upon
    which the Tribunal purported  to  allow  the  appeal.   Permission  was
    granted solely on the basis that the judge failed to explain why,  when
    having had evidence before him in the form of  witness  statements  and
    oral evidence from the third Appellant's mother and father as  well  as
    hearing  submissions  from  both  representatives  on  the  issue,  the
    Tribunal did not feel equipped to be able to  determine  the  issue  of
    best interests for itself.  The grounds of application state  that  the
    burden of proof is on the Appellant and the matter does not require  to
    go back to the Secretary of State for the Home Department as there  was
    nothing unlawful about her  decision.   Section  55  had  plainly  been
    addressed.

 3. There were no preliminary issues.

 4. The Presenting Officer submitted that there are now clear guidelines in
    cases like this.  He referred to the case of PD and Others (Sri  Lanka)
    [2016] UKUT (108).

 5. Counsel for the Appellants submitted  that  the  judge  had  sufficient
    information before him to come to his own decision.  She submitted that
    the judge has correctly set out the law and has  construed  everything.
    She submitted that the said case of PD & Others  makes  things  clearer
    but the Respondent could have asked  for  more  information  about  the
    third Appellant and had this  information  been  available  the  appeal
    might well have been allowed unconditionally.

 6. It is clear that the judge had sufficient  information  before  him  to
    enable him to reach his own decision relating to  the  third  Appellant
    and Section 55 of the 2009 Act.  There is a clear material error of law
    in the judge's decision.

 7. The way for this appeal to be heard fairly is for it to be set down for
    a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal relating to the  third
    Appellant's claim.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  findings  relating  to  the
    first two Appellants are satisfactory and the  reasons  for  dismissing
    their claims are satisfactory.

 9. Counsel for the Appellants submitted that at the First-tier hearing the
    first two Appellants had witnesses who  made  statements  but  did  not
    attend the hearing.  She submitted that family ties and the family unit
    have to be considered in the round.  She submitted that it  has  to  be
    considered how this  family  fits  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  its
    connections with the United Kingdom.  She submitted that if  there  has
    to be a rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal, evidence will need to
    be led from these witnesses who did not attend the  First-tier  hearing
    as well as consideration being given to  the  condition  of  the  third
    Appellant who is now almost 9 years old.

10. The Presenting Officer submitted that the first two Appellants did  not
    appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision and this has to be the starting
    point, unless there has been a big change  in  their  circumstances  of
    which there has been no suggestion.

11. I have carefully considered the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  I
    find that there are no errors  in  the  way  in  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge dealt with the first  and  second  Appellants'  appeals.
    The facts relating to their appeals and how they are dealt  with  under
    the Rules and on human rights grounds have been  properly  dealt  with.
    It was pointed out by the Presenting Officer that the first and  second
    Appellants did not cross-appeal the decisions relating to their claims.
     I find that the First-tier Tribunal dealt properly with the first  and
    second Appellants' claims but that there is a material error in the way
    that the third Appellant's claim has been dealt with.

Notice of Decision

As there are material errors of law in the decision relating  to  the  third
Appellant I direct that the decision relating to the  third  Appellant  only
has to be re-made and it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  third  Appellant's
claim  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  on  all  issues.   The
decisions relating to the first two Appellants must stand.  Members  of  the
First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the third Appellant's case are  not
to include Judge Green.

Anonymity has not been directed.



Signed                              Date 27th July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray



