
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02319/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 September 2019                  |On 27 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                    [C Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, Counsel, instructed by SRP Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is a very tragic case.  The appellant is a citizen of China who was
born on 13 July 1985.  She arrived in this country in 2008 and was granted
indefinite leave to remain in 2010.  Her husband, also a Chinese national,
also has indefinite leave to remain and they have three children, two
daughters born in 2010 and 2011 and a son born in 2014.  The family ran a
restaurant together with the appellant's brother-in-law and his wife, [LL],
who both also have indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  That couple now
have a very young son who is a British citizen and previously had a
daughter.  The families lived in the same house.

At the time of the tragic events, which was 2015, the appellant and [LL]
would take it in turn to look after each other's children and on 22 March
2015, when the appellant's niece was just 7 months old, the appellant was
looking after her own children and this very young baby.  Apparently, this
baby had difficulties in taking on food and, as babies do, was being a
little difficult to control.  The appellant, it seems, lost control of
herself and shook this baby so hard that the baby died.  Subsequently, she
came up with an excuse for the injury to this baby, claiming that she had
turned the baby upside down because she thought she was choking and had
pushed her up and down two or three times.  Apparently, she also at some
stage attempted to blame [LL], the baby's mother, for what had happened.

The appellant was charged with and ultimately convicted of manslaughter,
but not before the family had had to endure a six week trial, because until
the end of this trial the appellant refused to accept responsibility for
what she had done.  As the trial judge unsurprisingly noted in his
sentencing remarks, her actions "have devastated her family and have caused
immense distress".  The judge went on to say that "the pain of loss for
[LL] was clear when she gave her evidence.  That pain must have been
intensified by knowledge that [the appellant] was falsely blaming her for
[her daughter's] death".

It is a remarkable factor in this case that the family have continued to
express their love for the appellant and the baby's father urged the judge
to exercise compassion in terms which the judge recorded in his sentencing
remarks as follows:

"I therefore, on behalf of my family, sincerely plead to The Honourable
Judge to be lenient when sentencing [the appellant] so that she could
reunite with her family and to be with her children again as soon as
possible".

The judge took account of the aggravating features, being first that she
had not pleaded guilty but had continued to maintain her innocence until
after her conviction and secondly that she had attempted to put
responsibility for the death on the baby's mother.  He also concluded that
there had to be an "immediate and lengthy term of imprisonment" because the
appellant's culpability was high and "there was significant albeit brief
violence towards a very vulnerable defenceless baby".  The judge also noted
that "this loss of control was not precipitated by anything more than the
mundane frustrations which a crying child can cause".  Obviously, as the
judge also was bound to record, the elements of harm could not be higher.
The judge also took account of the appellant's previous good character and
the harm that the sentence of imprisonment would cause to her own children.
 He sentenced the appellant to 6 years' imprisonment.

The respondent subsequently made a deportation decision and the appellant's
appeal against this decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Gurung-Thapa, in a decision promulgated on 7 June 2019 following a hearing
before her at Nottingham Justice Centre on 8 May 2019.  The appellant now
appeals against that decision, leave having been granted by Upper Tribunal
Judge Keki?.

Grounds of Appeal

The grounds were settled by Mr Walsh, who has also appeared before the
Tribunal today.  It is noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge made
findings of fact first that the appellant had a genuine parental
relationship with her three British children, secondly that she has a
genuine relationship with her partner, who is settled in the UK, thirdly
that it would be unduly harsh to require the children to move to China with
the appellant, but fourthly that it would not be unduly harsh for the
children to remain in the UK whilst the appellant was removed to China and
that it would not be unduly harsh either for the appellant's partner to
remain in the UK or move to China.

I note with regard to the last finding (that it would not be unduly harsh
for the appellant's partner to move to China) that this finding does not
seem to take account of the reality of the situation which is that were he
to do so, given that it was held to be unduly harsh for the children to
move to China, that would leave the children in the UK without either
parent.  However, that does not have a material bearing on the decision, as
the judge approached this case on the basis that the effect of deportation
would be that the appellant and her children would be separated.

It is submitted in the grounds that the judge erred in relying on a finding
(at paragraph 62) that "there is no evidence before me to show that the
emotional and psychological impact on the appellant's husband and her
children would be anything other than that which is ordinarily to be
expected by the deportation of a parent ...".

It is submitted that the judge was wrong first to premise that "there is
some yardstick or acceptable threshold of psychological impact associated
with deportation which is acceptable" and secondly that the judge had
failed to give "any proper weight to the evidence as to psychological
impact of the deportation".  While it is accepted in the grounds that the
test of "unduly harsh" is a stringent one to meet, it is not accepted that
what is "ordinarily to be expected" as a result of deportation "is a matter
that prevents or causes the deportation not to be unduly harsh".  The
grounds rely on the findings of the psychiatrist that deportation would
have a detrimental impact on the children's wellbeing and academic life.
It is noted that the psychiatrist had reported that the children "had
formed a close attachment with her, that if forcibly removed from the UK
their happiness and satisfaction with family life 'will be affected
further, for it will feel as if they lost a caregiver/parent and they will
be going through a grieving process'".

The appellant also relies on the psychiatrist's finding that "the
children's relationship with their mother has been very much based upon
face-to-face and tactile activities and time spent together visiting her in
prison as well as telephoning, card/letters".

It is submitted that the judge underplayed the impact of the psychological
damage and that although they have experienced one separation already, the
impact of a further separation by way of deportation would have a further
detrimental impact.

It is also submitted that the judge was wrong in concluding at paragraph 77
of her decision "that rehabilitation plays no role in the proportionality
assessment in the case", relying on the decision of the Presidential
Tribunal in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019]
UKUT 00123.  It is submitted that in this case the issue of rehabilitation
was a relevant one because the offender had three young children of her own
and she remained a carer of those children.  This was particularly
important, it is suggested, because the OASys Report as well as the
sentencing judge both concluded that the risk of reoffending was low (in
the case of the sentencing judge, he stated in terms that he did not
consider that the appellant posed any sort of risk).

There is also reference within the grounds to the failure of the judge to
consider the risk of double jeopardy but that submission was not maintained
during oral argument.

The Hearing

In oral argument, Mr Walsh relied on the grounds, and invited the Tribunal
to have regard at the outset to the psychiatric report, which is at pages
273 to 292 of the appellant's bundle.  He reminded the Tribunal that the
appellant was still in custody and was not due to be released until
December of this year but that notwithstanding that she was not living with
her family she had been seeing her children face-to-face while she was in
custody.  The psychiatrist had given a summary of her conclusions and her
methodology at paragraph 2.2 of her report, where she had dealt with the
impact on the children as follows:

"2.2 [The two elder daughters] are doing very well at school and they are
well-adjusted and have no emotional difficulties, however, this is not to
say that if their mother was removed from the UK, they would not experience
any emotional difficulties.  Given [their] tender years, their
psychological, social and educational development will most likely be
impacted upon if their mother is separated from them in the long term.
[The two girls] present with some dissatisfaction at present with family
and home life and this is most likely as a result of their mother's
absence".

Mr Walsh emphasised that this was a case where the appellant had maintained
close ties with the family, who had, he said, almost daily contact with her
and that this was not therefore a case where family ties would have to be
re-established on release from prison.

The Tribunal was asked to note that at paragraph 2.4, the psychiatrist
opined that:

"It is my belief that the children's psychological health and academic
performance may most likely deteriorate [and that] it is difficult to say
whether this would only be in the short term and if it could ever be
recovered ...".

Then, at 2.7, the psychiatrist gave her opinion that the appellant's
removal from the UK and returning her to China would not be in the best
interests of any of the children.

At 6.6, the psychiatrist notes how the appellant's children's father has
said that they have all developed a strong attachment with the appellant
through the regular contact they have with her and informed the Tribunal
that the children had been told that their mother would be coming home.  At
paragraph 8.5, reference is made to how the children and in particular one
of the daughters had told the psychiatrist that she was really looking
forward to seeing her mother again and how when they visit her the children
would spend three hours with her, playing with toys and so on.

Referring to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision, Mr Walsh invited the
Tribunal to note that at the end of paragraph 54 the judge had recorded
that since March 2015 the appellant had not resided with her children.  At
paragraph 57, the judge had noted that the father was coping, albeit with
some difficulties.

Mr Walsh referred to paragraph 61, where the judge had said that the
suggestion that the appellant's removal would have a detrimental impact on
their academic life was "somewhat speculative given the fact that the
children are doing well at school and that the daughters are very well
satisfied with their school", but submitted that it was not right to draw a
parallel with their position now because although the appellant was not
living with her children they were still able to see her but of course if
she was deported that would no longer be the case.

While at paragraph 62, the judge had accepted that removal would affect the
children emotionally and psychologically, Mr Walsh challenged the judge's
finding that "there is no evidence before me to show that [this impact] ...
would be anything other than that which is ordinarily to be expected by the
deportation of a partner/parent".

Mr Walsh then took the Tribunal through the passages in the decision from
paragraph 67 onwards, referring to "very compelling circumstances, over and
above the exceptions" but criticised the conclusion at paragraph 77 that
rehabilitation was not an important factor in this case.  He referred in
particular to the decision in RA, where at paragraphs 32 and 33, the
Tribunal had found as follows:

"32. As the Court of Appeal pointed out in Danso v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
596, courses aimed at rehabilitation, undertaken whilst in prison, are
often unlikely to bear material weight, for the simple reason that they are
a commonplace; particularly in the case of sexual offenders.

33.  As a more general point, the fact that an individual has not committed
further offences, since release from prison, is highly unlikely to have a
material bearing, given that everyone is expected not to commit crime.
Rehabilitation will therefore normally do no more than show that the
individual has returned to the place where society expects him (and
everyone else) to be.  There is, in other words, no material weight which
ordinarily falls to be given to rehabilitation in the proportionality
balance (see SE (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 256, paragraphs 48 to
56).  Nevertheless, as so often in the field of human rights, one cannot
categorically say that rehabilitation will never be capable of playing a
significant role ...  Any judicial departure from the norm would, however,
need to be fully reasoned".

Mr Walsh submitted that this would be one of the few cases where
rehabilitation would be an important factor for three reasons.  First,
because, he says, the circumstances of offending in this case were highly
unusual, rare and not likely to repeat themselves, secondly, because this
was an offence within the extended family "like a domestic offence", and
thirdly, because the two families have remained integrated and the baby's
parents have forgiven her.

Mr Walsh submitted that these factors took this case outside the usual case
which a Tribunal would be considering and it did drive or should have
driven the Tribunal to look at the prospects of rehabilitation.  In this
case, we had the view with the trial judge that there was no real risk of
reoffending.

On behalf of the respondent Ms Everett submitted that the Tribunal had not
been pointed to any error of law in the decision.  The facts of this case,
as was often the case, were very tragic, but there was nothing in the First-
tier Tribunal's decision which indicates that the judge had overlooked any
of the facts.  From paragraphs 52 to 56, she had dealt with whether
separation would be "unduly harsh" and within that consideration from
paragraphs 58 to 62, she had clearly engaged with the psychiatrist's
report.

There was no indication in the judge's consideration that she had
overlooked the psychiatrist's conclusion.  The judge herself had also
considered at paragraph 64 what is often glibly referred to as "modern
means of communication" but had engaged with the glibness and acknowledged
that this would not be the same as face-to-face communication.  She was
acutely aware of the difficulties which would be faced by the children as a
result of the physical separation from their mother.

So far as rehabilitation was concerned, Ms Everett suggested that this
submission was simply unarguable.  The offence itself was very serious.
Although it was said to be "rare" there are many cases where a very serious
offence is committed which is unlikely to be repeated but that of itself
could not tip the balance.  The suggestion that this was a "domestic
offence" was also a very bad point, because it is essentially saying that
if you know your victim the crime is somehow less serious.  So far as the
forgiveness of the victim's parents is concerned, that cannot be legally
determinative either.  The judge did give this some weight, because at
paragraph 72, he stated in terms that "the issues of reoffending and
forgiveness of the victim's parents should be given due weight" but
nonetheless was entitled to find that these factors were not determinative.

In reply, Mr Walsh again sought to persuade the Tribunal that the prospect
of rehabilitation was a factor which needed to be considered in the
balancing exercise and the judge was wrong not to do so, when she found, in
the last sentence of paragraph 76, that "there is, in other words, no
material weight which ordinarily falls to be given to rehabilitation in the
proportionality balance".

Discussion

In my judgment, the judge, in an extremely thorough, detailed and careful
decision, considered every aspect of this appeal with commendable care.  So
far as the rehabilitation point is concerned, she had in mind in particular
the guidance given by the Presidential Tribunal in RA (see in particular at
paragraph 76).  She gave consideration to this argument, but her conclusion
that it made no material difference to this case was not only one which was
open to her, but on the facts any other conclusion would have been
difficult to sustain.

Although Mr Walsh, as he was obliged to, placed great emphasis on the
report of the psychiatrist, there is really very little, if anything, in
the psychiatrist's report which could not have been said by any person
looking at the facts dispassionately or about a very large number of cases
indeed where a parent is being removed, deported and where his or her
children will be remaining.  As Sedley LJ noted in his very well known
dictum at paragraph 27 of AD Lee [2011] EWCA Civ 348 "The tragic
consequence is that this family, short-lived as it has been, will be broken
up for ever because of the appellant's bad behaviour. That is what
deportation does."  It is only where there are very compelling reasons over
and above those contained within the exceptions set out within the Rules,
that deportation will not be proportionate in a case where an appellant has
committed an offence as serious as in this case.

Ms Everett is, in the judgment of this Tribunal, entirely correct when she
submits that the appellant has not identified any material error in the
judge's decision, because there is none.  The law is set out entirely
correctly.  She analyses what is set out both within paragraphs 399 and
399A of the Immigration Rules and also the provisions of Section 117C of
the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and in particular the
effect of subSection (6), which states that, "in the case of a foreign
criminal who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
four years, the public interest requires deportation unless there are very
compelling circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
and 2".

In this case, the judge found (and this finding is not now challenged) that
Exception 1 does not apply because there would not be significant obstacles
to the appellant reintegrating into China for the reasons which are given.
So far as Exception 2 is concerned, although the judge finds that it would
be unduly harsh for the children to relocate to China, she finds that it
would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain with their father in
the UK without the appellant, and her reasons for so finding are fully and
carefully argued.  While the judge accepts that the children will be
affected both emotionally and psychologically (see paragraph 62),
nonetheless this is not any greater than would ordinarily be expected to
follow from the deportation of a parent in such cases.  That is
insufficient for a finding that the separation would be "unduly harsh", let
alone that there are in this case "very compelling reasons" beyond the
exceptions why deportation would not be proportionate, and with regard to
the issue of "very compelling circumstances, over and above the
exceptions", as the judge correctly noted at paragraph 73, the seriousness
of the particular offence of which the foreign criminal has been convicted
is also a relevant factor.

In the circumstances of this case, not only was the judge's decision a
sustainable one, but it is hard to see how she could have reached any other
conclusion.

It follows that this appeal must be dismissed.



Decision

There being no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier
Tribunal, this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 23 September 2019
