
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02490/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2021                               |On 16 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               MD ARIFUZZAMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh  born  on  16  September  1985,
    appeals against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge L K Gibbs)
    promulgated on 22 September 2020. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds against a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 29 January 2020 refusing him leave  to  remain
    on the basis of long residence.

 2. Two previous Tribunals (the most recent in October 2019) had  concluded
    that the appellant had been the party to  a  marriage  of  convenience.
    Judge Gibbs relied on Devasseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702*  and  found  [16]
    that she should not depart from the conclusions reached in the previous
    appeals. This finding led her to conclude [17] that the  appellant  had
    not completed 10 years' lawful residence as he  claimed  but  that  his
    lawful residence had ended on 15 July 2015, the date on which his leave
    to remain as a student had been curtailed.

 3. Judge Gibb heard evidence from four witnesses who testified as  to  the
    genuineness of the  appellant's  marriage  to  an  EEA  citizen.  Those
    witnesses had not given evidence before the previous Tribunals although
    their evidence related to events going back over a period of years. One
    witness claimed that he had attended the appellant's  wedding  and  had
    lived for several months with the appellant and his spouse.  The  judge
    dealt with the evidence of the witnesses at [15]. She  noted  that  'no
    explanation is provided by the appellant or his  witnesses  as  to  why
    they not attend any of the previous appeal hearings, despite  the  fact
    that the genuine nature of the appellant's marriage has always been  in
    issue.' [my emphasis]. The judge 'was not persuaded that  the  evidence
    of these witnesses carries sufficient weight to lead me to depart  from
    the previous judges' findings.'

 4. The appellant argues that the judge perpetrated a procedural  error  by
    failing to ask the witnesses (whose evidence had not been challenged in
    cross examination) why they had not provided written evidence before or
    attended the previous hearings.

 5. I disagree with that submission. I have highlighted above  the  passage
    in the judge's decision where she records that the  appellant  did  not
    provide any explanation for the fact that the witnesses had  not  given
    evidence before. At the outset of proceedings, the  burden  of  proving
    that an individual is a party to a marriage of convenience  is  on  the
    Secretary of State but, as Mr Bates,  who  appeared  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal submitted, where there are undisturbed judicial findings  that
    an appellant is a party to a such a marriage, it is for  the  appellant
    to prove that he is not, a submission which Mr Karim, who appeared  for
    the appellant, did not challenge. It would have  been  obvious  to  the
    appellant in the instant appeal that he had to explain  why  witnesses,
    who  could  have  assisted  him  at  previous  hearings  because  their
    testimony concerned events  which  had  occurred  before  the  previous
    proceedings, had not done so. It was for the  appellant  to  prove  his
    case and his failure to volunteer any explanation entitled Judge  Gibbs
    to attach little weight to that evidence irrespective of whether either
    the  witnesses  or  the  appellant  were  questioned  directly.  It  is
    significant that, even now, no explanation has been put forward.




 6. Mr Karim also submitted  that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  make
    findings on the evidence of the witnesses. I disagree.  The  judge  was
    not required to make detailed findings on the specific claims  made  by
    the witnesses. It was enough for the judge to say why she  had  reached
    the comprehensive finding that  nothing  the  witnesses  had  said  was
    sufficient to lead her to depart from  the  findings  of  the  previous
    Tribunals. I also disagree with Mr Karim's submission  that  the  judge
    misapplied  Devasseelan.  He  argued  that  the   appellant   was   not
    introducing a new 'fact' which had not been brought to the attention of
    the previous judge (see Devasseelan at [4]) but rather new evidence  of
    an 'old' fact i.e. that he was in a genuine marriage.  That  submission
    does nothing, in my opinion, to undermine the validity of  the  judge's
    approach to the new evidence.

 7. The third ground challenges the judge's analysis  of  paragraph  276ADE
    (Private Life) of HC 395 (as amended). The appellant claims that he  is
    estranged from his family as a consequence of his marriage.  He  argues
    that, whether or not the relationship with the EEA national is genuine,
    a marriage ceremony had taken place and the family 'may well be upset.'
    I find that, in the light of the very poor credibility of the appellant
    as found by three different  Tribunals,  the  judge  was  justified  in
    rejecting the claim that the appellant's family would be upset  by  his
    attempt to remain in the United Kingdom.

 8. The final ground asserts that the judge did not give sufficient reasons
    for finding that the appellant enjoys family life with the adult cousin
    with  whom  he  currently  resides.  However,  the  judge   cites   the
    appellant's age and personal financial independence as reasons why  the
    existence of a relationship which extends beyond the  normal  emotional
    ties between adult family members. The reasons given are adequate.  The
    argument that the appellant has not been given credit for acting  as  a
    Covid volunteer is without any merit in the light of section  117B  (4)
    and (5) of the 2002 Act which the judge has applied correctly at  [27].



 9. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 9 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

