
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02264/2015
     HU/02266/2015
     HU/02268/2015
     HU/02269/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 October 2017                       |On 6 November 2017                  |
|Decision prepared immediately following  |                                    |
|the hearing on 23 October 2017           |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                        Zahida [I] (first appellant)
                       Muhammad [I] (second appellant)
                           [M I] (third appellant)
                          [K I] (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Immediately following a hearing on 19 September 2017, I gave a decision
    in which I found that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    contained a material error of law.  Much of what is stated within  that
    decision is repeated below.

 2. The appellants in this case are national of Pakistan  consisting  of  a
    mother (the first appellant),  who  was  born  in  December  1974,  her
    husband (the second appellant), who was born in August 1975, and  their
    two  children  (the  third  and  fourth  appellants),  who  were   born
    respectively on September 2007 (the third appellant) and December  2010
    (the fourth appellant).  The third appellant was  born  in  Poland  but
    came here with his parents on 2 February 2008.  The  fourth  appellant,
    their daughter, was born in the UK.

 3. The first appellant had arrived as a  student  in  this  country  on  2
    February 2008 (with her son and husband) with a short period  of  leave
    which was subsequently extended and then she was granted further  leave
    as a post-study worker to 30 September 2013.  She made an  unsuccessful
    application for leave to remain as a Highly Skilled Migrant, which  was
    refused in the same year, and although she applied for judicial  review
    of this decision this was refused in October 2014.  Accordingly, though
    she (and the other appellants) had been resident lawfully in the United
    Kingdom for the first five or so years that they were here, technically
    thereafter the family has been here without leave, although  throughout
    this period they have been attempting to regulate their position.

 4. The second appellant, the first appellant's husband, had leave  granted
    in line with hers as her dependant and the lawfulness of  the  stay  of
    her children is the same.  They have  been  in  this  country  lawfully
    while their mother was here lawfully, but currently they  do  not  have
    leave to remain.

 5. On 22 June 2015, by which time the appellants had  been  unlawfully  in
    this  country  following  the  refusal   of   the   first   appellant's
    unsuccessful application for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Highly  Skilled
    Migrant in 2013, the first appellant sought  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of her family life.  She also asked for  reconsideration  of  the
    decision to refuse  her  leave  as  a  Highly  Skilled  Migrant.   This
    application was  refused  and  the  appellants  appealed  against  this
    decision.

 6. The appeals were heard at Hatton Cross by First-tier Tribunal Judge M R
    Oliver on 28 November 2016, but in a Decision and  Reasons  promulgated
    on 6 January 2017, Judge Oliver dismissed the appeal.   The  appellants
    then appealed to this Tribunal and were given leave to do so.

 7. At the time the application was made, the oldest child was 7 years  and
    8 months old, having been in the UK for over seven years.

 8. The basis of the application, as I noted in my decision as to error  of
    law, made immediately following the hearing on 19 September  2017,  was
    clear from the witness  statements  contained  within  the  appellants'
    bundle which had been before Judge Oliver and it was that  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) the Tribunal  needed  to  consider  whether  it
    would be reasonable  to  expect  the  older  child  to  leave  the  UK.
    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) provides as follows:

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE(1).    The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
                    to remain on the grounds of private life in the  UK  are
                    that at the date of application, the applicant:

                    ...

                    (iv)   is under the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
                        continuously in the UK for  at  least  seven  years
                        (discounting any period  of  imprisonment)  and  it
                        would not be reasonable to expect the applicant  to
                        leave the UK ..."

 9. Clearly, at the time this application was made the third appellant  was
    under the age of 18 years and had lived continuously in the UK  for  at
    least seven years, so under  the  Rules,  his  removal  could  only  be
    justified if it could not be said that "it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect the applicant to leave the  UK".   In  other  words,  the  third
    appellant's  application  should  have  been  allowed  unless  it   was
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.

10. As I noted in my earlier decision, in the witness statement  which  had
    been made for the hearing before Judge  Oliver,  the  second  appellant
    (the father of the third appellant) said as follows at paragraph 14:

         "My son has lived in the UK for  over  eight  years.   Indeed,  the
         respondent, under the Immigration  Rule  276ADE,  acknowledges  and
         recognises the right of a child's private life in the  UK  and  the
         practical difficulties which  a  child  would  face  on  [sic]  the
         country he is to be removed to.  ..."

11. I also noted that the first appellant in her statement at paragraph 24,
    had stated as follows:

         "24. The [respondent] does not deny that my son's integration  into
             the UK is not relevant or immaterial.  The position  which  is
             set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  and
             paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules is that unless there
             are strong public policy reasons as  to  why  a  parent  of  a
             qualifying child should be or must be removed from the UK, the
             [respondent] would be  expected  to  respect  and  preserve  a
             parent of child private life under EX.1 of Appendix FM of  the
             Immigration Rules, under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
             Rules and under Article 8 of ECHR."

12. I set out these excerpts from the witness  statements  and  noted  that
    although what was contained therein, which had presumably been  settled
    by the appellants' solicitors, could perhaps have been  better  worded,
    nonetheless it was clear that the argument that they  were  making  was
    that their applications under Article 8 should have succeeded under the
    Rules.

13. I also noted that notwithstanding this at paragraph 8 of his  decision,
    Judge Oliver had stated as follows:

         "It has not been suggested that the appellants can bring themselves
         within the Rules concerning settlement on the basis  of  family  or
         private life, but it is argued that their  appeals  should  succeed
         for  compassionate  reasons  and  because  there  are   exceptional
         circumstances."

14. The judge was clearly wrong in so  stating,  and  it  is  notable  that
    within his extremely brief decision (amounting to no more than two  and
    a half pages in total) there was not even any  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules nor  was  there  any  reference  to  Section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  inserted
    by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014, which provides as follows:

         "117BArticle 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         ...

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

15. As I noted in my earlier decision, in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    705, a decision handed down on 7 July 2016 (which again  had  not  been
    mentioned within Judge Oliver's decision, even though it is the leading
    case dealing with the circumstances in which the long  residence  of  a
    child should be considered), at paragraph 49 Lord Justice  Elias,  with
    whom the other judges agreed, stated in terms that:

         "The fact that the child has been in the UK for seven  years  would
         need to be given significant weight in the proportionality exercise
         for two  related  reasons:  first,  because  of  its  relevance  to
         determining the nature and strength of the child's best  interests;
         and second, because it establishes as a starting point  that  leave
         should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
         contrary."

16. I accepted the argument made on behalf of the appellants by  Mr  Sharma
    that it had been incumbent on Judge Oliver to  consider  properly  what
    the best interests of the children were by reference  to  the  evidence
    which had been adduced.  I found that in this case Judge Oliver had not
    only seemingly misunderstood the length of time the children  had  been
    in this country before applying under Article 8, but also did not  show
    that he had understood that so far as  an  Article  8  application  was
    concerned it was incumbent on him to consider the case as at  the  date
    of his decision.  When dealing with the argument  that  the  period  of
    seven years which the older child had been in this country was a matter
    which was of some weight, he dismissed this argument in  the  following
    terms:

         "10. It is further argued that they should  be  allowed  to  remain
             because of the best interests of their children under  Section
             55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
             Although it is right that their son has now been in the United
             Kingdom for over eight years, he had been here for  only  five
             years  when  his  parents   embarked   on   the   unsuccessful
             applications noted above.   Although  the  period  [of]  seven
             years was suggested  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
             affecting children; onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  197  as  a
             positive pointer, it was also suggested that the  seven  years
             ran from the age of 4 years.  In this case the son was only  4
             months old on arrival."

17. As I have already stated in my earlier decision,  and  repeat  in  this
    decision, that is not an accurate statement of what was stated in  that
    case.  The seven years does not "run" from the age of 4 years; the most
    that the judge could have understood from the decision in that case was
    that the period from 4 years old was more significant  than  the  seven
    years from the date of birth, but the court did  not  decide  that  the
    earlier period could just be ignored.  It is  clear,  in  my  judgment,
    that when one considers in particular the judgment in MA (Pakistan)  it
    is incumbent on the judge to at least give proper reasons  as  to  why,
    notwithstanding the seven years that the oldest child had been  in  the
    UK, its relevance to the  strength  of  her  best  interests  could  be
    overcome.  As the court found in MA (Pakistan) "leave should be granted
    unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary" and the judge should
    have embarked on a proper proportionality exercise with this  in  mind,
    which he did not.

18. At the error of law hearing, although  Mr  Clarke,  then  appearing  on
    behalf of the respondent, had sought to persuade the Tribunal that  the
    judge had effectively considered the best interests of the children, he
    was obliged to concede that his reasoning was perhaps not  as  thorough
    as it might have been.  One of the things which I noted that the  judge
    had not appeared to have considered at all when finding at paragraph 11
    that "their best interests lie in remaining  with  their  parents"  was
    whether or not their best interests would be to remain in this  country
    with their parents; as already noted, there is no consideration at  all
    of the provisions set out within Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, which
    deals with whether or not a parent should be removed when it would  not
    be reasonable to expect a child with  whom  they  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting qualifying relationship to leave.

19. For these reasons, I found that Judge Oliver's failure to  have  regard
    to the relevant Rules,  statutes  and  authorities  (in  particular  MA
    (Pakistan)) was a material error of law such that the decision he  made
    would have to be set aside and remade.  Having canvassed the opinion of
    both representatives at that time, it was agreed  that  although  there
    would have to be some further fact-finding, that could be  carried  out
    by this Tribunal and it would be more appropriate for the  remaking  of
    the decision to be in this Tribunal rather than  remitting  the  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal.  I agreed and gave further  directions
    for  the  service  of  up-to-date  witness  evidence  with  regard   in
    particular to the best interests of the children, and arranged for  the
    hearing then to be relisted before me.

    The Rehearing

20. Regrettably, despite the very clear directions which I made, up-to-date
    witness evidence was not in fact served.  It would have been helpful in
    particular, as I had made clear during the previous hearing, if  up-to-
    date evidence had been provided with regard to the current position  of
    the third and fourth appellants, the children.  However,  having  heard
    full arguments on  behalf  of  both  parties,  and  being  assisted  in
    particular by a very full skeleton argument prepared on behalf  of  the
    appellants by Mr Sharma, I consider that I can properly dispose of this
    appeal without the need of a further adjournment on the  basis  of  the
    evidence which I have heard.

21. Both the first and second appellants gave evidence before me  in  which
    essentially they relied on the witness statements  they  had  made,  as
    well as answering some supplementary questions relating to the position
    with regard to their children.   They  were  both  cross-examined  very
    fairly and very briefly by Mr Duffy.

22. Essentially, and this not challenged, both appellants  are  very  well-
    qualified scientists.  They both have bachelor's  degrees.   The  first
    appellant has two master's  degrees,  one  in  biophotonics  which  she
    obtained in Paris and another in nanotechnology, which she acquired  in
    England; her husband only has one master's degree in  addition  to  his
    bachelor's degree, both in science subjects acquired in  Pakistan.   As
    already noted, other than the fact that they did not leave the UK  with
    their children having initially failed to obtain leave to remain, their
    immigration history is not a bad one; throughout the time when thy have
    not had leave to remain, they have been  seeking  to  regularise  their
    position.

23. Were this Tribunal just concerned with the  position  of  the  parents,
    although well-qualified, it could not  be  said  that  either  of  them
    satisfied  any  of  the   requirements   set   out   within   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) to (vi) of the Immigration Rules and  nor  could  it  be
    said that, absent their children, there would have been any  especially
    compelling reason why they should be granted permission, exceptionally,
    to remain in this country outside  the  Rules.   Perfectly  reasonably,
    their reasons for  wishing  to  remain  in  this  country  are  largely
    economic; because of the specialisms they have, they would be  able  to
    obtain far better employment in this country than they could back home,
    but that on its own would not be a reason  why  absent  their  children
    their claims should be allowed under  Article  8.   However,  when  one
    considers the overall proportionality, which this Tribunal will have to
    do when considering whether or not it is "reasonable"  for  the  oldest
    child, who is a qualifying child, to return, the fact that  they  would
    almost certainly  not  be  a  burden  on  this  country  but  would  be
    productive workers is a matter which will have to be taken into account
    when the "reasonableness" of the child returning to Pakistan (which  is
    a misnomer because, as I understand matters, he has never been to  that
    country, having been born in  Poland  and  then  having  come  to  this
    country when some 4 months old) is considered.  The only visit in  fact
    made by the older child to Pakistan was a very brief visit so  that  he
    could be seen by relatives at a  time  when  he  was  in  this  country
    lawfully, and he returned shortly after.   For  the  purposes  of  this
    appeal  Mr  Duffy  does  not  suggest  that  that  visit  was  of   any
    significance.

24. Although I have not seen up-to-date school reports, there is no  reason
    to doubt that the children are both doing very  well  at  school.   The
    first appellant describes her daughter as "brilliant", which is  how  I
    would expect a bright child to be described by a proud parent,  and  it
    seems very clear, and is not disputed, that as  bright  young  children
    will, they have adapted very well to life in this country and have very
    many friends of no doubt different cultures, with whom their lives  are
    entwined.  They do both understand Urdu, because although  their  first
    language is English, Urdu remains spoken  in  the  household  primarily
    between the first  and  second  appellants,  whose  first  language  it
    remains.  However, the prevailing  culture  in  which  they  have  been
    brought up is that of the UK.

25. I have in mind as I must the precise guidance given  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) at paragraph 49, which I now repeat, in full:

         "49. Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the  wider
             construction of Section 117B(6),  the  same  principles  would
             apply in such a case.  However, the fact that  the  child  has
             been in the  UK  for  seven  years  would  need  to  be  given
             significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
             related  reasons:  first,  because   of   its   relevance   to
             determining the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
             interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
             point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
             reasons to the contrary."

26. On behalf of  the  respondent,  Mr  Duffy  agreed  that  he  could  not
    realistically dispute that the best interests of these children (and in
    particular the older child, the daughter, who was a "qualifying  child"
    as defined within Section 117D of the 2002 Act) was to  remain  in  the
    UK.  However, that was only the starting point; the test this  Tribunal
    had  to  consider  was  whether  or  not  it  was  reasonable  (or  not
    unreasonable) to expect that qualifying child, the third  appellant  to
    leave the UK.  The test was the same under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  and
    (in respect of the parents) under Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.
    Setting out the factors fairly, Mr Duffy invited the Tribunal  to  take
    account of the fact that the first and second appellants were educated,
    intelligent people with family in Pakistan (they both have a number  of
    siblings and some parents remaining there) and that the  children  were
    very bright and  could  adapt.   However,  it  was  accepted  that  the
    immigration history of the parents was not a particularly bad one,  and
    other than that they overstayed while they were still seeking leave  to
    remain, there was no other factor on which  the  respondent  wished  to
    rely.

27. On behalf of the appellants, Mr Sharma referred the Tribunal  not  just
    to the guidance given in MA (Pakistan) but also to the  guidance  given
    by the respondent which is set out at  paragraph  11  of  his  skeleton
    argument and is as follows:

         "The requirement that a non-British citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the seven years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to  the  extent  that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable.  The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than seven years."

28. As properly  and  rightly  accepted  by  Mr  Duffy  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, this Tribunal, when considering an appeal under  Article  8
    has to consider the position as at the  date  of  hearing,  and  as  at
    today's date the older child has not just been here  seven  years,  but
    has been here in this country for four months short of ten years, which
    includes the very formative years from 4 onwards.  In my judgment,  her
    case is therefore stronger than it was when she had just been here  for
    seven years, because in the intervening period her  roots  have  become
    much stronger.

29. I consider the case from her point of view to begin with.  It has  been
    accepted, as I have noted, on behalf of the respondent, that  the  best
    interests of both children (but I am now considering  the  position  of
    the older child) are that she should remain in this country.  This is a
    primary consideration although not necessarily  paramount,  but  having
    regard both to the guidance given by the respondent herself,  and  also
    to that given by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 49 of MA  (Pakistan),
    I approach her case on the basis that strong reasons will  be  required
    in order to justify removing that child  from  the  UK.   Although  the
    Tribunal is not restricted in considering factors relating to the child
    herself, but may also take into account the immigration history of  her
    parents (which was reluctantly accepted by Lord  Justice  Elias  in  MA
    (Pakistan), who felt bound by the previous decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450), in this case,  the  reasons
    why the removal of this child could be said to  be  justified  are  not
    sufficiently strong.  I bear in mind the length of time  she  has  been
    here, which is a powerful factor against removal, but also that on  the
    other side, although there is always a  public  interest  in  enforcing
    immigration control, in this case there is a lack  of  the  aggravating
    features which regrettably are so commonly found in cases of this sort.
     There is no suggestion  that  the  first  and  second  appellants,  if
    granted leave, would be anything other than assets to the UK,  and  the
    third appellant (and her brother)  appear  bright,  able  children  who
    themselves would also be assets to this country.  That of itself is not
    a reason why they should be allowed to remain, but as the  older  child
    is a "qualifying child" as noted above, and the presumption  (albeit  a
    rebuttable presumption as accepted by Mr Sharma in his submissions)  is
    that that child should be allowed to remain  unless  there  are  strong
    reasons why he should not, I do not consider in  the  circumstances  of
    this case, having conducted a proportionality exercise in which I  have
    considered all the factors, that it would be reasonable to expect  that
    child to leave.

30. It follows that having regard to Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act,  the
    public interest does not require either of her parents  to  be  removed
    either, because it is stated in terms at Section 117B(6) that:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require that person's  removal  where  the
         person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  a
         qualifying child, and it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the United Kingdom."

    As I have found that it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom, and clearly both parents have  a
    qualifying relationship with that  child,  it  is  not  in  the  public
    interest to require either parent to leave.

31. In these circumstances, clearly it is  not  appropriate  to  order  the
    removal of the fourth appellant either, and so the appeals of all  four
    appellants must succeed on Article 8 grounds and I will so find.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver  as  containing
a material error of law and remake the decision as follows:

The appellants' appeals are allowed, on human rights grounds, Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                       Dated: 31 October 2017

