
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02417/2020
     (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 July 2021                                |On 23 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Ms Neetu Sharma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Allen, Counsel, instructed by PSA McKenzie
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever
("the judge"), promulgated on 3 March 2020, by which he dismissed the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal of her human rights
claim.

The Appellant, a citizen of India, had come to the United Kingdom as a
student in October 2011 and had remained with leave in that category until
an appeal was dismissed and she became appeal rights exhausted on 23
January 2017.  A number of further applications were made, all without
success.  The most recent application (treated as a human rights claim) was
made on 14 April 2019 and refused by the Respondent on 29 January 2020.
The Appellant asserted that she wished to undertake further studies in the
United Kingdom (in the form of a Master's degree) prior to returning to
India.  She claimed to have established a private life in the United
Kingdom over the course of time.  She also claimed to have been in a
relationship with a Mr Kumar.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

The judge went through the Appellant's immigration history in the United
Kingdom and, it is fair to say, was unimpressed by certain aspects relating
to it.  He found that the Appellant had been an overstayer since becoming
appeal rights exhausted in January 2017.  At [15] the judge addressed an
issue which had been raised in cross-examination but had not featured in
the Respondent's decision letter.  In oral evidence the Appellant had been
asked about how she was financially supported in the United Kingdom.  She
had said that friends of her father who travelled to and from India would
bring cash back with them from her father and pass it on to her.  This
method was used not only in terms of financial support for her but also for
the payment of fees in the past.  The judge found this explanation to be
"highly unlikely" and rejected it.  He went on to state that:

"Whilst the method of her financing does not go to any particular issue in
this case it reflects on the credibility of the Appellant's evidence
generally.  I find in general terms therefore that the Appellant is not
motivated as she claims to simply remain in the UK for a further year of
study before returning to India but rather her motivation is to remain
indefinitely within the UK by one means or another."

The judge then considered the position of Mr Kumar and found that he was an
Indian citizen without any status in the United Kingdom.

At [17] the judge considered relevant factors in respect of the overall
Article 8 balancing exercise including those set out in section 117B of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  He noted
the Appellant's previous precarious status and then her overstaying from
2017.  He regarded that the private life established over time attracted
little weight and went on to state that "there is no right to study and
there is clear case law indicating that refusing a person leave to remain
to study is not tantamount to a disproportionate breach of their Article 8
rights."  The final sentence of [17] reads as follows:

"There is a public interest in maintaining immigration control and to some
extent it could be said that where a person deliberately and unlawfully
remains in the UK submitting on a regular basis applications which are
almost bound to fail that the public interest is enhanced."

The alleged family life with Mr Kumar was considered, but regarded as of no
assistance to the Appellant's case.  The appeal was duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

The grounds of appeal are divided into two, although they are clearly
interrelated: first, it is said that the judge made an error of fact by
finding the Appellant's explanation as to how she received funds to be
incredible, whereas new evidence (submitted with the application for
permission and pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal's Procedure
Rules) showed that the cash method had in fact been used; second, the judge
acted with procedural unfairness by failing to raise his concern as to the
Appellant's evidence at the hearing itself.

Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe on
21 January 2021.

The hearing

Ms Allen focussed her submissions on the procedural unfairness issue.  She
acknowledged that the issue had been raised in cross-examination, but it
had not appeared in the Respondent's decision letter and therefore the
Appellant had not adduced evidence on the point.  The judge had on the one
hand stated that this issue did not go to a particular matter, whilst on
the other found that it adversely affected the Appellant's overall
credibility.  Ms Allen (who had appeared below) submitted that if a concern
over the explanation had been raised at the hearing, an application for an
adjournment in order to adduce further and better evidence would have been
made.  She submitted that the judge's error was material because he had
stated in terms that the incredible explanation as to finances reflected
poorly on the Appellant's evidence as a whole.  Ms Allen submitted that as
procedural unfairness had occurred the appeal should be remitted to the
First-tier Tribunal.

Ms Everett submitted that the judge had been entitled to find as he did,
but even if there had been procedural unfairness the Appellant simply could
not succeed in respect of her Article 8 claim in light of the facts as a
whole.  Therefore, Ms Everett submitted, any error was immaterial.  If on
the other hand the judge's decision should be set aside the decision could
be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

Conclusions on error of law

With a fair degree of hesitation, I have concluded that there was
procedural unfairness.  The hesitation arises because this is not an
example of a judge taking a point against an appellant which had not in any
way been canvassed at a hearing: the financial support issue had been
raised in cross-examination and the Appellant was given the opportunity to
provide an explanation.  Having said that, it is the case that the issue of
how the Appellant received financial support was not raised in the
Respondent's decision letter and I am satisfied that this was the reason
why further evidence on this issue had not been provided by the Appellant
in advance of the hearing.

Whilst it is undoubtedly the case that a judge is not obliged to inform a
party of their concluded view as to a particular evidential issue, if a new
matter is raised during a hearing and there is, in the judge's mind, at
least a provisional concern on the evidence given, fairness may require the
concern to be ventilated in order that the Appellant and/or their
representative has an opportunity to make specific submissions on it, lead
further evidence at the hearing, or, as Ms Allen said would have happened
in the present case, seek an adjournment in order to provide further and
better evidence from other sources.  In all the circumstances, I am
satisfied that the failure of the judge to adopt this course of action did
lead to procedural unfairness, albeit only to a limited extent.

The question then is whether the error is such that the judge's decision
should be set aside, having regard to the discretion under section 12(2)(a)
of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Whilst Ms Allen put forward a perfectly respectable argument as to why the
judge's error was material to the outcome of the Appellant's appeal, in all
the circumstances I disagree and have concluded that, absent the specific
procedural unfairness, the result would have inevitably been the same.  In
other words, I do not accept that the error might have made a difference to
the judge's overall conclusion on the appeal.  My reasons for this are as
follows.

First, as highlighted previously, the error I have identified was only in
respect of a narrow evidential issue, namely the method by which the
Appellant was being financially supported.  It is relevant that the
procedural unfairness did not deprive the Appellant of a fair hearing in
respect of an important and contentious matter.  There was never any
suggestion that she was not being financially supported at all and was
therefore reliant on public funds.

If one were to proceed on the basis that the appellant's explanation as to
how she received money from her father was entirely credible, this could
only have provided somewhat better evidence as to her financial
independence in the United Kingdom a matter which was not in fact in
dispute.  Taking this across to the mandatory considerations set out in
section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act, such financial independence is of neutral
value.

Second, the judge made it clear enough that the financial support issue did
not go to a core issue in the appeal.  I acknowledge that he deemed the
appellant's explanation as somewhat damaging to her overall credibility.
However, he did not make a finding that she had practised deception in any
way.  On a fair reading of the judge's decision as a whole, there are no
other express findings that the appellant had perpetrated significant
misconduct or had lied about particular matters.  The considerations
weighing against the appellant set out at [17] are essentially simple
statements of fact: she was in fact an overstayer and had been since early
2017; her status, when lawful, was in fact only ever precarious; she had in
fact made numerous unsuccessful applications (most, if not all, based on
repeated Article 8 assertions) since becoming an overstayer; her claim had
in fact only ever really been predicated on a desire to undertake a further
course of studies in this country (I will deal with the position of Mr
Kumar, below) and the judge was perfectly entitled to conclude that there
was no right to study protected by Article 8 (see, for example, Patel
[2013] UKSC 72; [2014] 1 AC 651, at paragraph 57).

In respect of the final sentence at [17], one can readily discount any
enhancement of the public interest in play (i.e. the importance of
maintaining effective immigration control) by virtue of any perceived
concerns with the appellant's credibility. On any view, the 'normal' public
interest, as enshrined in section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act was a significant
factor on the Respondent's side of the balance sheet.

In view of the above, and having regard to the case-law and mandatory
considerations under section 117B of the 2002 Act, even if an entirely
benevolent view had been taken of her overall credibility and motivation,
it is in my judgment so difficult to conceive a judge, directing himself or
herself properly in law, allowing the Appellant's appeal on private life
Article 8 grounds, that I am driven to conclude that the error I have
identified was immaterial.

Third, there is no conceivable way in which the error relating to the
financial support issue could have materially the judge's consideration of
Mr Kumar, an Indian citizen with no status in the United Kingdom.

Fourth, I do not regard the fact that the judge made an adverse observation
as to the Appellant's credibility, which I have concluded was based on an
error, to be a sufficient basis, in and of itself, to set the decision
aside. If there had been an express finding of dishonesty by the judge, my
view might have been different. However, as mentioned above, no such
finding was made. If the Appellant has an adverse immigration history, it
is in truth only because she has remained in the United Kingdom as an
overstayer since 2017 and made repeated unsuccessful applications for
further leave, rather than perhaps adopting a different course of action
such as returning to India earlier and seeking entry clearance as a
student.



Notice of Decision

Although making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law, I do not set that decision aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore dismissed.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                     Date: 8 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
