
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02670/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2019                             |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               dr Kashif Riaz
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs G Fama (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge J L Bristow promulgated on 12th April 2018, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham Priory Court on 9th April 2018.   In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and  was  born  on  6th
    July 1980.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    3rd January 2018, refusing his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of ten years' long residency.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he first entered the UK as a  student  in
    2007, and gained various extensions of stay, including the grant of  an
    EEA residence card in 2012, when he began living with a Czech national,
    and that he has now  acquired  ten  years'  lawful  residence  in  this
    country, such as to enable him to apply for indefinite leave to remain.



The Judge's Determination

 4. The judge considered the appeal before him on the basis  of  a  "paper"
    appeal.   The  documentation  before  the  judge   was   sparse.    The
    observation was made by the judge, after considering the relevant legal
    provision in paragraph 276B (at paragraph 20), that  this  was  a  case
    where "the Appellant has not adduced  any  evidence  to  prove  to  the
    required standard that he has at least  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the UK" (paragraph 21).  Accordingly, the judge went on to
    conclude that, "on the evidence before me I am not  satisfied  that  he
    has proved to the required standard that he can meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276B" (paragraph 22).  Thereafter, the judge  went  on  to
    consider the position under Article 8 (see paragraphs 23  to  26),  and
    concluded  that  the  decision  that  he  was  arriving  at   was   not
    disproportionate (see paragraphs 27 to 39)  to  the  Appellant's  human
    rights.

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  his  decision
    in concluding that the Appellant could  not  succeed  on  private  life
    grounds.  Moreover, the finding that the Appellant was not  financially
    independent was wrong given that he had submitted his pay slips  as  an
    NHS doctor.  Moreover, the judge placed no weight on the benefit to the
    UK in retaining doctors' trained in the United  Kingdom,  and  did  not
    refer to the well-known decision in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.  This was a
    case where the Appellant had been in the UK for eleven  years,  and  he
    deserved to succeed under paragraph 276B of HC 395.

 7. On 18th May 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me, on 5th April 2019, the Appellant was on  this
    occasion represented by Mrs G Fama, (of Counsel),  and  the  Respondent
    was represented by Mr David Mills,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  Mrs Fama began at the outset by expressing her  gratitude  to
    Mr Mills, on account of the fact that she had just been alerted to  the
    fact that this was a case where the Appellant had been in a receipt  of
    a Tier 2 visa, (which was the equivalent of a work permit)  that  would
    entitle him  to  work  in  this  country  until  September  2021.   She
    submitted that she was not aware of this.  As far as she was concerned,
    she had arrived to argue the Appellant's eligibility on  the  basis  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  Her  instruction  was  that
    the Appellant had been in the UK for eleven years continuously.  He had
    never been out of this country for more than the required  six  months,
    which would thereafter disentitle him  to  come  back  as  a  returning
    resident.  She agreed that the Appellant's application would have to be
    determined on the  basis  of  the  sparse  documentation  before  Judge
    Bristow at the time of the hearing.  It was true that there was a  well
    compiled  bundle  of  documents  thereafter,  on  the  basis  of  which
    permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal, but that was not  the
    bundle that was before Judge Bristow, who had  struggled  to  find  the
    evidence that the Appellant wished to rely upon.

 9. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that this was a human  rights  appeal.
    The Appellant had applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis
    of ten years' residence.   However,  he  did  not  have  ten  years  of
    continuous leave.  What had happened was that he  had  entered  into  a
    relationship with an EEA national in 2012, and had then been granted an
    EEA residence card, when he had then, upon its expiry  on  2nd  October
    2017, applied for an extension, which he did  on  18th  November  2015,
    which she did, and that application was refused.  It was not until 26th
    September 2017 that he then applied for a Tier 2 visa.  What this meant
    was that he was without lawful  leave  when  this  EEA  residence  card
    expired, and up to the point when he eventually then  secured  on  26th
    September 2017 a Tier 2 visa, which would now be valid until 2021.   It
    was accepted that it was not a big gap.  It was likely  the  case  that
    the Appellant was not aware that this gap had the  effect  of  breaking
    his lawful residence.  Nevertheless, the position currently was that he
    did not have lawful leave and therefore could not succeed.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

11. First, it is agreed by all those before me today that the  judge  below
    did not have the evidence that the Appellant sought  to  rely  upon  to
    demonstrate that he had been in this country lawfully for ten years, so
    as to entitle him to remain on the basis of indefinite  leave  in  this
    country.

12. Second, on the contrary, the evidence is that the Appellant's leave had
    been broken after his EEA residence  card  expired,  so  that  he  only
    entered a period of lawful leave after 26th September 2017 with a  Tier
    2 visa being granted to him up to September 2021.

13. Third, it can be no part of a consideration for a  judge  that  the  UK
    needs to retain doctors trained in this country, at a time of dire need
    in the NHS.  That may well be the case.  However, that is a matter that
    falls within the province of the  UK  government,  to  be  debated  and
    decided upon by the UK Parliament.   It  is  no  part  of  the  judge's
    function to have regard to policy concerns, which have not materialised
    into hard law.

14. Finally, what this means is that, that  on  the  basis  of  the  agreed
    evidence before me, this was an  Appellant  who  will  after  September
    2021, be in a position to apply, on the basis  of  five  years'  lawful
    residence in this country, for indefinite leave to remain.  However, as
    far as the present appeal is concerned, it  cannot  be  said  that  the
    judge below had in any way erred  in  law.   Accordingly,  this  appeal
    falls to be dismissed.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss             25th April 2019
