
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/02487/2015

                                                HU/02491/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                       |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 October 2017                      |      On 17 October 2017             |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H STOREY

                                   Between

                              Susma Subba Limbu
                                 Ronal Subba
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Howells, instructed by NC Brothers & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nepal who were born  respectively  on  9
    December 1989 and 7 April 1991.  They are sister and brother  and  both
    are the children of the sponsor, their father, Mr Naindra Kumar.  He is
    a former Gurkha soldier who (together with his wife) came to the United
    Kingdom in September 2013.

 2. On 3 June 2015, the appellants made applications for entry clearance to
    join their father and mother in the UK as the dependent children  of  a
    former Gurkha soldier.  Their applications were, in essence, made under
    Art 8 of the ECHR and the relevant guidance of the Home Office in  IDI,
    Chapter 15.

 3. On 2 July 2015,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  each  of  the
    appellants' applications.  Those decisions were subsequently upheld  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager on 26 October 2015.

The Appeals to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Both appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 8 February 2017, Judge J Pacey dismissed each  of  their
    appeals.  The judge accepted that there was  family  life  between  the
    appellants and their  parents  in  the  UK  based  upon  emotional  and
    financial dependence.  Nevertheless, the judge found that  the  refusal
    of entry clearance was proportionate under Art 8.2 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had been wrong to find that the "historic  injustice"  recognised
    as engaged in cases where ex-Gurkha soldiers had  been  prevented  from
    settling in the UK did not apply to children of such  servicemen  where
    they had not been born at  the  time  their  parents  would  have  been
    allowed to settle in the  UK  but  for  the  historic  injustice.   The
    grounds rely upon the respondent's own policy, namely IDI, Chapter  15,
    Section 2A Annex K at para 17 states that:

         "In order to qualify for settlement  under  this  policy  the  Home
         Office needs to be satisfied that  the  former  Gurkha  would  have
         applied to settle in the UK upon discharge with the dependent child
         if they had been born by then (but otherwise the child  would  have
         been born here) if a sponsor states that he intended to  settle  in
         the UK on discharge, then, in the  absence  of  any  countervailing
         evidence, this requirement would normally  be  considered  to  have
         been met." (emphasis added)

 6. The grounds argue that, therefore, the Home Office's policy applied  to
    the appellants as the judge had  found  that,  had  their  father  been
    allowed to settle (but for  the  historic  injustice),  the  appellants
    would have been born in the UK.  Consequently, in effect, the  historic
    injustice was not only suffered by their father but also by them.

 7. On 8 September 2017, the respondent filed a rule 24  notice.   In  that
    notice, the respondent accepted that the judge had materially erred  in
    law in concluding that para 17 of Annex K of  the  respondent's  policy
    not apply to them and that therefore they  had  suffered  no  "historic
    injustice".

 8. At the hearing, Mr Richards acknowledged  that  was  the  Secretary  of
    State's position.  He accepted that  the  judge's  decision  could  not
    stand.  In respect of  remaking  the  decision,  Mr  Richards  made  no
    submissions inviting us to dismiss the appeal.  He  accepted  that  the
    facts fell, in effect,  within  the  respondent  policy  and  that  the
    appellants had both suffered the "historic injustice" recognised in the
    case law and that there were no countervailing factors such as  a  poor
    immigration history or offending which militated against a finding that
    the appellant's exclusion from the UK was not proportionate.

 9. Mr Howells, on behalf of the appellants took us to a number of passages
    in Judge Pacey's decision.  He pointed out that the  ECM  had  conceded
    that Art 8.1 was engaged.  He relied upon the judge's findings at paras
    25 and 28 of her decision that family life was established between  the
    appellants and their parents in the UK based upon their  emotional  and
    financial dependency.  Further, he relied upon the respondent's policy,
    which we have set out above, and that the judge had found that  if  the
    appellant's father had been allowed to settle in  the  UK,  they  would
    have been born in the UK and so likewise  have  suffered  an  "historic
    injustice".

10. Mr Howells placed  considerable  weight  upon  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in Gurung and Others v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal's subsequent decision in  Ghising  and  Others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:
    historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).  In respect of  Gurung
    he relied upon the court's statement at [42] that:

         "...the historic injustice is such an important factor to be  taken
         into account in  the  balancing  exercise  and  why  the  applicant
         dependent child of a Gurkha who is settled in the  UK  has  such  a
         strong claim to have his Art 8(1) right vindicated, notwithstanding
         the potency of a countervailing public interest in the  maintaining
         of a firm immigration policy."

11. In relation to Ghising he relied, in particular, upon what was said  by
    the Upper Tribunal at [59] that:

         "...the historic injustice issue will carry significant weight,  on
         the Appellant's side of the balance, and is likely to outweigh  the
         matters relied on by the Respondent, where these consist solely  of
         the public interest [in maintaining a firm immigration policy]".

12. Mr Howells further relied upon what the Upper  Tribunal  said  at  [60]
    that:

         "If the Respondent can point to matters over and above the  'public
         interest in maintaining of a firm immigration policy', which  argue
         in favour of removal or refusal of leave to enter,  these  must  be
         given appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour.
          Thus, a bad immigration  history  and/or  criminal  behaviour  may
         still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the
         Appellant's side.  ... But, if the Respondent is relying only  upon
         the public interest described by the Court of Appeal at para 41  of
         Gurung, then the weight to be given to the historic injustice  will
         normally require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

Discussion

13. It is accepted that the judge's decision contained a material error  of
    law in that she failed to take into account that a "historic injustice"
    had been suffered by the appellants in accordance with the Secretary of
    State's policy because, had the  appellant's  father  been  allowed  to
    settle in the UK, they would have been born in the UK.

14. We agree with the Secretary of State's concession on this issue.   That
    was an  error  and  one  which  was  material  to  the  decision  which
    accordingly we set aside.

15. As we have indicated, Mr Richards on behalf of the respondent  made  no
    positive submissions inviting us to dismiss the appeal under Art.8.

16. This is a case in  which  the  "historic  injustice"  suffered  by  the
    appellants falls to be given "significant  weight".   The  only  public
    interest relied upon by the respondent consists in the "public interest
    in maintaining of a firm immigration policy" which is, of  course,  set
    out in s.117B(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

17. Mr Richards did not seek to rely, in his submissions,  upon  any  other
    aspect of the public interest.  Although, we do note  that  the  public
    interest recognised in s.117B(3) of the 2002 Act  is  engaged.   It  is
    plain  from  the  evidence,  that  neither  appellant  is  "financially
    independent".  Indeed, it was part of the judge's reasoning, leading to
    a finding that "family life" existed between the appellants  and  their
    parents, that they were financially dependent upon  their  father.   We
    were not taken to any evidence by either representative in relation  to
    the appellants' ability to speak English and,  therefore,  whether  the
    public interest recognised in s.117B(2) of the 2002 Act is engaged.  We
    do, however, note that the first appellant is seeking to qualify  as  a
    doctor and the second appellant is a student.  There is  no  suggestion
    that their studies have not been conducted through the  medium  of  the
    English language.

18. In our judgment, the substance of the public interest  relied  upon  in
    this case is that identified in Gurung at [41] and stated by the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ghising at [60] as normally to be considered as  outweighed
    by the  "historic  injustice"  suffered  by  individuals  such  as  the
    appellants in this case.  As Mr Richards acknowledged, and  Mr  Howells
    submitted, this is not a case where there can be  said  to  be  a  "bad
    immigration history" or  any  "criminal  behaviour"  providing  greater
    weight or more powerful factors to weigh against the appellants' family
    life and the injustice that they have not been able  to  maintain  that
    family life in the UK with their parents.

19. In our judgment, the interference with the appellants' family  life  is
    serious and, but for the historic injustice, they would have been  born
    in the UK where their parents would have been settled.  We weigh in the
    balance,  against  this  interference,  the  public  interest  we  have
    identified.  In our judgment, it has not  been  demonstrated  that  the
    public interest outweighs any interference with the family life of  the
    appellants having regard to the historic injustice suffered by them.

20. For these reasons, the appellants have established that the refusal  of
    entry clearance to join their parents in the UK breaches Art 8  of  the
    ECHR.

Decision

21. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  each  of  the
    appellants' appeals involved the making of an error of law.  The First-
    tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.

22. We remake the decision allowing each of the appellants'  appeals  under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.
                                                                      Signed


                                [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             16 October 2017

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have allowed each of the appeals and, in our judgment, it is  appropriate
to make a  fee  award  in  respect  of  any  fee  paid  or  payable  by  the
appellants.





                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             16 October 2017



