
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/02865/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford UT                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17th April 2018                        | On 27th April 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                Harpreet kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICer
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Counsel,
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of India, born 13th August 1985, appeals  with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mensah)
    dismissing her appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) to refuse her entry as the spouse of Ravinder Singh  Rai,
    "the Sponsor", a man settled here.

 2. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal was  brought  on  one  ground
    only, namely that the ECO's refusal contravened Section 6 of the  Human
    Rights Act in that it was  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR right to family life.  The date of the ECO's
    decision is 4th January 2016.

 3. The following facts  were  not  disputed.  The  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    married on 20th March 2015 in an arranged marriage in  India  following
    which the application for entry clearance was  made  on  15th  December
    2015.

 4. In considering the application, the ECO said he was satisfied that  the
    Appellant fulfilled the Immigration Rules with one exception.   He  was
    not satisfied that the marriage between the parties was a  genuine  and
    subsisting one.  He came to this conclusion on the basis that the  only
    evidence of contact between the parties following the marriage, was  in
    the form  of  money  transfer  receipts  and  one  birthday  card.   He
    therefore refused the application under the Immigration Rules.

 5. The ECO then went on to look at Article 8 ECHR, but having decided that
    the Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  not  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage,  concluded  that  there  was  nothing  exceptional   in   the
    application which would warrant consideration outside the Rules.

The FtT Hearing

 6. The Appellant appealed the refusal to the First-tier Tribunal.   Before
    the FtT, the  Sponsor  attended  and  gave  oral  evidence.   The  FtTJ
    recorded that the Sponsor said that he had visited his wife twice since
    the marriage and he supplied photographs evidencing those  visits.   In
    addition, mobile phone records were filed  showing  continuing  contact
    between the parties.

 7. The FtTJ then said the following at [13]:

         "The decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  was  concerned  with
         whether there was a genuine and  subsisting  family  life.   It  is
         clear the decision was correct at the time as there was  so  little
         evidence filed with the application.  I  have  no  jurisdiction  to
         remake the immigration decision and this matters (sic) comes before
         me as a human rights appeal only."

 8. She followed this up at [14] saying:

         "However, the starting point is whether I find there  is  a  family
         life between the sponsor and the appellant.  I have ample  evidence
         from the sponsor and his family showing he has not only had contact
         with his wife but visited her  twice  since  they  married.   I  am
         entirely satisfied they have a genuine and subsisting family life."

 9. The judge then however went on to dismiss the  appeal.   The  Appellant
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me  to
    determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contained  such
    error of law that it requires to be set aside and remade.

UT Hearing

10. I heard brief submissions from Ms  Faryl  for  the  Appellant  and  Mrs
    Pettersen for the Respondent.  At  the  end  of  those  submissions,  I
    indicated that I was satisfied that the FtT's decision contained  error
    of law because the FtTJ's approach  to  the  evidence  before  her  was
    incorrect.  This led her to fail to recognise that she was dealing with
    a human rights appeal in an entry clearance case.  Having made a  clear
    finding that she was satisfied that the parties have, as she termed it,
    a genuine and subsisting family life she should have gone on to  decide
    whether or not the Appellant could be said now to meet the  Immigration
    Rules.  A positive answer to that question would provide  great  weight
    to be attributed to  the  Appellant's  case  when  considering  whether
    Article 8 is met.  This failure I find  amounts  to  a  material  error
    requiring the FtT's decision to be set aside.

11. Having informed the parties that the FtTJ's decision was set aside  and
    on being told that there was no further evidence to be  served,  I  was
    satisfied that I was in a position to remake the decision.  I preserved
    the finding that the parties have a genuine and subsisting family life.

12. The starting point in this matter is whether  the  Appellant  could  be
    found to fulfil the Immigration Rules.  What is required in this appeal
    is an evaluation of the post-decision evidence referenced  by  the  two
    visits made by the Sponsor to the Appellant  together  with  the  phone
    records showing continuing contact.

13. As this appeal is an Article 8 appeal against a decision refusing entry
    clearance, Section 85A(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 applies such that:

         "The Tribunal may consider only the circumstances  appertaining  at
         the time of the decision."

    Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act says the Tribunal may:

         "Consider evidence about any matter which it thinks relevant to the
         substance of the decision,  including  evidence  which  concerns  a
         matter arising after the date of the decision."

14. Subsequently obtained evidence,  including  evidence  of  post-decision
    events is admissible,  providing  that  it  relates  to  "circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the decision."  As the IAT pointed  out  in
    DR Morocco, [2005] UKIAT 00038 it is on that  basis  that  evidence  of
    "intervening devotion" between the date  of  decision  and  hearing  is
    admissible as it reflects on the intention of the party in  a  marriage
    case at the date of the decision.

15. I find that the evidence of intervening devotion sheds a light  on  the
    relationship between the parties to the  marriage  and  enables  me  to
    conclude that the parties have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.
    This  then  leads  me  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant  fulfils  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, there being no other matters  in
    issue under the Rules.

16. The fact that the Appellant is able to fulfil the Rules must rank as  a
    weighty  factor  in  determining  whether  the  interference  with  the
    Appellant's human rights is a proportionate  one.   There  was  nothing
    further of note set out by the ECO on why  the  decision  was  refused.
    The refusal was solely on the basis of the genuineness and  subsistence
    of the marriage.  Accordingly I am satisfied that the  refusal  amounts
    to a disproportionate interference with the Appellant's  and  Sponsor's
    Article 8 ECHR rights.   I  remake  FtTJ's  decision  by  allowing  the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  19th  July  2017  is
set aside for legal error.  I remake the  decision  under  Article  8  ECHR.
The appeal of Harpreet Kaur against the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  refusal
to grant her entry  clearance  as  the  spouse  of  Ravinder  Singh  Rai  is
allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     25 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award. I was not asked to make one.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     25 April 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
