
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02054/2019
                                                               HU/02036/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision promulgated                 |
|On 11 August 2020 via Skype          |On 19 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                AMINAT SALIU
                                HIMAMAT SALIU
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UK VISA SECTION
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Frost instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. On 21 August 2019 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lloyd  ('the  Judge')
        dismissed the appellants' appeals on human rights  grounds  against
        the refusal of an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) to grant them leave
        to enter the United Kingdom to enable them to join their mother  in
        the United Kingdom.
     2. Permission to appeal was initially refused by another judge of  the
        First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by a judge
        of the Upper Tribunal on the basis it is said the Judge  failed  to
        have regard proper regard to the findings of another  judge,  Judge
        Osbourne, in the successful appeal of the appellants sponsor.



Background


     3. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born on 5 September 1997 and
        17 September 1999, respectively. They applied for  leave  to  enter
        the United Kingdom to join their mother who is  their  sponsor.  As
        both appellants are over 18 years  of  age  they  cannot  meet  the
        requirements of paragraph 352D of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  so
        relied upon an ability to demonstrate exceptional circumstances  or
        compassionate factors which justified a grant of leave outside  the
        Rules.
     4. The Sponsor was  granted  refugee  status  in  the  United  Kingdom
        following a successful  appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Osborne on 30 October 2017. The  Judge  notes  in  her  appeal  the
        Sponsor claimed she was forced to leave Nigeria in 2012 as a result
        of long-term domestic abuse perpetrated against her by her husband.
        The Sponsor took her two youngest children with her  but  left  the
        two elder  children,  the  appellants',  with  her  husband.  Judge
        Osborne accepted her account of domestic  abuse  was  credible  and
        that she had been trafficked out of Nigeria.
     5. The Judge records the issues in this appeal  from  [8]  noting  the
        exceptional circumstances relied upon by the appellants which were:


        a) their immediate family, including siblings under 18, qualify for
           family reunion and have already travelled to the UK
        b) they will be left alone in a dangerous situation.
        c) They are dependent on immediate family in the country of  origin
           and not leading an independent life.
        d) There are no other relatives to turn to and they would therefore
           have no means of support and would likely  become  destitute  if
           they remained in Nigeria.


     6. Having had the benefit of not only  the  documentary  evidence  but
        also seeing and hearing the Sponsor  give  oral  evidence  together
        with that of a Mr Bakari the Judge sets out his  findings  of  fact
        from [28] of the decision under challenge.
     7. Those findings can be summarised in the following terms:


           i. The evidence given  by  the  Sponsor,  her  uncle  Mr  Bakare
              together with the letter from Mrs Olasunbo was  not  credible
              and contained a contrived account of the  acute  mistreatment
              of the appellants in Nigeria as  a  means  of  supporting  an
              'outside the rules' application [28].
          ii. The Judge did not believe  the  appellants  would  have  been
              placed in the care of the Sponsor's ex-husband and his family
              if what the Sponsor was saying was true as  the  prospect  of
              mistreatment must have been known  to  the  Sponsor  at  that
              time. [29].
         iii. If the Sponsor was aware that the consequence of leaving  the
              appellants, who  at  that  time  were  children,  would  have
              resulted in them being  exposed  to  abusive  treatment,  the
              Sponsor would never have left them in her ex-husband's  care.
              If the appellant had  been  in  the  dire  circumstances  the
              Sponsor  suggests  she  would  have  taken  action  to   make
              alternative arrangements for them in Nigeria long before  her
              asylum claim was granted and the subsequent application  made
              outside the Rules [29].
          iv. The fact the applications were left until the appellants were
              over 18 is indicative of the fact the circumstances were  not
              treated with any urgency at all [30].
           v.  To  the  relevant  civil  standard  the  Judge   finds   the
              appellant's former husband as being in agreement  that  their
              daughters shall join their mother in the United Kingdom.  The
              Judge did not believe the evidence given by the Sponsor  that
              her ex-husband had made  repeated  telephone  calls  to  them
              putting them under pressure to return to him, as if they were
              so afraid of him they would not have answered his  call.  The
              scenario that Mrs Olasunbo had invited them to  answer  their
              father's calls was found not to be believable [31].
          vi. The Judge did not accept the appellants are in  circumstances
              of destitution and vulnerability in Nigeria [32].
         vii. The Judge does not dispute  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
              Osborne found the Sponsor credible in her asylum claim and to
              have suffered prolonged abuse by her husband, but it was  not
              found axiomatic that the appellant's claims to have  suffered
              abuse from their father and paternal  grandmother  are  true.
              The Judge finds this appears to be the starting point of  the
              proposition which is made on appeal in  the  context  of  the
              appellants application to join their mother in the UK outside
              the immigration rules [34].
        viii. The Judge does not find objective evidence  provided  by  the
              appellant's representative compatible with the  findings  the
              Judge had made on the evidence presented by the  sponsor  and
              other witnesses [35].
          ix. The appellants own evidence in a statement of  25  June  2019
              was they had left  their  father's  house  because  of  their
              grandmother as their father was always  travelling  away  and
              their grandmother was head of the household. The Judge  finds
              the level of abuse suggested to have been inflicted  on  them
              by the grandmother not corroborated by  anything  before  the
              First-tier Tribunal. The Judge does not accept there  is  any
              corroborated  evidence   that   their   father   gave   their
              grandmother money which was intended for  their  support  but
              which was not used  for  that  purpose.  There  was  also  no
              corroboration to support the claim their  father  would  flog
              them when they he returned home  because  of  accusations  by
              their grandmother that they had insulted  her  and  said  bad
              things to her [36].
           x. The Judge accepts it is a matter of judicial record that  the
              sponsor and her former husband had a toxic  relationship  and
              the reasons for  its  breakdown  and  notes  the  appellant's
              appeal is predicated  on  the  assumption  that  because  the
              relationship between the Sponsor and  appellants  father  was
              toxic so must be their relationship with their father and  in
              turn their  grandmother.  The  Judge  does  not  accept  this
              proposition and did not accept that the  country  information
              recording that domestic violence in Nigeria cannot be defined
              exclusively  to  be  violence  between   husband   and   wife
              automatically applied to the present appeal as that  was  not
              one that was supported by  the  evidence  placed  before  the
              Judge [37].
          xi. The  Judge  notes  reference  to  an  expert  report  of  Mrs
              Thullesen which was relied on by the Sponsor  in  her  asylum
              appeal.  The  author   is   said   to   be   an   expert   in
              psychotherapeutic intervention with victims  of  trafficking.
              The Judge does not find the appellants reliance  placed  upon
              the report in the context referred to in the citation set out
              at [38] of his decision is sustainable for  the  purposes  of
              this appeal [39].
         xii. The Judge does not accept the appellants are financially  and
              emotionally  dependent  upon  the   Sponsor,   rejected   the
              submission the appellants were living  on  borrowed  time  in
              their  current  accommodation,  it  was  not   accepted   the
              appellants cannot safely or reasonably returned to  the  care
              of their father, it was noted both appellants are adults, and
              the Judge finds the  Sponsor  was  deliberately  vague  about
              their level of educational qualifications  for  if  they  had
              been educated to at least high school level it  was  probable
              that they would have obtained some basic qualifications  that
              would fit them for employment and therefore  regular  earning
              in Nigeria [40].
        xiii. The Judge finds the Sponsor's brother lives  in  Nigeria  but
              there is no effective corroboration of the claim the  brother
              was forced to leave Ibadan due to threats from the  Sponsor's
              former husband [41].
         xiv. The Judge does not accept the refusal of the application will
              constitute   a   disproportionate   interference   with   the
              appellant's article 8 rights [42].
          xv. The facts do not engage paragraph  352D  of  the  Immigration
              Rules [44].
         xvi. On the  totality  of  the  evidence  it  is  not  a  case  of
              exceptional circumstances and the evidence did not support  a
              finding that Article 8 is engaged; for the reasons set out by
              the Judge in the decision as a whole [45].




Grounds and submissions



     8. The appellant asserted the Judge  erred  in  law  relying  on  four
        grounds.
     9. Ground one asserts a failure to take adequate account  of  relevant
        evidence, asserting  the  credibility  findings  of  Judge  Osborne
        constitute substantive corroboration of the appellant's claims  yet
        there was no evidence the Judge treated them as such.  The  grounds
        assert this treatment perpetrated by the appellants father is  what
        is corroborated in  the  determination  of  Judge  Osborne  in  the
        context of the Sponsor's asylum claim.  This  grounds  asserts  the
        Judge downplayed the history of sexual and physical abuse  suffered
        by the Sponsor. The finding of the Judge the Sponsor would have not
        left the children with her ex-husband is said  to  be  infected  by
        arguable error as Judge Osborne already found the  sponsor's  claim
        to be credible with regard to domestic  abuse  perpetrated  against
        her which is relevant to the Sponsors evidence that she was  forced
        to leave the appellants behind when she fled with her  two  younger
        children due to lack of space at her initial  refuge.  It  is  said
        there was never a suggestion this was her choice to place  them  in
        the care of their father.  The  grounds  assert  that  against  the
        domestic background was not only the Sponsor's own history of abuse
        but other factors, namely the absence of the appellant's father for
        long periods of work which meant it was plausible and credible that
        the appellants should gradually become a target of serious domestic
        abuse. The grounds assert there was no suggestion that Mr  Bakare's
        evidence in relation to the central issue of alleged domestic abuse
        suffered by the appellants was ambiguous and inconsistent and  that
        the Judge's assessment fails to give due regard to Judge  Osborne's
        earlier findings that this  was  an  honest  witness.  The  grounds
        assert the Judge only paid "lip service" to the  previous  relevant
        findings and failed to take previous  findings  into  account  that
        corroborated the plausibility and  credibility  of  the  appellants
        claims, and as such failed to take the required  holistic  approach
        when evaluating the appellant's human rights claim.
    10. Ground 2 asserts a failure to give reason/speculative reasoning  as
        asserted at [37] in which the Judge finds the evidence before  that
        Tribunal tended to show that the UNICEF  2015  report  on  domestic
        violence was not applicable to the present case.  It  is  said  the
        implied reasoning based on an argument in the determination is that
        Judge Osborne's findings are to be  relativised  to  the  point  of
        irrelevance. It is asserted the  Judge's  reasoning  is  materially
        defective. The grounds also assert the Judge gives  no  reason  for
        finding at [39] that reliance upon a key aspect was "an  evidential
        step too far". It is also asserted the findings in relation to  the
        telephone calls said to have been made by  the  appellant's  father
        are speculative with no reasons being given for why that was not  a
        believable scenario. It is also asserted  the  telephone  was  only
        answered on one occasion contrary to the Judge's findings at [31].
    11. Ground 3 asserts the Judge  failed  to  give  anxious  scrutiny  to
        factors telling in the appellant's favour.
    12. Ground 4 asserts a misdirection  on  the  evidence  leading  to  an
        unlawful finding that Article 8 ECHR is not engaged as it  is  said
        that the approach to the evidence failed to give proper  regard  to
        the findings of Judge Osborne in the previous determination of  the
        mothers protection claim and that as a recognised refugee  who  was
        forced by circumstances to leave  behind  her  two  older  children
        article 8 is plainly engaged and that continued enforced separation
        of  the  appellants  from  their  mother  is   a   disproportionate
        interference with article 8.



Error of law


    13. Mr Frost's oral submissions  relied  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal
        summarised above, with additional reference to the evidence  of  Mr
        Bakare, an assertion there was no conspiracy to bring the  children
        over, and the Judge failed to  consider  the  history  of  domestic
        violence and the account of what Mr Bakare had seen on a  visit  to
        Nigeria.
    14. Mrs Pettersen was invited to respond in which she asserted [22]  in
        relation to the submissions and  comments  concerning  Mr  Bakare's
        evidence answered this criticism, in which the Judge writes:


          22. Mr Bakare's evidence has been ambiguous and inconsistent.  In
             a post-hearing written submission of 15 August 2019,  from  Mr
             Frost, of Counsel, and for which I had given no formal  leave,
             Mr Frost observed that during the hearing Mr Bakare appears to
             have "one or two memory lapses". He was indeed very unsure  in
             his  recall  of  quite  significant  events  relevant  to  the
             Appellants' cases. Mr Bakare remarked during his evidence that
             "at his age" he found it difficult to remember details. Age is
             of course relative. Mr Frost somewhat belatedly  submits  that
             any lapses ought not to undermine Mr Bakare's or  the  Sponsor
             Ms Saliu's, overall  credibility.  In  particular,  Mr  Bakari
             stated in evidence that he first met Ms Saliu  in  the  UK  in
             2016, whereas Ms Saliu stated that that it was 2014. Mr  Frost
             says  that  he  should  have  pointed  the  Tribunal  to   the
             letter/character reference from Mr Bakare  dated  3  September
             2014 (at AB/A210), showing  that  they  did  indeed  establish
             contact however, the flaws in Mr Bakare's  evidence  are  more
             troublesome to credibility than that.


      15. The Judge specifically deals  with  Mr  Bakare  at  [24]  in  the
          following terms:


          24.     I do not believe that Mr Bakare's evidence is reliable. I
             do not dispute that he has visited Nigeria on a fairly regular
             basis, and that on his last visit, in June/July 2019, he  went
             to the home of Mrs Olasunbo where the Appellants were staying.
             On a previous occasion in 2018, he met the girls at a hotel in
             Lagos. His recall of his visits to Nigeria and  meetings  with
             the Appellants are very vague. He  cannot  remember  with  any
             accuracy what gifts he delivered to  them  from  the  Sponsor,
             although she purports to give evidence of what she had  handed
             to her uncle to take to Nigeria. In  response  to  a  question
             about whether Mr Bakare had ever taken gifts  to  Nigeria  for
             the sisters from their mother, Mr Bakare stated  that  on  one
             visit he took a mobile phone. When Mrs  Saliu  was  questioned
             earlier in the hearing, she had not mentioned this phone. I am
             not prepared to admit in evidence  "retrospectively"  what  Mr
             Bakare is  now  said  (by  Mr  Frost)  to  have  recalled,  in
             conference after the hearing even if it assisted - which I  do
             not believe it does. Namely, that it was  in  fact  Mr  Bakare
             himself who had taken the initiative to purchase  this  phone.
             The Sponsor had nothing directly to do with it. I  acknowledge
             that both mentioned the gift  of  some  clothes  on  a  recent
             visit.


      16. Even if Mr Bakare was  found  by  Judge  Osborne  to  have  given
          credible and reliable evidence when that appeal was heard and the
          decision promulgated on 30 October 2017 that did not prevent  the
          Judge from making his own assessment of the credibility  of  that
          witness at the hearing on 15 August 2019. No legal error material
          to the Judge's findings in relation to the  reliability  of  this
          witness has been made out.
      17. There is no merit in the submission made by  Mr  Frost  that  the
          Judge's approach this appeal from the start was on the  basis  of
          there being a conspiracy between the sponsor and the witnesses to
          try and secure the appellants entry to the United Kingdom,  which
          is suggestive of the Judge not having an open mind to the  merits
          of the appeal. The Judge was arguably entitled to come to such  a
          conclusion  if  that  was  one  reasonably  open  to  him  having
          considered the  evidence  in  the  round  and  balancing  up  the
          competing interests.
      18. There is also no merit in the argument  that  the  Judge  somehow
          attempted to devalue the sponsors experiences at the hands of her
          ex-husband in Nigeria when he describes the sponsor  having  been
          involved in a toxic relationship. Mr Frost's suggestion that this
          grossly undervalued the sponsors experiences is not made out. The
          Judge was not required to set out findings in  relation  to  each
          and every aspect of the evidence and would have  been  criticised
          as he set out verbatim paragraphs of Judge Osborne's decision  in
          which the positive findings were made in relation to the sponsors
          experiences at the hands of her ex-husband in Nigeria and of  her
          being trafficked the  United  Kingdom.  A  toxic  relationship  a
          relationship characterised by behaviour on the part of the  toxic
          partner that can be emotionally and, not infrequently, physically
          damaging to their partner.  The Judge's use of  the  term  "toxic
          relationship"  appears  to  accurately  reflect   the   behaviour
          experienced  by  the  sponsor  which  was  both  controlling  and
          violent. No material legal error is made out on this basis.
      19. At [29] Judge finds:


          I do not believe that the Appellants would have  been  placed  in
          the care of the Sponsors ex-husband and his family, including his
          mother. If what the Sponsor says were true, the prospect  of  the
          mistreatment must have been known to the sponsor at the  time.  I
          conclude that the circumstances of her leaving her former husband
          and fleeing to the UK were such that if she had thought that  his
          abusive treatment would extend to his  two  daughters  she  would
          never have left them in his care; and more especially for so long
          a time. It is in my view no explanation for the  Sponsor  to  say
          that she did not think that the process of her securing asylum in
          the UK would take so long. If the Appellants had been in the dire
          circumstances which she suggests, or if she had even feared  that
          might happen, she would and  could  have  taken  action  to  make
          alternative arrangements for them  in  Nigeria  long  before  her
          asylum was granted,  and  the  subsequent  application  was  made
          outside the rules.


      20. The Judge is criticised for this finding on the  basis  that  the
          material considered by Judge Osborne indicated  the  Sponsor  had
          been subjected to ill-treatment and domestic  abuse  and  had  to
          flee for her own safety and was unable  to  take  the  appellants
          with her. Even if that is so that does not explain error  in  the
          Judge finding that if the  sponsor  was  aware  of  ill-treatment
          being suffered by the children she  did  nothing  to  remove  the
          children from that environment and to arrange alternative  carers
          for them, as she did subsequently. As noted by Mrs Pettersen when
          the application was made for leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom
          for the purposes of settlement on 17  May  2018,  the  appellants
          were still living with their father  with  regular  contact  with
          their mother. They only moved to their current address  following
          the refusal by the ECO. The  visa  applications  show  both  have
          access to a mobile phone and Gmail accounts too. The  application
          form at Part 8  also  asks  for  an  applicant  to  set  out  any
          additional information they wish to be considered as part of  the
          application being relied upon the application  yet  there  is  no
          reference any incidents of violence or abusive  treatment  having
          been suffered by either applicant.
      21. In the refusal notice the ECO writes :


          You have provided a letter from Migrant Legal Project,  who  have
          made representations on your behalf, stating  the  exceptions  do
          apply to your circumstances. However, I am not satisfied that you
          have provided adequate evidence to demonstrate this is the case.


          I understand you to remain living with your father who I  believe
          you have lived  with  since  birth.  Whilst  I  accept  that  the
          circumstances of your mother's departure  from  Nigeria  and  her
          subsequent claim for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
          her relationship with your father, there is  nothing  to  suggest
          you are in any danger from him. Your mother left you in his  care
          when she departed Nigeria and has  maintained  contact  with  you
          since then. I am therefore not satisfied you are in  a  dangerous
          situation in Nigeria.


          You state you remain dependent on immediate family  members.  You
          live with your father  and  are  financially  supported  by  your
          mother. You have not provided any evidence to suggest  that  this
          arrangement cannot continue or that should this change you  would
          be unable to find paid work  and  live  independently  from  your
          father. Therefore I am not  satisfied  you  would  likely  become
          destitute on your own or that you have  no  means  of  supporting
          yourself.


      22. The  appellants  were  granted  a  right  of  appeal  which  they
          exercised. The grounds of appeal were considered by  a  reviewing
          Entry  Clearance  Manager  (ECM),  in  accordance   with   normal
          procedure, who wrote:


          Based on the refusal  notice  and  the  additional  documentation
          submitted, I am satisfied the original  decision  to  refuse  was
          correct. The decision is therefore in accordance with the law and
          the  Immigration  Rules  and  I  am  not  prepared  to   exercise
          discretion in the appellant's case.


          The evidence submitted with  the  appeal  does  not  address  the
          issues raised in the reasons for refusal  letter.  The  appellant
          was 20 years old at the time of application  and  therefore  does
          not meet the requirements of the rule.


          It is noted the appellant has been  living  with  her  father  in
          Nigeria since birth. No suggestion has been made as to  why  with
          the financial assistance from her mother,  the  appellant  cannot
          continue to reside in Nigeria. Therefore the appellant  does  not
          qualify outside of the Rules.


          I have considered, under paragraphs  GEN  3.1.  and  GEN  3.2  of
          Appendix  FM  as  applicable,  whether  there   are   exceptional
          circumstances in the appellant's case which could or would render
          refusal of breach of Article 8 of the ECHR because  it  could  or
          would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences   for   the
          appellant  or  the  appellant's  family.   In   completing   this
          assessment I have also taken in to account, under  paragraph  GEN
          3.3 of Appendix FM, the best interests of any relevant child as a
          primary consideration. Following a  thorough  assessment  of  the
          appeal I am satisfied that there is no basis for such a claim.


      23. Those reasons apply to both appellants who were over the  age  of
          18 at the date of the applications.
      24. Notwithstanding the lack of evidence having been recorded by both
          the ECO and ECM in relation to the appellants claims the  Judge's
          finding is that same situation existed  when  he  considered  the
          evidence made available.
      25. The Judge was clearly not satisfied the appellants had  made  out
          their claim. The specific claim by the appellants that  they  are
          in circumstances of destitution and vulnerability in Nigeria  was
          specifically rejected by the Judge at [32].
      26. The Judge was not oblivious to the findings of Judge  Osborne  as
          noted at [34].
      27. Mrs Pettersen submitted that if the alleged risk to the  children
          was as claimed it was reasonable to have expected the sponsor  to
          have referred to the same in her asylum claim in  2017,  yet  she
          did not.
      28. Mr Frost, in his reply, submitted that even if there was  a  lack
          of evidence of certain issues before the Judge  the  finding  and
          evidence from the sponsors case  should  have  been  accepted  as
          having 'plugged the gap' and that, accordingly, the only decision
          open to the Judge was to have allowed the appeals.
      29. The decision of Judge Osborne was a decision of a relative not of
          the appellants.  The  Devaseelan  principles,  as  modified,  are
          relevant. It is not made out the Judge did not  take  this  as  a
          starting point but the same is not determinative as  no  findings
          were made in relation to these  appellants  in  the  decision  of
          Judge Osborne which required the Judge to assess the evidence  he
          received and make findings he considered were open to him on  the
          evidence. This is not a case  in  which  the  findings  of  Judge
          Osbourne are conclusive so far as the appellants  are  concerned.
          The ECO note lack of evidence of ill treatment  by  their  father
          and grandmother, yet this was not remedied before the Judge.
      30. The findings are adequately reasoned, and it has not  been  shown
          are outside the range of findings open the Judge on the evidence.


      31. The finding in relation to Article 8 has not been shown to be one
          not available to the Judge on the evidence either. Whether family
          life recognised by Article 8 exists is a  question  of  fact.  No
          material legal error arises in  the  finding  there  will  be  no
          breach of Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

    32. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    33. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed...
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 13 August 2020












