
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/02050/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated                      |
|On 15th January 2018                      |On 8th February 2018             |
|Decision & Reasons given orally at        |                                 |
|the hearing                               |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                             Mr Ali Akbar Zilani
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Childs, Counsel, instructed by D J Webb & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The only Appellant in this appeal is Mr Ali Akbar Zilani.  His  appeal
    was originally linked at the First-tier  Tribunal  with  those  of  Mrs
    Sultana Begum, appeal  number  HU/02036/2015,  and  Mr  Tanbir  Hasnat,
    appeal number HU/02053/2015.  Mrs Begum's and Mr Hasnat's appeals  were
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.  There was never an appeal  against
    their decisions.  Their appeals remain allowed, and indeed, I have been
    able to see that Mr Hasnat and Mrs Begum were granted  entry  clearance
    because they are here at the Tribunal hearing before me  this  morning.
    Therefore, as I say, the only appeal is that of Mr  Zilani.  The  cause
    list which had the appeals of the Mr Hasnat and Mrs Begum  for  today's
    hearing is therefore incorrect.

2.    Mr Zilani is a son of Mrs Begum.  He was just over the age of 18  when
    he had applied for entry clearance.   The  judge,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Talbot, considered his appeal along with the other two Appellants
    at a hearing on 23rd February 2017 and he dismissed Mr Zilani's appeal.

3.    Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
    granted by the Upper Tribunal and  it  was  said  when  permission  was
    granted that,

         "The grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  are  essentially  an
         assertion that the First-tier Tribunal decision is perverse in  the
         light of the social worker's report and the acceptance by the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge of that report and that there  is  family  life
         between the Appellant and his younger brother.  A  challenge  based
         on perversity is a high threshold but it is just arguable  in  this
         case."


4.    The grounds seeking permission  were  detailed.  In  relation  to  the
    social worker's report it said at paragraph 9:

         "The IJ at paragraph 13 has not criticised the report of Mr  Ahmed;
         in fact, the IJ appears to have accepted the findings of the social
         worker's report.  It is therefore unclear as  to  why  the  IJ  has
         departed  from  the  evidence  of  the  social  worker   that   the
         relationship could not  be  maintained  through  modern  electronic
         means, albeit the finding has been made  implicitly.   Contrary  to
         the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish, it must be  the
         case that the IJ has failed to take  full  account  of  the  social
         worker's report.  The IJ has failed to give adequate reasons for  a
         finding on a material matter to the outcome or  otherwise  made  an
         irrational  finding  that  departed  from  the   expert   evidence.
         Alternatively, the IJ had made a mistake as to this fact, which has
         resulted in unfairness to the Appellant."

5.    In her written and oral submissions today, Ms Childs on behalf of  the
    Appellant essentially points out two aspects.  She  says  that  it  was
    paramount for the judge to consider the emotional bond and relationship
    between the two brothers and that the judge had not referred to the key
    parts of  the  social  worker's  report  when  making  findings  as  to
    proportionality.

6.    Mr Duffy in his brief but highly relevant submissions said  that  when
    permission to appeal was granted it was noted that it was on the  basis
    of a perversity challenge.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
    rejected the social worker's report but  the  judge  had  explained  at
    paragraph 24 of his decision as to why it would not be disproportionate
    for the decision to be made.  The same paragraph also went  on  to  say
    how they could care for the Appellant's brother in the United  Kingdom.
    It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  alive  to  the
    facts of the case.  Ultimately this was a decision which the  Appellant
    does not like.  The decision was for the judge alone.   Another  judge,
    indeed, many other judges may have come to  a  different  decision  but
    that does not mean that there is a material error of law.

7.     In assessing the rival  submissions  it  is  necessary  to  refer  to
    paragraph 24 of the judge's decision in  a  little  more  detail.   The
    judge said:

         "...  It is also referred to in  the  social  worker's  report.   I
         accept that the relationship between the brothers  is  closer  than
         would generally be the case because of the disabilities  of  Tanbir
         and the involvement of Ali in supporting his brother including with
         regard to intimate physical  matters  such  as  dressing,  feeding,
         washing and toileting.  I accept  that  his  role  is  particularly
         important in the physically more onerous matters  such  as  lifting
         Tanbir.  It is arguable that for  these  reasons  the  relationship
         between the two brothers constitutes Article 8 family life  despite
         the fact that Ali is over 18 (and Tanbir was also over  18  by  the
         date of decision).  The issue is whether the Respondent's decision,
         insofar as it would result in the separation of the brothers, would
         lead to such unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  as  to  render  it
         disproportionate.  I am not persuaded that the consequences for Ali
         could meet this test.  He may be able to maintain the  relationship
         with his brother and his mother in  some  form  through  electronic
         means and will  no  doubt  be  capable  of  adjusting  to  the  new
         situation, as he gets on with his life in Bangladesh as  a  healthy
         young adult.  The consequences for  Tanbir  may  be  more  serious.
         However, in place of the company and support  of  his  brother,  he
         will be able to enjoy the relationship with and  support  from  his
         father and extended family members in the UK.  Taking into  account
         all the evidence before me, I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  are
         sufficiently compelling or exceptional  circumstances  to  meet  an
         Article 8 claim outside the ambit of the Immigration Rules."


8.    In my judgment, having accepted the social worker's report and  having
    noted the extensive relationship between the brothers  (which  included
    not only the physical nature  of  the  assistance  that  the  Appellant
    provided to Tanbir but also the emotional bond that they had),  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to explain how the extended family members  or
    others here in the  UK  would  have  been  able  to  assist  with  that
    emotional bond and that emotional relationship.   The  social  worker's
    report explained that it was not  possible  to  use  modern  electronic
    means  to  assist  with  that  emotional  bond  because   of   Tanbir's
    disabilities.

9.    In my judgment, there is therefore an error of law which is  material.
    The judge accepted that there was family life.  The judge accepted that
    there was the social worker's report saying what  it  did  following  a
    specific visit to the family in Bangladesh and thereby it was incumbent
    upon the judge to explain how  it  was  that  this  relationship  would
    continue between the two brothers from such a distance.

10.   I turn to consider what the appropriate course might  be  now  that  I
    have found there to be an error of law, namely whether there should  be
    a continuation hearing today or whether that should be on  a  different
    occasion and the location of it of any such hearing.   In my  judgment,
    because of the relatively  unusual  circumstances  of  the  Appellant's
    brother and mother having been granted entry clearance and because they
    are now here in the UK and because ultimately  this  is  an  Article  8
    claim the Appellant should be given  the  opportunity  to  present  any
    further evidence that he seeks to rely upon.

11.   I have considered whether the  appropriate  course  for  that  further
    hearing should be here at the Upper Tribunal or the First-tier Tribunal
    and, in my  judgment,  the  appropriate  venue  is  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal will give further directions  as  it
    considers but the only direction I make is that the matter is not to be
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot.  The hearing will take place
    at Taylor House. The only issue will be the matters in respect of  this
    Appellant. The findings of the Judge that  he  could  continue  in  his
    private and family life from abroad are set aside.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained an error of law.
There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed: A Mahmood                            Date; 15 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

