
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02451/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th October 2018                         |On 17th October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RIABIAZ [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT  MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Khan, instructed by Khokhar Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, I shall refer  to
    the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen
    of Iran born on 2 January 1990.  His  appeal  against  deportation  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson on 18 June 2018.

2.   The Secretary of State appealed on the ground that the judge failed  to
    identify why it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  Appellant's  British
    citizen partner and child to remain in  UK  without  him  following  AJ
    (Zimbabwe)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1012.  The  judge  relied  only  on  the
    separation of  the  Appellant  from  his  partner  and  child  from  an
    emotional perspective. The Appellant's low-risk of re-offending was not
    relevant in this respect.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic  on  the
    grounds that it was arguable that the  judge  failed  to  identify  the
    basis upon which he concluded that it was unduly harsh to separate  the
    Appellant from his partner  and  child  and  misdirected  himself  when
    assessing the public interest.

4.   Mr Bramble relied on the grounds and submitted that the judge  had  not
    properly dealt with the issue of 'unduly harsh'. The test  was  a  high
    one and the impact on the Appellant's child did not reach the  required
    level. The judge failed to identify factors which took the  case  above
    the ordinary. The low-risk of  re-offending  did  not  impact  on  this
    situation. The judge failed to identify the factors  which  lead  to  a
    finding that  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  have  unduly  harsh
    consequences over and above separation.

5.   Mr Khan submitted that the Appellant was not  present  at  the  hearing
    which proceeded on submissions only. The  facts  were  agreed  and  the
    decision was a balanced one. The Appellant's  criminality  was  at  the
    lower end of the scale and the judge correctly attached less weight  to
    the public interest. The Appellant came to the UK as  an  unaccompanied
    minor seeking asylum and had been living in the UK for 13 years. He had
    been working and was integrated. He had a genuine relationship with his
    British citizen partner and child. Prior to his  entry  to  the  UK  he
    lived in a refugee camp in Iraqi Kurdistan. The judge was  entitled  to
    come to the decision he did on the information before him.

6.   The judge found that the Appellant had been in a relationship with  his
    British citizen partner since January 2016 and his son was born  on  12
    July 2017. On 3 November 2017 the  Appellant  was  sentenced  to  eight
    months' imprisonment for assault occasioning  actual  bodily  harm,  in
    which he repeatedly attacked the victim with a weapon. The  Appellant's
    actions were out of character, he had shown remorse and there was a low
    risk of re-offending. The child's best interests were for the Appellant
    to remain in the UK. He was a joint carer and financial  provider.  His
    deportation would result in his partner having to bring up their son as
    a single parent and his son would lose daily contact  with  his  father
    which would be detrimental in his formative years.

7.   I find that the  judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  identify  some
    additional feature, other than separation,  affecting  the  nature  and
    quality of the relationship between the Appellant and his  partner  and
    child. On the facts found by the judge the effect  of  the  Appellant's
    deportation on his partner and child would not result in  unduly  harsh
    consequences  over  and  above  separation.  Maintaining  a  close  and
    immediate relationship with a British citizen partner and  child  would
    not outweigh the public interest in the normal course of events. I find
    that the judge  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the  effect  of  the
    Appellant's deportation on his partner and child would be unduly harsh.
    I set aside this finding and the judge's decision to allow the  appeal.
    The judge's findings at paragraphs 43 to 66 are preserved.

8.   The following findings are  preserved:  The  Appellant  was  a  foreign
    criminal  under  section  117D(2)(c)(ii)  and  he  could  not   satisfy
    paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules. The Appellant was in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship with his British citizen partner and  child
    and it would be unduly harsh for them to  go  to  Iran.  The  issue  is
    whether the effect of the Appellant's deportation on  his  partner  and
    child would be unduly harsh.

9.   The  Appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal because he was unwell. There was insufficient medical evidence
    before the judge and an application for  an  adjournment  was  properly
    refused. The Appellant has provided medical evidence to  show  that  he
    had surgery on his back on 27 May 2018. The hearing took  place  on  14
    May 2018. I am satisfied that the Applicant did not have an opportunity
    to put his case before the First-tier Tribunal and that the  nature  of
    the judicial fact finding  is  such  that,  in  the  interests  of  the
    overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit the case.

10.  I have decided  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of 25 September 2012 that the decision dated  18  June  2018
    should be set aside and the appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.




                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  The Tribunal is directed pursuant to section 12(3)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal at  a  hearing
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Monson.

(iii)    The Appellant  to  file  and  serve,  on  the  Respondent  and  the
    Tribunal,  any  further  evidence  and  submissions,  including  expert
    evidence, at least 14 days before the hearing.

(iv) The appeal to be listed, for two hours, before  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge  at  Taylor  House,  London  on  the  first  available  date.  No
    interpreter is required.


           J Frances


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
