
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/02063/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by "Microsoft Teams"           |Issued on                            |
|on 23 June 2021                      |On 30 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               RAJA AJAZ KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer, instructed by NK Law Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 31 December 1989.

 2. The facts of the case are not in dispute.  The appellant came to the UK
    as a visitor in 2011; was served with papers as  an  overstayer  on  11
    December 2012; failed to comply with reporting conditions, both  before
    and after being encountered in  a  routine  search  in  February  2015;
    married his UK citizen wife in an Islamic ceremony on 21 December 2017,
    and legally on 2 April 2019; voluntarily left  the  UK  on  4  December
    2019; and applied to  re-enter  on  12  December  2019,  based  on  the
    marriage.

 3. The ECO refused the application on 14 January  2020,  under  paragraphs
    320 (11) and EC-P.1.1 (c)  of  section  S-EC  of  appendix  FM  of  the
    immigration rules, because the appellant had contrived in a significant
    way to frustrate the intentions of the rules; in light of  his  conduct
    and character it was undesirable to issue him with entry clearance; and
    the decision-maker, having referred to an Entry Clearance Manager,  was
    not prepared to exercise discretion in his favour.

 4. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  His grounds relied upon  PS  [2010]
    UKUT 440 on  the  public  interest  in  encouraging  regularisation  of
    status,  and  referred  to  the  SSHD's  guidance  to  decision-makers,
    although without identifying the guidance.

 5. FtT Judge  Thorne  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 12 February 2021.  At [55] the FtT itemised  matters  in
    the proportionality balance, ending at (l), under reference to PS, with
    his voluntary return, in his favour.  At [56 - 57] the  FtT  found  the
    favourable factors to be outweighed by "the strong public  interest  in
    maintaining fair and effective immigration control".

 6. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to appeal to the UT, on
    grounds entitled (1)  "inadequate  reasoning,  entitlement  to  succeed
    under the rules" and (2) "misdirection in respect of article 8".

 7. On 22 March 2021 FtT Judge Welsh granted permission.

 8. Mr Greer applied to amend by adding ground (3), "misdirection  in  law:
    The immigration rules", as follows:

         "It is the Appellant's submission (at Ground 1) that  the  FTT  has
         failed to consider whether the decision to  exclude  the  Appellant
         was a proper exercise of  the  Respondent's  discretion  under  the
         rules and otherwise given inadequate  reasons  for  the  conclusion
         that the general grounds of refusal are made out.

         Further, or in the alternative, the Appellant contends that the FTT
         inadvertently applied the incorrect immigration rule.

         The Immigration Rules, as in force at  the  date  of  the  decision
         giving rise to the appeal, was as follows:

             Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the  United
             Kingdom should normally be refused

             (11)  where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in  a
             significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:

                  (i) overstaying; or

                  (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

                  (iii) being an illegal entrant; or(iv) using deception  in
                  an application for entry  clearance,  leave  to  enter  or
                  remain or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary
                  of State or a third  party  required  in  support  of  the
                  application (whether successful or not);

             And  there  are  other  aggravating  circumstances,  such   as
             absconding,   not   meeting   temporary    admission/reporting
             restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity  or
             multiple identities, switching nationality,  making  frivolous
             applications  or  not  complying  with  the   re-documentation
             process.

         On 1st December 2020, by virtue of  Statement  of  changes  to  the
         Immigration Rules: HC 813, of 22 October 2020 Paragraph 320(11)  of
         the Immigration rules was repealed, and replaced by  the  analogous
         provisions at Paragraph 9.8.2

             9.8.2. An application for entry  clearance  or  permission  to
             enter may be refused where:

             (a) the applicant has previously  breached  immigration  laws;
             and

             (b) the application was made outside the relevant time  period
             in paragraph 9.8.7; and

             (c) the applicant has previously contrived  in  a  significant
             way to frustrate the intention of  the  rules,  or  there  are
             other  aggravating   circumstances   (in   addition   to   the
             immigration breach), such as a failure to cooperate  with  the
             redocumentation process, such as using a false identity, or  a
             failure to comply with enforcement processes, such as  failing
             to report, or absconding.

         This change of emphasis is significant  as  it  is  no  longer  the
         Respondent's statement of policy  that  those  who  contrive  in  a
         significant way to undermine the Immigration rules should  normally
         be excluded, only that they may be excluded.  The FTT proceeded  to
         determine the matter on the basis of the previous Immigration Rules
         and, as a consequence,  may  have  attached  undue  weight  to  the
         Appellant's    immigration    history    when    considering    the
         proportionality of his exclusion."

 9. Mr Diwyncz, with his customary fairness, did not oppose  the  amendment
    of the grounds, and acknowledged that the judge had been led into error
    through parties not drawing attention  to  a  relevant  change  in  the
    rules.  He accepted that the change from "should  normally"  to  "may",
    although subtle, was a real one.

10. Having heard submissions, I indicated that there had been an  error  of
    law, although through little fault of the judge,  in  terms  of  ground
    (3); and that it was an error material enough to require  the  decision
    to be set aside.

11. This was always a  borderline  case,  where  the  immigration  history,
    although discreditable, was far from the worst.   Some  decision-makers
    and judges might  have  found  that  the  desirability  of  encouraging
    regularisation of status outweighed past flouting of the rules; others,
    without falling into any legal error, might have come down on the other
    side.  In a close case, it could not be said that but  for  inadvertent
    oversight of the change in the rules, the outcome must  have  been  the
    same.

12. Parties agreed that as there is no dispute on the facts, the UT  should
    proceed to remake the decision.  They had said all they wished  to  say
    on the substantive merits.  Mr Greer had described the situation as one
    of  a  "common  or  garden  overstayer",  with  no  "truly  aggravating
    circumstances".

13. I indicated that the appeal would be allowed.

14. The case  remains  quite  finely  balanced;  but  on  considering  past
    immigration misconduct, the family situation, the  rules  as  they  now
    stand, compliance with the rules in all other respects, and the further
    passage of time, I judge that  the public interest does not now require
    the refusal of entry clearance, and the proportionality  balance  falls
    in  the appellant's favour.

15. The decision of the FtT is set aside.  The appeal, as first brought  to
    the FtT is allowed.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      23 June 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

