
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02123/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 April 2021 via Skype for       |On 08 June 2021                      |
|Business                             |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     FS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D. Revill, instructed by Sunrise Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were primarily the directions given  by
the First-tier Tribunal,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
grounds of appeal and  the  parties'  subsequent  written  submissions,  the
contents of which I have recorded.
The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: the parties were content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.

 1. This is an appeal against a decision First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana
    promulgated on 23 November 2020 dismissing an appeal by the  appellant,
    a citizen of Pakistan born on 22 March 1981, against a decision of  the
    respondent dated 22 January 2019 refusing his human rights claim.

Factual background

 2. The appellant arrived in this country on  a  student  visa  in  October
    2010, valid until 16 March 2012.  Following  an  application  that  was
    refused on 4 April 2012, on 12 April 2012, the  appellant  successfully
    applied for further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  student,  which  was
    granted until 26 November 2013, and extended until 12 October 2015.  On
    13 August  2014,  the  appellant's  leave  was  curtailed  because  the
    respondent considered him to have used deception in his 12  April  2012
    application by relying on a proxy test-taker in a Test of  English  for
    International Communication ("TOEIC") assessment.  On 2  November  2017
    the appellant made an application for leave to remain on the  basis  of
    his private and family life. That application was refused on 22 January
    2019, and it was that refusal that was under appeal  before  the  judge
    below.

 3. The appellant's November 2017 human  rights  claim  was  based  on  his
    relationship with his wife, A, their daughter, B, born in May 2018, and
    the private life he claimed to have established in this country.

 4. The application was refused on suitability grounds, as  the  respondent
    considered that the appellant relied in his April 2012  application  on
    an invalid TOEIC certificate following  a  test  he  purported  in  his
    application to have taken at the Premier Language Centre  on  28  March
    2012.   Also,  there  would  be  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    appellant continuing family  life  with  A  and  B  in  Pakistan.   His
    relationship with A had been formed at a time the  appellant  knew  his
    immigration status was unlawful.  B had resided  in  this  country  for
    less than seven years.  Her best interests would be served  by  leaving
    the UK with both parents, for Pakistan, the country of her nationality.
     Family members in Pakistan would be able to support the family unit on
    its return.

 5. Subsequent to the appellant's application to the Secretary of State,  A
    made a claim  for  asylum,  with  the  daughter  she  shares  with  the
    appellant as her dependent, and that claim remains under  consideration
    by the respondent. A had previously been granted discretionary leave to
    remain, which, the appellant contended, had been extended by virtue  of
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 by the submission of her  asylum
    claim.  The appellant and A also had another daughter, C, who was  born
    in November 2019.

 6. The appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that  it  would
    be a disproportionate interference with his Article 8 ECHR private  and
    family life rights, and those of his family, for him to be removed. His
    wife's asylum application meant that it would not be possible  for  her
    to accompany him to Pakistan in order to  continue  their  family  life
    there.  He had not used a proxy-test taker.  His solicitor had included
    the test result in his application without his knowledge; the appellant
    had passed an English for Speakers of Other Languages ("ESOL") test  in
    November 2012, and had assumed that his solicitor had  used  that  test
    certificate to support the application.  He had no motive to cheat.  It
    was the solicitor's fault that an invalid TOEIC certificate was used in
    support of the application.

Relevant procedural chronology

 7. Before the substantive hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, a number  of
    case management directions had been given. On  7  April  2020,  in  the
    course of vacating the scheduled substantive hearing in response to the
    pandemic, the acting  resident  judge  at  Hatton  Cross  directed  the
    appellant to serve an "appellant's skeleton argument"  ("ASA")  setting
    out the appellant's case by reference to its key components,  and  gave
    corresponding  directions  to  the  respondent  to  respond   to   each
    contention in turn.  Paragraph 6 of the directions stated that, "if  no
    response is received within the said time limit it will be assumed that
    the respondent does not take issue with the  submissions  contained  in
    the ASA."

 8. The appellant served an initial ASA on 30 April  2020.   There  was  no
    response from the respondent.

 9. The respondent did not do so, despite further and  specific  directions
    being made requiring her  to  respond  on  25  June,  7  August  and  3
    September 2020.  Each set of directions  raised  the  prospect  of  the
    respondent being taken to agree to the assertions made in  the  ASA  in
    the event of an unsatisfactory response.

10. The respondent did not provide a detailed response in  advance  of  the
    hearing, leading the appellant to apply, at the outset  of  the  appeal
    hearing, for the respondent not to be permitted to contest the  matters
    in the ASA submitted by the appellant.

11. In pre-hearing correspondence, the respondent refused to consent to A's
    asylum claim and the appellant's own fear of return being considered as
    a "new matter" (see letter dated 17 July 2020), but  consented  to  the
    birth of C being considered as a new matter (see letter dated 13 August
    2020).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

12. The  judge  refused  Ms  Revill's  renewed  application,  made  at  the
    substantive hearing, to prevent the respondent from being permitted  to
    object to the matters outlined in the ASA.  In doing so, she recorded a
    submission from the presenting officer made  at  the  time  that,  "all
    issues will be fleshed out  at  the  hearing  and  there  would  be  no
    disadvantage to the appellant." The judge continued in these terms,  at
    [14]:

         "I decided that the appeal will continue and if there is any issues
         [sic] which relates to  unfairness  to  the  appellant  during  the
         hearing due to the lack of response  by  the  respondent,  for  the
         appellant's counsel to raise it. This was agreed  and  the  hearing
         continued."

13. The  judge  rejected  the  appellant's  response  to  the  respondent's
    allegations that he used a proxy test taker in a TOEIC  test.   It  was
    not credible that  the  appellant's  solicitor  had  acted  in  such  a
    fraudulent and dishonest way in  the  absence  of  any  report  to  the
    solicitor's regulation authority or the police [33]. The appellant  had
    made a bare allegation against his former solicitor with no evidence to
    substantiate it.

14. Addressing the significance  of  the  appellant's  involvement  of  his
    solicitor in his April 2012 application, the judge said at [35]:

         "Also if the appellant did not take the English  language  test  as
         claims [sic], he has not given a credible reason for why  he  would
         go to a solicitor in the first place to make  an  application  when
         one of the requirements of the application  was  having  passed  an
         English language test. This demonstrates that the appellant went to
         a solicitor in order to make the  application  without  sitting  in
         [sic] English language test and therefore he must have  known  that
         the solicitor was going to procure a false English language test on
         his behalf."

15. At [36], the judge found that, because the appellant  accepted  he  had
    attended his solicitor's premises in order to sign some forms:

         "it also demonstrates to me that the appellant made the application
         with a false certificate with his application. If the appellant had
         been a victim of fraud there is no credible explanation for why  he
         did not report  the  matter  to  the  police  or  make  any  effort
         whatsoever to get to the bottom of what happened."

16. At [37], the judge said it was not credible that  the  appellant  could
    not remember how much the  solicitor  had  charged  for  preparing  the
    application.

17. At [39], she added:

         "The appellant said in his application that his friend gave  him  a
         one-bedroom flat without rent. The appellant has not  provided  any
         evidence of this friend.  This  suggests  that  the  appellant  was
         working in the United Kingdom."

18. Having resolved the suitability question  against  the  appellant,  the
    judge turned to the remainder of the appellant's case.   She  found  at
    [41] that the appellant would not face "very significant obstacles"  to
    his reintegration Pakistan, returning as  a  citizen  of  that  country
    having lived there  during  his  "informative"  years.   There  was  no
    credible reason why the appellant could not return to Pakistan  pending
    the determination of his wife's asylum claim; if it was successful,  he
    would be able to apply for entry clearance to join her, and if it  were
    not successful, she would be able to return, with  their  daughter,  to
    live with him in Pakistan.  His fears about not being  able  to  secure
    employment or find accommodation in the meantime could not constitute a
    credible reason for him not to be returned: see [43].

19. The judge addressed the best interests of the appellant's  children  in
    these terms, at [44] and following:

         "44. I take into account the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
         children in the United Kingdom who are very young and one was  born
         very recently. I  find  that  their  best  interests  will  not  be
         compromised for the brief period  that  the  appellant  returns  to
         Pakistan. If the appellant's wife [sic] asylum appeal succeeds, you
         can make an application to return. If it doesn't succeed  than  the
         appellant's wife and children will return to Pakistan  to  continue
         family life with him.

         45. At the hearing the appellant's wife was asked  why  she  cannot
         look after the children on her own after the appellant  returns  to
         Pakistan. The evidence is that the  appellant's  wife  works  on  a
         three hour shift, three days a week. One of her daughters  goes  to
         school and the other as a baby. While I accept that  the  appellant
         must have been helping his wife while she is only out of the  house
         for nine hours a week, that does not mean  she  cannot  obtain  the
         help of her friends hire [sic] a babysitter which she  agrees  that
         her  friends  do  hire  babysitters.  I  find  that   it   is   not
         disproportionate to expect the appellant to return to Pakistan  and
         if necessary to make an entry clearance application to re-join  his
         family in the United Kingdom in the event that  his  wife's  asylum
         claim succeeds. I find that no evidence been placed before me  that
         the temporary separation  will  interfere  disproportionately  with
         their protected rights."

20. The judge's global proportionality conclusions were at [54]:

         "The appellant has attempted to remain in this country by fraud. He
         has children but the public interests must prevail over any  rights
         of the appellant or his wife and children  although  I  have  taken
         into account their best interests as  my  primary  obligation.  The
         children will be looked after by their mother in this  country  and
         their best interests will be served  until  their  mother's  asylum
         application decision is made. Although I do not  wish  to  prejudge
         her asylum claim, I note that the basis of her asylum claim  I  was
         told is that she had  an  illegitimate  child  with  the  appellant
         before they were married.  They  are  both  married  now  and  have
         another child. It is a very weak asylum claim but  my  decision  is
         not based on this."

21. The judge dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

22. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew.  The grounds contend the judge erred by:

          a. Ground 1: failing to accede to  the  appellant's  application,
             made at the outset of the hearing, for the  respondent  to  be
             treated  as  not  disputing  the  contents  of  his   skeleton
             argument, and/or failing  to  give  reasons  for  refusing  to
             accede to that application;

          b. Ground 2: failing to have regard to the unchallenged  evidence
             that the appellant passed an ESOL test in November 2011;

          c.  Ground  3:  irrationally   finding   that   the   appellant's
             credibility was undermined by his decision to use a  solicitor
             to assist with his 2012 application, his inability to remember
             how much he paid them, his admission that he signed  forms  at
             their premises, and his  failure  to  provide  evidence  of  a
             friend who later accommodated him;

          d. Ground 4: failing to make a finding as to whether  it  was  in
             the best interest of  the  appellant's  children  for  him  to
             remain in the UK;

          e. Ground 5: erroneously finding that the appellant's  separation
             from  his  wife  and  children  would  be  "brief"  when   the
             respondent had been unable to  confirm  how  soon  the  asylum
             claim would be resolved;

          f. Ground 6: impermissible placing weight  on  her  view  of  the
             merits of A's asylum claim, when the  respondent  had  refused
             consent for that matter to be determined by the tribunal.

23. The respondent provided a rule 24 response dated 7  January  2021.   Ms
    Revill provided a skeleton argument for the hearing before me.

Discussion

Ground 1

24. In order to address ground 1, it is necessary to place the  application
    Ms Revill made at the outset  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in context.  Specific,  tailored  case  management  directions
    were given on a number  of  occasions  before  the  substantive  asylum
    hearing below, as part of a new case management process adopted by  the
    First-tier Tribunal which is intended to ensure early identification of
    disputed and agreed issues.  There had been a degree of procedural non-
    compliance with that process by the respondent in the  run  up  to  the
    substantive hearing, although it was not a flagrant refusal  to  engage
    with  the  pre-hearing  process.   The  gravamen  of  the   appellant's
    complaint is that the form and manner of the respondent's response  was
    substandard, rather than non-existent.  In her formal, undated response
    served on the First-tier Tribunal on 13 August 2020, the  Secretary  of
    State provided a "counter schedule" purporting to address  the  matters
    raised in the ASA.  In all material  respects,  the  respondent  merely
    relied on the position as set out in the refusal letter.  I accept that
    that was an insufficient response, as at least some of the  matters  in
    the  ASA  post-dated  the  refusal  letter,  such  as  the  appellant's
    proffered "innocent explanation".

25. On 3 September 2021, Judge Moon refused a pre-hearing paper application
    made by the applicant to  prevent  the  respondent  from  opposing  the
    contents of the ASA.  The judge said at paragraph (d) of the  Note  and
    Directions issued in response to the application:

         "(d) The  following  observations  are  made  in  relation  to  the
         direction sought by the appellant's representatives:

               i. It is accepted that the current  position  may  place  the
                  appellant at a disadvantage as the respondent has now been
                  put  on  notice  of  the  appellant's  arguments  and  can
                  consider in advance how  to  address  them  but  that  the
                  appellant has been denied this opportunity.

              ii. If the tribunal is minded to make  a  direction  in  terms
                  sought by the appellant, in the interests  of  common  law
                  fairness,  a  corresponding  direction  should   also   be
                  considered which would prevent the appellant  from  making
                  any submissions that are not addressed within the ASA.

             iii. There is  a  danger  that  the  direction  sought  by  the
                  appellant will damage the quality of the evidence given by
                  the witnesses to questions put to the witnesses in  cross-
                  examination as a result of the direction sought."

26. In the operative directions then given, Judge Moon said:

         "The application is refused. The tribunal has an obligation to take
         such action as is considered just. Restricting submissions made  by
         the respondent  may  not  be  in  the  interests  of  justice.  The
         respondent ought to be given the opportunity to make submissions in
         relation to an application that has such serious consequences."

    Pausing here, the application had been made  on  the  papers,  and  the
    respondent had not had the opportunity to address the  concerns  raised
    by the appellant.  The directions continued:

         "2.  The respondent is now on notice that the  document  which  has
         been filed does not amount to a response to the ASA. The respondent
         is to file and serve a full response to the ASA no later than 4  PM
         on Friday, 25 September 2020. The response should  include  written
         reasons  for  the  respondent's  withholding  of  consent  for  the
         tribunal to consider the new matter  of  the  appellant's  fear  on
         return to Pakistan."

27. At paragraph 3, the directions concluded:

         "If the respondent does not comply  with  paragraph  2  above,  the
         appellant may reinstate this application orally, and  request  that
         the application be re-considered as  a  preliminary  issue  at  the
         substantive hearing."

28. Expanding upon ground 1, Ms Revill contends that the judge was  invited
    to exercise a discretionary power under the Tribunal Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014,  and  that
    she failed to give reasons for the manner in which she did so, or, more
    accurately, declined to do so.

29. In my judgment, the judge did give reasons for refusing, in effect,  to
    strike out the  respondent's  defence.   Her  reasons  were  brief  but
    sufficient.  It is important to note that, on 7 August 2020,  a  remote
    Case Management Review hearing took place before Judge Moon.  The  note
    of that hearing issued by the judge  identified  that  the  issues  for
    resolution at the substantive hearing  were  the  suitability  concerns
    raised by the  respondent,  whether  the  appellant  would  face  "very
    significant obstacles" to his integration in Pakistan, and whether  his
    removal would breach his rights under article 8 of the ECHR.  The  note
    also records that it was common ground that the appellant did not  meet
    the immigration rules, and that the relationship between the  appellant
    and A was genuine and subsisting.  Thus, while  the  respondent's  non-
    compliance with the directions to respond to the ASA  was  unfortunate,
    the appellant could have been in no doubt about the  matters  which  he
    was expected to address at the substantive hearing.

30. In submissions before me, Ms Revill could identify no unfairness at the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal caused by the respondent's  non-
    provision of a detailed response to the ASA.   Her  criticisms  of  the
    judge were founded on the principles  of  procedural  rigour,  and  the
    importance of all parties complying with directions  of  the  tribunal,
    and assisting the tribunal to further  its  overriding  objective,  and
    cooperating with it generally: see rule 2(4) of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  She
    contended that it was an error of law for the judge not  to  apply  the
    established three-stage 'relief from  sanctions'  test  established  by
    Denton v White [2014] EWCA Civ 906 and the associated authorities.

31. I find the judge gave sufficient reasons for refusing the  application.
    The reasons were brief, but the judge explained that  if  any  fairness
    issues arose as a result of the respondent's  previous  non-compliance,
    they could be dealt with as and when they arose.  That was an  approach
    entirely  consistent  with  the  overriding  objective,  which  is   to
    facilitate the participation of all parties, and  to  deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly.  The relief sought by the appellant  was  draconian.
    In effect, it would have prohibited the respondent from challenging the
    case advanced by the appellant, which would be a very serious  step  to
    have taken, especially given the respondent had  already  indicated  at
    the CMR before Judge Moon what the disputed issues were.  The judge was
    entirely correct to address the matter by reference to the fairness  of
    the hearing, if it were  to  entail  a  substantive  challenge  by  the
    respondent to the contents of the ASA.  While procedural rigour is very
    important, the principle must be applied in such a way which  does  not
    extinguish  a  party's  ability  to  participate  in  the   proceedings
    altogether for no good reason.  No further reasons  were  required  for
    proceeding to conduct a substantive trial of the issues.

32. Nothing turns on the judge not addressing the strike out  request  (for
    that is what it was) by reference to the Denton v White criteria  (that
    is, the significance of breach; whether there was a good reason for it;
    and to consider all the circumstances of the  case  to  deal  with  the
    application justly).  She was not invited to do so by  Ms  Revill,  who
    appeared below.  The operative analysis conducted by the judge  was  by
    reference to the fairness of the respondent being able to maintain  the
    objections she raised at the CMR on 7 August 2020,  some  three  months
    before the hearing.  Those brief considerations form the focus  of  the
    matters the judge would have had to consider under the third  stage  of
    the Denton criteria in any event.  This is a  criticism  of  form  over
    substance.

33.  The  relief  the  appellant  sought  was  draconian:  to  prevent  the
    respondent from being able to contest matters in the ASA,  even  though
    the appellant was on notice as to the disputed issues, pursuant to  the
    CMRH on 7 August 2020.  While procedural rigour is  important  in  this
    jurisdiction, it would have been an extreme step  to  prevent  a  party
    from arguing its case in circumstances where to do so, as confirmed  by
    Ms Revill, exposed the opposing party  to  no  prejudice.   As  to  the
    sufficiency of reasons facet to this ground of appeal, few reasons  are
    required to enable a party to enjoy its right to have  its  case  heard
    and considered.   It was entirely open to the judge to approach matters
    on the basis of fairness, and in doing so  she  gave  amply  sufficient
    reasons for allowing the matter to proceed.

Grounds 2 and 3

34. It is convenient to consider grounds  2  and  3  together.   The  first
    reason given  by  the  judge  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  claimed
    innocent explanation was because she did not accept  his  account  that
    his solicitor had fraudulently obtained the invalid  TOEIC  certificate
    on his behalf.  At [33] the judge gave reasons that were  open  to  her
    that, in the absence of any police involvement or  regulatory  referral
    concerning that very serious allegation  he  made  against  his  former
    solicitors,  she  rejected  that  account.   See  [33].    Merely   not
    mentioning the ESOL is nothing to the point, as the  appellant's  prior
    ability to speak English would have been incapable of curing his wholly
    incredible account that his solicitor had committed  criminal  offences
    on his behalf.  Even those  competent  in  the  English  language  have
    cheated in TOEIC tests; the ESOL certificate was one factor set against
    the background of the appellant's account.  Appellate tribunals  should
    be slow to infer that an expert tribunal has not taken  a  factor  into
    account merely because it has not been  expressly  mentioned.   See  MA
    (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  UKSC  49
    at [45]:

         "...where a relevant  point  is  not  expressly  mentioned  by  the
         tribunal, the court should be slow to infer that it  has  not  been
         taken into account."

35. Had the judge's analysis stopped there, no complaint could have arisen.
     However, the remaining aspects of the judge's analysis  of  the  TOEIC
    issue are contradictory and fatally undermine the  first  part  of  her
    analysis.

36. Having rejected the solicitor's role in the fraud at [33], at [35]  the
    judge then appears  to  accept  that  the  solicitor  did  fraudulently
    procure the certificate for the appellant.  It is  worth  quoting  [35]
    again:

         "This demonstrates that the appellant went to a solicitor in  order
         to make the application without sitting in [sic]  English  language
         test and therefore he must have known that the solicitor was  going
         to procure a false English language test on his behalf."

37. The above analysis flatly contradicts the otherwise sound findings  the
    judge had already reached.

38. The confusion continues  at  [36]  when  the  judge  again  appears  to
    conclude that the appellant's former solicitor had a role of sorts,  by
    submitting a fraudulently obtained  certificate  with  the  appellant's
    application.  However,  also  at  [36]  the  judge  suggests  that  the
    appellant was the fraudulent actor and that it was  not  the  solicitor
    who procured the "form".  These conclusions are difficult to  reconcile
    with those stated at [33] and [35].  It is simply not clear whether the
    judge found the solicitor to be complicit (as she suggests at [35]), or
    rejected the suggestion as  incredible  (as  she  did  at  [33]).   The
    analysis at [36] is again less clear, and suggests that  the  appellant
    is culpable simply because he sought the assistance of a solicitor with
    an immigration application, which cannot amount to a rational basis for
    rejecting an innocent explanation.

39. While I am mindful of the restraint with  which  this  tribunal  should
    approach findings of fact  reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    judge's  analysis  of  the  TOEIC  issue  was  contradictory   and   so
    irrational.  That was an error of law.   Those  findings  must  be  set
    aside.

Grounds 4 to 6

40. While ground 4 was characterised as a challenge to the judge's  failure
    to assess the best interests  of  the  appellant's  children,  properly
    understood it is a challenge to the assessment of their best  interests
    that the judge conducted.  As set  out  at  paragraph  19,  above,  she
    considered the best interests of the children to be to remain here with
    their mother.  At [45] of her skeleton argument, Ms Revill states  that
    the judge failed to address the need for the children to  have  ongoing
    contact  with  their  father,  or  "to  explain  why  his  presence  is
    irrelevant to those best interests."

41. The context for the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  children's  best
    interests in the present matter is atypical. A has claimed asylum  with
    B as her dependent. The appellant and A have since had a further child,
    C.  Until A's asylum claim (and that of B as her  dependent)  has  been
    finally determined, neither A nor B can be removed,  and  there  is  no
    possibility of the family relocating to Pakistan. That is  not  to  say
    that the appellant's removal could never  take  place  while  A  and  B
    remain in this country - the proportionality of the appellant's removal
    is a distinct matter from the assessment of the best interests  of  his
    children, although should take account of it - but one would expect the
    judge to have addressed factors such as the  extent  to  which  ongoing
    contact would be possible during  the  period  of  separation,  and  to
    explain why the appellant's presence in the UK, as their father,  would
    not be required, when addressing the children's best interests. I  have
    not been alerted to any safeguarding  or  other  concerns  which  would
    mitigate against the appellant's presence in the country being  in  the
    best interests of his children, thereby enabling  the  family  unit  to
    remain as a single unit. Yet those were factors that the judge did  not
    address, thereby failing to take into account relevant  considerations.



42. Allied  to  those  deficiencies,  the  judge's  categorisation  of  the
    appellant's likely period of separation from  A  and  the  children  as
    "brief" fails to engage with  the  likely  timescale  involved  in  the
    determination of the asylum claim.  When addressing the best  interests
    of children, it is necessary to be as precise as  possible.  While  the
    judge cannot be criticised for not being able  to  predict  the  likely
    timescale involved in  the  determination  of  A's  asylum  claim  with
    precision (including any appeals in the event it  is  refused),  merely
    casting off any separation as "brief" fails to engage with  the  likely
    reality of the time taken to determine  an  outstanding  asylum  claim.
    The judge may have been influenced by her view  on  A's  "weak"  asylum
    claim: see [54].  That was an impermissible consideration;  the  merits
    of A's asylum claim were not an issue in relation to which  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was constituted to address, and the  Secretary  of  State
    had specifically declined to consent to the  tribunal  considering  it.
    That observation went beyond the jurisdiction of the tribunal and  was,
    by definition, an irrelevant consideration.  Even if the  asylum  claim
    was "weak", it would not  necessarily  be  bound  to  fail  and  so  be
    suitable for certification as "clearly unfounded", with the consequence
    that the possibility of a prolonged process of  legal  challenge  could
    not have been excluded by the judge.  I find that the judge  failed  to
    address the best interests of the appellant's children by reference  to
    the "real world"  within  which  the  children,  A  and  the  appellant
    currently reside. That was an error of law.

Conclusion

43. In light of my findings concerning the extent of the errors of  law  in
    the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  consider  that  it  is
    appropriate to set the decision of Judge Chana aside in  its  entirety,
    with no findings of fact preserved. In light of the extent of  findings
    of fact that are required, I remit the case to be reheard in the First-
    tier Tribunal, before a different judge.

Anonymity

44. In light  of  the  connected  asylum  claim,  and  the  involvement  of
    children, I consider that an anonymity order is appropriate.


Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Chana involved the making of an error of  law  and  is
set aside with no findings of fact preserved.

The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  heard  by  a
different judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 26 May 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

