
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02324/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Friday 20 August 2021             |On Monday 04 October 2021            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                            MR MD SALMAN BIN ALAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S  Karim,  Counsel  instructed  by  Liberty  Legal
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department.
   For ease of reference, I refer to the parties as they were before the
   First-tier Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean promulgated on 24 November 2020 ("the
   Decision"). By the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal
   against the Respondent's decision dated 3 February 2020, refusing his
   human rights claim founded on Article 8 ECHR.  The Respondent refused the
   claim on the basis that the Appellant had used a proxy test taker in
   respect of an English language test when making an application for
   student leave in 2011.  The Appellant strenuously denies that allegation.
    This is a so-called "ETS case".


2. The Judge accepted that the Respondent's evidence met the evidential
   burden of demonstrating dishonesty.  However, she accepted the
   credibility of the Appellant's evidence.  That shifted the burden back to
   the Respondent.  The Judge found that the Respondent had not discharged
   the overall legal burden.  In her findings, the Judge made reference to
   the report of the All-Party Parliamentary Group in relation to the ETS
   issue ("the APPG Report").  Since the Decision, this Tribunal has
   considered the admissibility and evidential value of the APPG Report in
   the reported decision of DK and RK (Parliamentary privilege; evidence)
   [2021] UKUT 00061 (IAC) ("DK").  The Tribunal concluded that the APPG
   Report was itself not protected by Parliamentary privilege but that some
   of the content was.  For that reason, the Tribunal considered that if the
   APPG Report were admitted in evidence, "the Tribunal would be drawn into
   this forbidden area". Further, the Tribunal concluded that the opinions
   of the APPG were not material evidentially in an appeal which had to be
   determined by the Tribunal considering the individual appeal.   The
   Tribunal did however accept at [23] of the decision that the transcript
   of the evidence which was given to the APPG by experts might be relevant.




3. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal the Decision in an
   application dated 1 December 2020.  It is not disputed by the Respondent
   that the application was not in fact made until 9 March 2021.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe refused permission on the basis that the
   application was out of time.


4. When the application was renewed to this Tribunal therefore the first
   issue for the Judge considering that application was whether there was
   good reason to admit the application notwithstanding the delay in making
   the first application.  Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb, who considered the
   application, accepted the Respondent's excuse that the application had
   been drafted in time but, due to administrative mix-up, had not been
   filed.  It was thought by the Respondent's office that the application
   had been made in time and it was only when the application was chased
   that the error emerged.  Judge Grubb considered that the application
   involved "an allegation of fraud in the immigration context which is a
   matter of public interest".  He considered that, other than delay, the
   Appellant had "not suffered any tangible prejudice".  The Appellant
   disputes that, as I will come to.  Judge Grubb considered it "just to
   admit [the] application in the interest of justice".

5. Turning to the substance of the application for permission to appeal,
   that is based on an overall assertion of a material misdirection of law.
   The first issue on which it is said that the Judge misdirected herself
   relates to the weight placed on the Appellant's English language ability.
    It is said that the Judge failed to consider that there might be reasons
   other than inability to speak English which might explain why an
   appellant would use a proxy test taker.  Reliance was placed in this
   regard on the case of MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC)
   ("MA").  The second issue was the reliance placed on the APPG Report.  It
   is said that the Judge relied on that report as a reason to depart from
   existing case-law on the ETS issue.  It is asserted that the conclusions
   reached in the APPG Report are inconsistent with the views taken of the
   expert evidence by panels of this Tribunal and that the preferring of
   those conclusions by the Judge amounts to an error of law. It is also
   said that the caveat expressed by Professor French to the APPG does not
   undermine his evidence as before this Tribunal in ETS cases or nullify
   his opinion that there is a 1% false positive rate.


6. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted permission on the substance of the
   application in the following terms:


    "... 3.  It is arguable that in reaching his findings in the
    appellant's favour on the fraud/deception issue, the judge erred in law
    by admitting, and relying upon, the All Party Parliamentary Group
    ("APPG") report following DK and RK (Parliamentary privilege; evidence)
    [2021] UKUT 61 (IAC).  Whether any error, if established, was material
    will be a matter that will need to be addressed.  All grounds are
    arguable."

7. The Appellant filed a Rule 24 Reply dated 15 June 2021 taking issue with
   the Respondent's grounds and with Judge Grubb's decision to extend time.
   Annexed to the Rule 24 Reply was a transcript of the evidence given by
   the experts to the APPG.  No objection was taken to the admission of that
   evidence.


8. The matter came before me to determine whether the Decision contains an
   error of law and, if I so concluded, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.   At the end of the
   hearing, following oral submissions made by Mr Tufan and Mr Karim, I
   indicated that I did not find there to be an error of law in the Decision
   and that I would provide my reasons in writing for that conclusion
   following the hearing which I now turn to do.

DISCUSSION

Extension of time

9. I begin with Judge Grubb's decision to extend time.  Issue is taken by
   the Appellant with Judge Grubb's view that the extension of time would
   not prejudice the Appellant.  It is said that he was prejudiced because,
   if the application had been made and considered earlier, then this
   Tribunal's decision in DK would not have been reported and could not have
   been relied upon by the Respondent in her appeal against the Decision.


10. I do not consider that to be an attractive argument.  First, the
   Respondent's grounds do not themselves refer to DK as that decision was
   not in being.  A Judge even without the benefit of the decision in DK
   could readily have formed the view that the APPG Report was either not
   admissible or could not carry evidential weight and reached the same
   conclusion that the Judge had arguably erred by relying upon it.


11. Second, I accept that the change in the legal position following DK is
   not entirely the same as a case where a change is said simply to
   recognise what the law has always been.  That is the position as regards
   admissibility, but I accept not in relation to evidential weight.
   However, the Appellant has the opportunity still to rely on the evidence
   given to the APPG.  He is still able to argue as he has that the Judge
   did not err in giving some weight to the record of the evidence even if
   not to the report itself.


12. Third, a decision to extend time by a Judge is largely a discretionary
   matter.  Judge Grubb recognised that the Appellant might be said to be
   prejudiced by the fact of delay but balanced that against what he saw as
   the importance of the issue at stake.  There is no error made by the
   Judge when exercising his discretion.

The APPG Report


13. I begin with what is the second issue raised by the Respondent as that
   is the main reason for Judge Grubb's grant of permission.   Further, if
   the Judge has erred in this regard, it is still necessary to consider
   whether the error is a material one.


14. The Judge refers to the APPG Report at [23] to [26] of the Decision as
   follows:


    "23. The APPG Report states that 'all the experts agreed that the
    evidence provided by ETS to the Home Office was questionable' with all
    but one expert agreeing that it 'contained fundamental flaws that
    should make it impossible to take decisions based on [that] evidence
    alone' (page 10).  Like the APPG, I find that that is precisely what
    the Respondent has done which I find undermines her claim that the
    Appellant used deception to obtain the TOEIC certificate.
    24.  The APPG Report also points out that there was no reliable
    evidential trail linking each recording to the person who sat the test.
     In the emails between the Appellant and ETS's legal representative
    (outlined in paragraph 22 above) I find that this is exactly the
    experience of the Appellant.  He was unable to get an audio recording
    which verified that it was actually his test that had been supplied.
    25.  Furthermore, the APPG Report states that in relation to audio
    files expert witnesses identified 'a lack of continuity of the
    evidence' which no 'chain of custody' which I find goes against the
    veracity of the Appellant's ETS test result.
    26.  The experts who gave evidence to the APPG all raised 'serious
    concerns' about the reliability of the spreadsheets sent by ETS to the
    Home Office 'echoing the findings of the Home Affairs Select Committee,
    the National Audit Office and legal experts (APPG Report, page 14,
    paragraph 1.1).  I find this evidence casts doubt upon the credibility
    of the evidence relied upon by the Respondent in accusing the Appellant
    of dishonesty.  In evidence before the APPG it was demonstrated that
    fundamental parts of the ETS data-set were incorrect.  I therefore find
    that, without more, the Respondent cannot be sure that the data linking
    each student to a fraudulent test is either correct or reliable.  I
    further find that because this casts doubt on the accuracy of the ETS
    test results it therefore undermines the reliability of the test
    outcome claiming the Appellant's test was invalid."


15. Having made those comments about the APPG Report, the Judge reached the
   following conclusion at [27] of the Decision:


    "Accordingly, looking at the totality of the evidence before me,
    together with my findings in paragraphs 14-26 above, I find that the
    Respondent has not discharged the legal burden placed upon her of
    proving dishonesty."


16. I can readily accept that much of what is said at [26] of the Decision
   involves an error by the Judge.  She should not have relied upon the APPG
   Report in relation to what it has to say about proceedings before the
   Home Affairs Select Committee or the National Audit Office as both are
   subject to privilege (see [13] and [17] of the decision in DK).  It is
   also difficult to see how and why weight should be given to what are
   described by the Judge as "legal experts".  Those persons are no more
   than those solicitors and barristers who had conducted cases against the
   Secretary of State and who therefore understandably were likely to
   express adverse views about the ETS evidence.


17. However, with the exception of those matters, even following DK, it is
   not clear that the Judge made any error by referring to the APPG Report.
   Much of the reliance placed on it turns on the views of the experts.
   Those views are expressed in the transcript of their evidence upon which
   weight could be placed even following DK.


18. It is also necessary to set the Judge's reference to the APPG Report in
   context.  She had by this stage already accepted that the Respondent had
   discharged her evidential burden by reason of what she was told by ETS as
   confirmed by evidence which, perhaps unusually, was in this case filed by
   the Appellant as the Respondent had failed to submit it (see [13] to [16]
   of the Decision).

19. That the generic evidence coupled with evidence about an individual's
   test results meets the evidential burden on the Respondent is entirely
   consistent with decisions of this Tribunal (see SM and Qadir v Secretary
   of State for the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)
   [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) - "SM and Qadir").  However, as is equally clear
   from (ii) of the headnote in SM and Qadir the general evidence is not of
   itself sufficient to discharge the legal burden if an appellant's
   evidence satisfies his burden.  Having found as she did that the
   Appellant in this appeal had satisfied his evidential burden, the Judge's
   conclusion that this could not be overcome by the generic evidence is
   consistent with conclusions of this Tribunal in other reported cases and
   is not fundamentally influenced by the APPG Report.  The Judge could just
   as easily have reached the conclusion which she did at [27] of the
   Decision based on existing case law and without any reference to the APPG
   Report.

English language ability and other factors


20. As Mr Karim submitted and I accept, what is said by the Judge at [23]
   to [26] of the Decision is merely a bolstering of her previous
   conclusions about the reliability of the evidence in this case.  That
   brings me on then to the first issue raised by the Respondent concerning
   the weight given by the Judge to the Appellant's English language
   ability.  This and the other factors relied upon are also relevant to the
   materiality of any error made by reference to the APPG Report.


21. The Judge referred to the Appellant's English language abilities at
   [17] to [20] of the Decision as follows:


    "17. The ETS results show the Appellant scored 140 in his speaking and
    writing tests.  However, the Appellant disputes the allegation that the
    score of 140 in both tests was achieved using a proxy test taker.  In
    particular he points to the fact that in order to obtain a CAS for his
    course at the University of Sunderland, he needed a higher score and so
    took the test again and obtained slightly better results (Appellant's
    bundle, page 56).
    18.  The disputed test took place on 15 November 2011.  Two months
    later on 18 January 2012, the Appellant took the test again and, as
    stated on the University of Sunderland CAS achieved inter alia 170 in
    speaking and 160 in Writing.  I find that these results are consistent
    with the Appellant having achieved a score of 140 two months previously
    because they illustrate a slight, but not significant, improvement.  I
    further find that these subsequent results undermine the Respondent's
    claim that the Appellant used deception in the November 2011 test
    because they are in line with his level of attainment in that earlier
    test.
    19.  I note that on the basis of the language test taken in January
    2012 the Appellant went on to study for a BSc in International Tourism
    and Hospitality Management at the University of Sunderland later that
    year and went on to graduate in July 2015.  I find that he would have
    been unable to do that if he did not have sound English language skills
    and instead had to rely on a proxy, something he could not do at
    university.  The full transcript of his degree results shows that in
    his first academic year he obtained good results which I find are
    consistent with someone who had appropriate English language skills
    (Appellant's bundle, page 37).
    20.  The Appellant first learnt of the allegation of dishonesty and
    fraud when the Respondent refused his application for further leave in
    July 2016.  At the time the Appellant was studying for a Master of
    Science degree in International Tourism Management at Glasgow
    Caledonian University.  He graduated in November 2016."


22. I accept that the Tribunal in MA did point to other reasons why even an
   appellant fluent in English might nonetheless engage in deception (see
   [57] of the decision in that case relied upon in the Respondent's
   grounds).  Nonetheless, as the Tribunal made clear there and in SM and
   Qadir the assessment whether an appellant has engaged in deception is
   intrinsically fact sensitive.  Mr Karim drew my attention to [69] of the
   decision in SM and Qadir which makes reference to the sorts of factors
   which might be relevant.


23. In this case, the Judge did not engage in the exercise cautioned
   against by the Tribunal in SM and Qadir at [80].  She did not focus on
   the Appellant's language ability at the hearing but rather his ability
   taken in the context of what occurred at the time of the TOEIC test in
   2011 and the Appellant's overall academic achievements.  That was a
   permissible approach. They were not irrelevant factors.

24. What the Judge says at [18] of the Decision is particularly relevant.
   As Mr Karim pointed out, the Appellant's scores in the test in 2011 were
   quite low.  This was not a case where the Appellant had achieved very
   high scores by using a proxy test taker.  For that reason, he had to re-
   take the test in order to obtain a CAS for his course.  The scores which
   he achieved in that test (which was not impugned and which he took
   shortly after the TOEIC test) were similar to those achieved in the 2011
   test.  That the Appellant had to and did re-take the test at around the
   time of the impugned test was relevant to the Judge's consideration.


25. As Mr Karim submitted and I accept, the Respondent's challenge in this
   regard is directed at the weight which the Judge placed on this evidence.
    That was a matter for the Judge.  She has not erred by placing weight on
   this aspect and the Respondent's grounds are merely a disagreement with
   the findings made based on the evidence.


26. I return then to the point about continuity of evidence made by the
   experts to the APPG.  That is a point which arose in this case.  As the
   Judge says at [21] of the Decision, the Appellant "went to considerable
   lengths to obtain the audio tapes of his November 2011 speaking test".
   The Appellant produced correspondence in that regard and a transcript of
   the content of the audio tape which he subsequently received.  The Judge
   notes at [21] of the Decision that "the content of the audio tapes bears
   no relation to a language test".  In circumstances where the Respondent
   relied on the outcome of an examination of the audio recording, that
   comment is obviously significant.


27. The Judge goes on at [22] of the Decision to say more about the
   circumstances surrounding the audio tapes as follows:


    "The Appellant also states that the content and voice file were deleted
    but then reinstated (Appellant's Witness Statement, paragraph 8).
    Additionally the Appellant states that it is not his voice on the audio
    files.  The Appellant raised this with ETS legal representatives on a
    number of occasions and asked for the full test audio with verification
    that it was the Appellant's test recording (Appellant's bundle, pages
    72-730.  The correspondence ended with an email from the Respondent's
    representative, dated 3 August 2020, stating that they had provided the
    information requested and that ETS was not a party to the Appellant's
    litigation and they could be of no further assistance.  Although
    perhaps understandable, it is unhelpful to the Appellant who I find
    made his best endeavours to obtain verified audio recordings of his
    test in November 2011."


28. I accept of course that it would be unsurprising that the Appellant's
   voice would not appear on the audio file if, as the Respondent asserts,
   he had used a proxy test taker.  However, what the Appellant says
   occurred in his case is consistent with what was said by the experts to
   the APPG about the difficulties of establishing whether a recording
   properly belongs to an individual due to the deficiencies in evidence
   about continuity.  I have already made the point that the Judge would
   have been entitled, even post DK, to have regard to the evidence given to
   the APPG by the experts which is in line with what is said in the APPG
   Report as recorded at [23] to [25] of the Decision.  Particularly in the
   circumstances which arose in this case as set out in the Appellant's
   evidence, the Judge was entitled to place weight on the lack of
   continuity in relation to the audio file.


29. The Judge therefore provided reasons at [17] to [22] of the Decision
   for accepting the Appellant's case.  She was bolstered in her findings by
   what the experts had told the APPG, and she was entitled to have regard
   to that evidence if not the report itself.  As is pointed out in the
   Appellant's Rule 24 Reply at [16] to [18], those views are consistent
   with the opinions of the experts as recorded in the case-law relating to
   ETS cases.


30. Any error in relation to the Judge's reference to the APPG Report as
   exists at [26] of the Decision is therefore not material.


CONCLUSION

31. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law
   in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision with the result that
   the Appellant's appeal remains allowed.


DECISION
The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean promulgated on 24 November
2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I therefore
uphold the Decision.



Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  24 August 2021

