
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02176/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 March 2021                     |On 26 March 2021                     |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              SHAH MUBIN AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M A Rana, Counsel, instructed by Blakewells
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Malcolm ("the judge"), promulgated on 30  September
    2019,  by  which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of his human rights claim.  That claim was made on
    12 June 2018 and  relied  on  the  assertion  that  the  Appellant  had
    established both private and family life in the  United  Kingdom  since
    his arrival here in 2010.

 2. The real focus of the claim was that the Appellant enjoyed family  life
    with his daughter, born in August 2014, with whom he had a genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship, notwithstanding the fact that he  and
    his daughter's mother were no longer in a subsisting relationship.  The
    Appellant had stated that  he  was  having  regular  contact  with  his
    daughter, including residential contact at weekends and  during  school
    holidays.  The Respondent concluded that there was minimal contact,  if
    any, and that the Appellant had failed to show that he had either "sole
    responsibility" or "parental responsibility"  for  his  daughter.   The
    private life aspect of the Article 8 claim related to the time spent in
    this country.



Error of law decision

 3. I can state my decision on the error of law issue relatively briefly in
    light of Ms Everett's concession that the judge has materially erred in
    law.  She has in my view quite  properly,  accepted  that  there  is  a
    material contradiction between  two  important  parts  of  the  judge's
    decision.

 4. At [65] the judge said as follows:

    "I accept that the Appellant has had contact with his daughter over the
         years and more  recently  has  had  contact  including  residential
         contact as agreed  with  Ms  Begum  with  arrangements  being  made
         between the Appellant and Ms Begum's father".

 5. The arrangements referred to are set out earlier in  the  decision  and
    essentially were that the Appellant would see his daughter on  one  day
    during the week and that she would stay over with him (at his  sister's
    house, with whom he lived) at weekends and for a proportion  of  school
    holidays.  These arrangements were informal in nature.




 6. At [88] the judge went on to state as follows:

         "Whilst I accept that the Appellant  does  have  contact  with  his
         daughter as set out above, I  am  not  entirely  satisfied  on  the
         evidence given by the Appellant as [to] the extent of  the  contact
         which he has  with  his  daughter  given  the  concerns  which  had
         previously been raised in respect of the Appellant's credibility at
         his asylum hearing and given what I consider to be wilful incorrect
         information given in his application as to whether he had ever  had
         an asylum claim refused".

 7. In the next paragraph the judge stated:

    "Accordingly,  given  the  concerns  which  I  have  raised  about  the
         credibility of the Appellant whilst I  accept  that  he  does  have
         contact with his daughter I am not  satisfied  that  the  level  of
         contact is as claimed by the Appellant".

 8. As recognised by Ms Everett, it would in principle have  been  possible
    for the judge  to  have  accepted  a  degree  of  contact  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter,  but  not  to  the  extent  asserted.   The
    difficulty with the decision is that at [65] the judge stated in  terms
    that he had accepted the nature of  the  contact  as  agreed  with  the
    daughter's  mother.   As  explained  previously,   those   arrangements
    included regular and fairly significant residential contact.  Thus, the
    position adopted in [88] and [89] gave rise to a genuine  contradiction
    in the judge's findings and analysis on the crucial issue  of  contact.
    There is no clear  finding  as  to  what  other  form  of  contact  the
    Appellant might have been having with his daughter if it  were  not  in
    line with the arrangements agreed with Ms Begum.




 9. Given the importance of the issue of contact to the overall  assessment
    of the daughter's best interests and the Article 8 claim  overall,  the
    contradiction amounts to an error and that error is I conclude, and  as
    accepted by Ms Everett, material to the outcome.

10.  The  second  point  relates  to  the  judge's  purported   alternative
    conclusion as stated in [89]:

         "In any event even if  I  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was
         exercising contact as described by him in  his  evidence  whilst  I
         accept that if the Appellant requires to leave the UK he  would  no
         longer be able to have this contact with his  daughter  I  consider
         that he would be able to continue to maintain contact by  telephone
         and video call".

11. Ms Everett acknowledged the difficulties with this analysis.  If indeed
    the judge was accepting the full extent of the contact claimed  by  the
    Appellant, there was insufficient evaluation and reasoning  as  regards
    the conclusion that a switch from regular and fairly significant  face-
    to-face  contact  to  entirely  remote  contact  would   in   all   the
    circumstances be proportionate.  It rather seems to me,  and  with  all
    due respect, that this alternative conclusion was put down as something
    of an afterthought.  In any event, in the circumstances of this case it
    was legally inadequate.  This is a further material error of law in the
    judge's decision.


12. On the basis of Ms Everett's concession and for  the  reasons  set  out
    above, the judge's decision must be set aside.


Disposal

13. I have concluded  that  remittal  is,  on  an  exceptional  basis,  the
    appropriate course of action.  I say this for two reasons.  First,  the
    passage of time.  There has  been  a  significant  period  between  the
    hearing before the judge and now.  Second,  there  is  important  fact-
    finding to be undertaken.  The  judge  did  clearly  have  concerns  in
    respect of the Appellant's overall  credibility.   The  fact  that  the
    judge created a contradiction in his findings does not  preclude  those
    credibility concerns from remaining a relevant factor  as  regards  the
    assessment of the precise level of contact between  the  Appellant  and
    his daughter.  In addition, the nature of the contact does  potentially
    go to the existence or otherwise of a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the Appellant and his daughter.  It  may  well  be
    that the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  remittal  finds  there  is  such  a
    relationship, however in my view it  would  be  artificial  for  me  to
    preserve the judge's finding on this particular issue.  It is  best  if
    the First-tier Tribunal comes to this case with a clean  slate,  as  it
    were.

14. Therefore, there are no preserved findings of fact.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton  Cross
         hearing centre), with no preserved findings of fact;




      2) The remitted hearing shall not be conducted by First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Malcolm;



      3) Whether the remitted hearing shall be conducted remotely  or  on  a
         face-to-face basis is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   H. Norton-Taylor               Date: 18 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
