
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02912/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2018                             |On 17th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                rewati limbu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    The Sponsor in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    at  New Delhi, with permission, in relation to a Decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal in which the Appellant's  appeal  had  been  allowed.   I
    shall refer to the parties as they appeared in the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The case came before Judge Asjad in the First-tier Tribunal  in  August
    of last year. It was an entry clearance case involving a Nepalese  lady
    born on 9th January 1977.  She  had  applied  for  entry  clearance  to
    settle in the UK as the dependent daughter of a former  Gurkha  soldier
    who was the Sponsor.  The evidence that the judge heard  was  that  the
    Appellant is emotionally and financially dependent on her  parents  and
    has not formed an independent family unit. Had the Sponsor been allowed
    to settle in the UK when he left the Ghurkhas his daughter  would  have
    been born in the UK. The Sponsor had been  financially  supporting  his
    daughter since he and his wife left Nepal in 2010. He has visited Nepal
    three times since he left and his wife visits every year.   The  family
    maintain contact  by  telephone.   Culturally  in  Nepal  children  are
    expected to stay with their parents unless and until they  are  married
    and the Appellant has been unsuccessful at attempts to  seek  work  and
    has no other means of financial or emotional support.

 3. The Judge accepted that there was family life between the Appellant and
    her parents. It was accepted that the Appellant could not qualify under
    the policy or Appendix FM  and  the  Judge  was  therefore  looking  at
    Article 8 outside the  Rules.   The  first  consideration  was  whether
    Article 8 was engaged given the age of  the  Appellant  and  the  Judge
    found on the evidence that the dependency was such as to engage Article
    8 having addressed the Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31  point.   The  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  challenges  that  on  the  basis   that   financial
    dependency alone, particularly where it may be contrived cannot  amount
    to dependency over and above the normal emotional ties between an adult
    child and their parents.  There was no suggestion however in this  case
    that it was  contrived  and  the  evidence  is  quite  clear  that  the
    Appellant has always been  a  member  of  her  parents'  household  and
    entirely dependent upon them.  There was a  frequency  of  contact  and
    visits  and  I  find  therefore  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    challenge is not made out and  is  in  fact  a  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's conclusion.

Notice of Decision

 4. That is the only challenge that the Entry Clearance Officer makes,  and
    having found that that has no  merit  I  dismiss  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 5. There has been no application for and no necessity to make an anonymity
    direction.




Signed                              Date 12th April 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
