
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02194/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 26th February 2019                |On 12th March 2019                      |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                 Shanice [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Kanu, a representative trading as League For
Human Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr Lindsay, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born  on  22nd  July  2000.   She
    sought entry clearance as a child for settlement in the United  Kingdom
    by application made on 25th July 2017 when she was  17  years  of  age.
    The respondent refused her application on 13th  October  2017  and  the
    appellant appealed.  Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Freer at Taylor House on 7th December 2018.

2.   The judge found that the appellant's  father  had  sole  responsibility
    for the appellant but dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's father had a current Jamaican passport which did  not  show
    that he was a settled person in the United Kingdom.

3.   This morning Mr Lindsay  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    confirmed that the appellant's father is a settled person in the United
    Kingdom.  Despite my asking him why the respondent should not allow the
    appeal, he told me that the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's father  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant.   I
    pointed out to him that the judge found otherwise and that finding  was
    not challenged.

4.   As a result, I am satisfied that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ian Freer did contain an error  of  law  and  I  set  aside  that
    decision.   The  judge  was  satisfied  as  to  the  question  of  sole
    responsibility and I am satisfied, on the basis of representations made
    to me and confirmed by the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  that  the
    appellant's father  has  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

Notice of Decision

5.   This appeal is allowed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have  decided  to  to  make  a  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where  full
award not justified) for the following reason.  The appeal is allowed.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                dated 07 March 2019
