
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02358/2015
     HU/02360/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 November 2017                           |On 7 December 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                              mr mithun gurung
                              mr mitran gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms N Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Howe & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants are citizens of  Nepal  and  brothers.  Mithun  Gurung's
    date of birth is 30 September 1987 and  his  brother,  Mitran  Gurung's
    date of birth is  29  May  1990.   They  made  applications  for  entry
    clearance to join their father, the Sponsor, Mr Manbahadur  Gurung  (an
    ex-Gurkha soldier in the British army) and their  mother,  Mrs  Ransuea
    Gurung. The Sponsor has been here since 2010 and was granted settlement
    under the relevant policy in 2009.  The Appellants'  applications  were
    made in June 2015  and  refused  by  the  ECO  on  3  July  2015.   The
    applications were made under the policy  relevant  at  that  time.  The
    Appellants appealed and their appeals were and dismissed  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Colvin in a decision that was promulgated on 14
    February 2017.  The Appellants were granted permission to appeal  on  4
    September 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge McGinty.  The  matter  came
    before me on 20 November 2017.

2.    The judge recorded  there  was  an  earlier  determination  from  then
    Immigration  Judge  Kebede  which  was  promulgated  in  October   2010
    dismissing the appeals of the youngest Appellant and his sister.   That
    appeal was determined on the papers because there was no appearance  on
    behalf of the Appellants.  No documentary  evidence  was  submitted  in
    support and the judge concluded that there was no evidence  to  support
    the claims that the Appellants were financially  dependent  upon  their
    father or that he had been funding their studies.

3.   Judge  Colvin  heard  evidence  from  the  Sponsor  and  his  wife.  He
    dismissed the appeal under the relevant policy and Article 8. The judge
    found that the Appellants met the age requirement under Appendix  K  at
    the time of the application and that they had  not  formed  independent
    lives. They were single, unmarried and living in rented  accommodation.
    The judge accepted that they were unable  to  make  an  application  to
    settle with their parents when they were minors  because  of  the  Home
    Office policy then in place. However,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellants had lived apart from their parents for more than  two  years
    and therefore their appeal could not succeed under the  policy.   There
    is not challenge to this finding.

4.   The judge went on to consider financial and  emotional  dependency  and
    made the following findings.  The judge concluded that there  was  some
    discrepancy as to what the Appellants had been doing.  The  judge  made
    salient findings at paragraphs 25, 26, 27, 28 and 29 as follows:-

         "25. There is documentary  evidence  submitted  showing  that  both
             appellants completed the Higher Secondary education in  Nepal.
             There was then some discrepancy as  to  what  they  have  done
             since or are doing currently.   It  is  said  that  the  first
             appellant spent some time working in the Gulf in 2009 but this
             ended when the company he was working for became bankrupt.  It
             is said initially by his father in oral evidence  that  he  is
             now learning computers at college for 2  years  but  this  was
             later changed to agree with his wife that  he  is  studying  a
             language course.  In terms of the  second  appellant,  it  was
             said initially by his father that he had done some training as
             a cook and is now studying language but this was also  changed
             to the extent that he is studying  computer  and  it  was  his
             brother, the first appellant who had done a cookery  training.
             The sponsor's  wife  in  her  evidence  said  that  the  first
             appellant is studying languages  and  has  no  other  type  of
             training; whereas the second appellant  is  studying  computer
             and was trained as a cook about a year ago but was  refused  a
             job.


         26.  It is not clear from this evidence which of the appellants  is
             a trained cook.  However, in any event, there are no documents
             before me showing this and no documents confirming  that  they
             are both studying full-time as claimed.  When their mother was
             asked in oral evidence why the appellants had not  managed  to
             gain employment as porters in a tourist location like Pokhara,
             she said that she was not quite sure but that being  a  porter
             is not a prestigious job.


         27.  Due to  the  lack  of  evidence  before  me  relating  to  the
             appellants' circumstances now and since  they  left  secondary
             school, I am unable to be satisfied that they have shown to  a
             balance of probabilities  that  they  are  both  in  full-time
             education and unable to find  work  or  that  their  financial
             dependency on their sponsor is out  of  necessity.   Whilst  I
             accept that they are sent money by the sponsor and may  access
             his bank account in Nepal, this could be due to the generosity
             of their father to allow them to live a relatively  privileged
             lifestyle in Nepal particularly as I  find  that  no  coherent
             reason has been given why they cannot find work  albeit  as  a
             cook or even a porter.


         28.  In terms of  emotional  dependency  it  would  seem  that  the
             respondent has imposed a higher threshold than  that  required
             under the Annex K policy and that it has to be noted that this
             is not an application as an  adult  dependent  relative  of  a
             settled person under the Immigration Rules  where  the  higher
             threshold may be appropriate.   I  consider  that  this  is  a
             relevant point that  needs  to  be  taken  into  account  when
             assessing the evidence.  As  mentioned  before,  there  is  no
             evidence before me from the appellants themselves  saying  why
             they wish to come to the UK to be with their parents  and  why
             they consider themselves to  still  be  emotionally  dependent
             upon them.  The evidence that is before me is  that  they  are
             living together in rented accommodation in  Pokhara  and  that
             the family home in a remote village has been destroyed by  the
             earthquake.  I have no reason to doubt  the  evidence  of  the
             sponsor and his wife said that  they  have  regular  telephone
             contact with the appellants  and  there  is  some  documentary
             evidence in the bundle to confirm this.  It is said that  they
             have lived all their life with their parents  in  Nepal  until
             they left in 2010 - although this does not take  into  account
             that  there  was  a  period  when  the  first  appellant   was
             independent and working in the Gulf.  They have spent at least
             one significant period of time together from December 2014  to
             March 2015 which seems to have coincided with the marriage  in
             Nepal of their sister.  The previous application made  by  the
             second  appellant  and  his  sister  shows  that  it  was  the
             intention  that  these  family  members  would  accompany  the
             parents to the UK - although it  has  to  be  noted  that  the
             appeal against the refusal decision was not actively  pursued.
             The appellants are unmarried and have not  formed  independent
             family units.  In this  context  I  accept  that  in  Nepalese
             culture children are the parents'  responsibility  until  they
             got  married  -  a  matter  that  appears  not  to  have  been
             considered by the respondent.


         29.  On the basis of this evidence I accept that there is a  degree
             of emotional dependency of the  appellants  on  their  parents
             even if this is mainly as a result of the cultural context  of
             children  remaining  the  responsibility   of   the   parents.
             However, as I have found above that there is not  a  financial
             dependency arising out of necessity, it means that I cannot be
             satisfied that the appellants fulfil paragraph 9(5)  of  Annex
             K."

5.   The judge went on to consider Article  8  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and directed himself at paragraph 32:

         "32. It was accepted in the case of  Ghising  [2012]  UKUT  160  at
             paragraph 56 that the case of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ
             31 'has been interpreted too restrictively in  the  past'  and
             needs to be read in the light of subsequent decisions  of  the
             domestic and Strasbourg courts.  For example, family life  can
             exist without dependence: Patel & Others v ECO (Mumbai) [2010]
             EWCA Civ 17 when Sedley LJ held at paragraph 14 that 'what may
             constitute  an  extant  family  life  falls  well   short   of
             dependency'.  Neither voluntary separation of the family  (Sen
             v Netherlands [2003] EHRR 7) nor the attainment of the age  of
             majority  are  of  themselves  sufficient  to   displace   the
             presumption that there is a family life.   This  approach  has
             been followed in several domestic authorities.   In  AA  v  UK
             [2011] ECHR 8000 at paragraph 49 it was said that the critical
             features  in  assessing  the  existence  of  family  life  are
             continued  presence  in  the  family  home  and  whether   the
             dependant has established a family of their own."

    The judge made the following findings;

         "33. The factors in this case to be taken into account  in  showing
             family life continues are the following:


                . The appellants remain unmarried and have  not  established
                  families of their own;


                . There is a degree of emotional dependency even if this  is
                  mainly in the cultural context of children  remaining  the
                  responsibility of their parents until  being  married  and
                  the sponsor and his wife wishing to have the help of their
                  children as they become elderly;

                . The appellants remain living in rented accommodation  that
                  had previously been the family home;

                . The second appellant has shown  a  previous  intention  to
                  join his parents by making an application at the time that
                  they  are  settled  in  the  UK  -  although   no   proper
                  explanation has been given as to why the  appeal  was  not
                  actively  pursued  by  the  sponsor  and   submission   of
                  documentary evidence;

                . There is regular telephone contact  between  the  sponsor,
                  his wife and the appellants and the sponsor and  his  wife
                  have visited Nepal on at least one occasion for 3 months.

         34.  On the other hand I have found that the  appellants  have  not
             shown on the evidence before me that  they  have  a  financial
             dependency out of necessity on the sponsor and that there is a
             significant lack of evidence to show  their  circumstances  in
             Nepal as regards studying and work.  The appellants have  four
             married sisters in Nepal and, yet again, there is no  evidence
             as to their relationship with  them  particularly  with  their
             sister, Sabina, with whom they lived for several  years  after
             their parents came to the UK.  Without any evidence  from  the
             appellants themselves, it is difficult to say, for example, to
             what extent the appellants and their parents value and  depend
             on each other for mutual support or  the  appellants  rely  on
             their parents for guidance.  And for all these  reasons  I  am
             unable to find that it has been shown that this is in  fact  a
             close knit family relationship."


6.   The grounds argue that the judge erred in respect of Article 8(1).   It
    is asserted that the judge erred at paragraph 34 in concluding that the
    Appellants did not enjoy family life on the basis that they had  failed
    to demonstrate dependency out of necessity. It is asserted that  it  is
    unclear how the relationship with the Appellants' sisters would be more
    substantial than their  relationship  with  their  parents  and  it  is
    submitted that it was an irrelevant consideration.  In respect  of  the
    absence of witness statements from the Appellants  it  is  argued  that
    their intention to come to the UK  was  patently  demonstrated  by  the
    service of their applications and the absence of witness statements was
    a further irrelevant consideration.

7.       It was argued, and  this  was  the  main  thrust  of  Ms  Nnamani's
    submissions, that the assessment of  financial  dependency  was  flawed
    (the grounds cite part of  paragraph  24  of  Pun  &  Others  (Gurkhas:
    policy: Article 8) Nepal [2011] UKUT 00377). It is submitted  that  the
    judge  erred  when  concluding  that  the  Appellants  had  failed   to
    demonstrate necessary dependency.  At paragraph 27 of the determination
    the judge concluded that there was no coherent reason given to  explain
    the Appellants' inability to work. The Sponsor and  his  wife  made  it
    clear that their sons had not found work and that they were undertaking
    courses to enhance  their  skills.   It  is  argued  that  the  judge's
    conclusions in respect of family life are unsustainable  having  regard
    to the factors as set out by the judge at paragraph 33.

8.   Reference is made in the grounds to paragraph 24 in the  case  of  Pun.
    The grounds do not set out the complete paragraph, it is  necessary  to
    do so to understand what was said by the  UT.  Paragraph  24  reads  as
    follows:

         "The need for an evaluation of the facts of  each  particular  case
         seems to us to provide the answer to Mr Blundell's submission  that
         when assessing Article 8 any  financial  dependence  should  be  of
         necessity, not choice by analogy with a similar requirement to  the
         assessment of dependency under the Rules.  Even if such an approach
         is required under the Rules, and it does seem to us that  this  may
         be an oversimplification of what the court was saying in  Bibi,  it
         would  be  wrong  to  impose  such  a  limitation  when   assessing
         dependency within Article 8.  Each case must be looked  at  on  its
         own facts.  We certainly accept that a  contrived  dependency  will
         carry little, if any, weight within Article 8 either when  deciding
         whether family life exists or when assessing  proportionality,  but
         if financial dependency is a choice to be extent that an  applicant
         is dependent so that he or she can  pursue  further  studies,  this
         should not, without more mean that such dependency cannot  properly
         be taken into account."


9.   In Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 the Appellant resisted  removal  to  Sri
    Lanka on the basis of his continuing family life with his  mother,  his
    brother and his married sister who all lived in Germany.  He had  lived
    with them for many years in Germany before coming to this country about
    three years prior to the decision under appeal.  The  leading  judgment
    was given by Sedley LJ.  At paragraph 14 of his judgment he quoted  the
    statement of the Commission in S v United Kingdom that:

         "Generally, the protection of family life under Article 8  involves
         cohabiting dependants, such as parents and their  dependent,  minor
         children.  Whether it extends to other relationships depend on  the
         circumstances  of  the  particular  case.   Relationships   between
         adults, a mother and her 33 year old son in the present case, would
         not necessarily require protection of Article 8 of  the  Convention
         without evidence of further elements of dependency, involving  more
         than the normal emotional ties."

10.  Sedley LJ described that  as  setting  out  "a  proper  approach".   As
    regards the meaning of dependency in that passage, in paragraph  17  of
    his judgment he said:

         "Mr Gill  QC  says  that  none  of  this  amounts  to  an  absolute
         requirement of dependency.  That is clearly right in  the  economic
         sense but if dependency is read down as meaning 'support',  in  the
         personal  sense,  and  if  one   adds,   echoing   the   Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, real or committed or effective to the word  support,
         then it represents in my  view  the  irreducible  minimum  of  what
         family life implies."

11.  It was held that the Appellant's relationship with his family  did  not
    at the time of the decision constitute family life for the  purpose  of
    Article 8 whatever might have been the position while they  were  still
    in Germany.  Sedley LJ said at paragraph 19:

         "Returning to the present case, neither blood ties nor the  concern
         and affection that ordinarily go with them are,  by  themselves  or
         together, in my judgment enough to constitute family life.  Most of
         us have close relations of whom we are extremely fond and  whom  we
         visit, or who visit us from time to time; but none of us would  say
         on those grounds alone that we share a family life with them in any
         sense capable of coming within the meaning and purpose  of  Article
         8."

12.  In Ghising v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]  UKUT
    00160 the Upper Tribunal (Lang J and Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan)  was
    critical of the manner  in  which  Kugathas  had  been  interpreted  by
    courts.  It observed at paragraph 56 of its determination that:

         "The judgment in Kugathas has been interpreted too restrictively in
         the past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent  decisions
         of the domestic and Strasbourg courts."


    It continued at paragraph 57 to point out that several authorities  had
    recognised that family life may continue between parent and child  even
    after the  child  has  reached  the  age  of  majority.   The  Tribunal
    concluded at paragraph 62:


         "The  different  outcomes  in  cases  with  superficially   similar
         features emphasises to us that the  issue  under  Article  8(1)  is
         highly fact sensitive.  In our judgment, rather than  applying  the
         blanket rule with regard to adult children,  each  case  should  be
         analysed on its own facts, to decide whether  or  not  family  life
         exists, within the meaning of Article 8(1).  As Wall LJ  explained,
         in the context of family life between adult siblings:  'we  do  not
         think that Advic is authority for the proposition that Article 8 of
         the Human Rights Convention can never be engaged  when  the  family
         life that is sought to establish is  that  between  adult  siblings
         living together.  In our judgment, the recognition in  Advic  that,
         whilst  some  generalisations  are  possible,  each  case  is  fact
         sensitive and places an obligation on both adjudicators and the AIT
         to identify the nature of the family life asserted, and to explain,
         quite shortly and succinctly, why it is that Article 8 is or is not
         engaged in a given case'.  (Senthuran v Secretary of State for  the
         Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 950."


13.  The approach of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ghising  was  approved  in  R
    (Gurung) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    8.  In Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 630 Sir Stanley Burton with whom Richards  and  Christopher  Clarke
    LJJ agreed concluded at paragraph 24:

         "I do not think that the judgments to which I have referred lead to
         any difficulty in determining the correct approach to Article 8  in
         cases involving adult children.  In the  case  of  adults,  in  the
         context of immigration  control,  there  is  no  legal  or  factual
         presumption as to the existence or absence of family life  for  the
         purposes of Article 8.  I  point  out  that  the  approach  of  the
         European Commission for Human Rights cited approvingly in  Kugathas
         did not include any requirement of exceptionality.  It all  depends
         on the facts.  The love and affection  between  an  adult  and  his
         parents or siblings will not of itself justify a finding of  family
         life.  There has to be something more.  A young adult  living  with
         his parents or siblings will normally have  a  family  life  to  be
         respected under Article 8.  A child enjoying a family life with his
         parents does not suddenly cease to have a family life  at  midnight
         as he turns 18 years of age.  On the  other  hand,  a  young  adult
         living independently of his parents may well not have a family life
         for the purposes of Article 8."

14.  Sedley LJ's statement of the applicable principles in Kugathas has  not
    been in any sense disproved.  In ECO & Kopoi [2017] EWCA  Civ  1511  at
    paragraph 19  Sales  LJ  said  that  Kugathas  remains  good  law  (see
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Onuroah  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    1757).

Conclusions

15.   It is clear from paragraph  32  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the judge properly directed himself on the relevant  law.
    There is no criticism of his self-direction.  The  judge  engaged  with
    the Appellants' particular circumstances.  When the  full  decision  in
    Pun is considered, rather than a section of 24,  it does not support an
    argument that dependency from choice is not a  material  consideration.
    What the court emphasised was that what is needed is a  fact  sensitive
    assessment and that is what the judge in this case did.  He found  that
    there  was  inconsistent  and  unreliable  evidence  about   what   the
    Appellants were doing at the relevant  date.   There  was  no  coherent
    evidence about their circumstances as found by the  judge.   The  judge
    found that the evidence relating to what  they  had  been  doing  since
    leaving school until the date of the hearing was lacking.  The  grounds
    in my view disagree with the conclusion but do not properly engage with
    the findings of the judge made  in  respect  of  the  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor and his wife.  The judge accepted that the  Appellants'  father
    sent money to them. He did not conclude  that  they  were  studying  or
    genuinely unemployed.  This finding  was  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence. The judge conducted  a  fact  sensitive  assessment  and  was
    entitled on the evidence before him to find that dependency was out  of
    choice not necessity when considering family life.

16.  There was no evidence from  the  Appellants  about  their  relationship
    with their parents. This was surprising  because  the  nature  of  this
    relationship was core to the assessment of the appeal under article  8.
     The judge found  a  degree  of  emotional  dependency  and  considered
    Nepalese culture (see paragraphs 28 and 29).   There  was  no  evidence
    from the Appellants or their adult siblings in Nepal.   The  judge  was
    entitled to take this into account.  There were three adult siblings in
    Nepal, one of whom had lived with  the  Appellants  for  several  years
    after their parents' departure.  The Appellants were  not  isolated  in
    Nepal without their parents.  They  had  each  other  and  other  adult
    siblings. There was no evidence from  the  Appellants  or  their  adult
    siblings and it the judge to drew reasonable inferences from this.

17.      The judge properly factored into  the  assessment  that  there  was
    regular telephone contact and that the Appellants had  not  established
    their own families.  The judge attached weight to emotional  dependency
    but on the evidence before him and following on from his the lawful and
    sustainable findings, it was unarguable that this was more than usually
    expected between adult siblings and  their  parents,  namely  involving
    more than the normal emotional ties.  It  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that there was no family life  for  the  purposes  of  Article
    8(1).  The decision was  open  to  the  judge  and  complies  with  the
    relevant case law. It is not irrational or perverse.  I  conclude  that
    the judge did not make an error of law and the decision is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 6 December 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
