
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02470/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30 October 2017                           |On 09 November 2017            |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                           mr samson kibrom okbay
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Boyle, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, born on 8  September  1991.   He
    appeals against the decision of the respondent  on  14  September  2015
    refusing him leave to enter the United Kingdom to join  his  wife,  the
    sponsor, who has limited leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    refugee.

2.   The application was refused because the respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant and the sponsor were married prior  to  her  leaving
    Eritrea.  It is  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  a
    marriage certificate or photographs of the wedding at the time.

3.   The appeal against the decision  came  for  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  3  January  2017.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 9 January 2017 the appeal was dismissed.

4.    Challenge  is  made  to  the  decision  on  the  basis  of  procedural
    unfairness and of a failure to take into account all the evidence.

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  that  basis
    and the matter comes before me to determine the merits of the appeal.

6.   In terms  of  chronology  it  is  the  evidence,  particularly  of  the
    sponsor, that she married the appellant on 1  March  2012,  a  marriage
    arranged by the families and conducted in  the  Pentecostal  way  by  a
    Pentecostal pastor.  It was the case  for  the  sponsor  that  she  was
    arrested by the Eritrean authorities  in  December  2012,  having  been
    caught practising her Pentecostal faith.  She managed  to  escape  with
    the assistance of an agent arranged by  her  husband's  brothers.   She
    left Eritrea on 26 May 2013.  She says that she last saw the  appellant
    on 30 April 2013 when he visited her in Asmara.

7.   Her asylum claim was granted on 13 August 2013.

8.   The appellant in his statement indicated that he too fled  Eritrea  and
    claimed asylum in Uganda.  He managed to obtain the sponsor's telephone
    number through a  mutual  friend  and  contacted  her  in  March  2014.
    Thereafter she visited him in Uganda between 17 April 2014 and 28 April
    2014, since when they have been in continuous  contact  via  telephone,
    through viber and by post and that there has also been a money transfer
    from her to him.

9.   As was noted by the respondent in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and
    by the Judge, there were inconsistencies between the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor and that of the appellant.

10.  The appellant in his statement of 31 March 2015, to be found  at  pages
    45 to 47 of the appeal  bundle,  indicated  that  the  pastor  who  had
    conducted the marriage  ceremony  retained  the  marriage  certificate.
    Thereafter, they did not have any contact with the pastor as "we do not
    know his whereabouts or situation".  It also stated that they  did  not
    have any contact with their families because it would be dangerous  for
    them to contact them and therefore were unable to produce the document.
     He also said there were no photographs taken of the wedding.

11.  The sponsor in her statement of 14 December 2016, to be found at  pages
    4 to 12  of  the  bundle,  said  at  paragraph  13  that  the  Eritrean
    authorities had confiscated their identity documents and  any  marriage
    documents which they had.  Thus they were unable to provide evidence to
    prove the marriage on the basis that  both  she  and  he  fled  Eritrea
    illegally without having the chance to collect their belongings.

12.  At paragraph 12 it was stated that soon after she fled Eritrea she  was
    informed by some of her neighbours who fled Eritrea after her that  the
    Eritrean authorities went "to my family's house and my husband's family
    house and all our family photographs and all the written documents were
    confiscated by the Eritrean authorities on 30 May 2013".

13.  Significantly there  is  no  reference  to  that  matter  made  by  the
    appellant, notwithstanding seemingly that the raid was  conducted  also
    at his home.

14.  At paragraph 24 the sponsor indicated as follows:

         "Therefore  the  ECO  should  have  been  aware  that  our  wedding
         photographs and marriage contract were confiscated by the  Eritrean
         authorities following my illegal exit  from  the  country  so  they
         cannot be produced."


15.   It  is  entirely  understandable  therefore  that  the  Judge  focuses
    particularly on those matters.

16.  It is said that the Judge failed to  put  matters  of  concern  to  the
    sponsor.  It is clear however from paragraph  9  of  the  determination
    that the sponsor was given an opportunity to deal with the  discrepancy
    between her account of having wedding photographs and  the  appellant's
    account that there were none.  The explanation was that she had made  a
    mistake in her witness  statement.   The  Judge  did  not  accept  that
    explanation, given that she had adopted her statement at the  start  of
    her evidence and did not indicate that there  were  any  errors  in  it
    until the inconsistency was pointed out to her.

17.  It is clearly difficult to reconcile the  statement  of  the  appellant
    that the marriage certificate was retained by the pastor, who could not
    be found, with the account given  by  the  sponsor  that  the  marriage
    documents had been  seized  by  the  authorities.   It  clearly  was  a
    significant event, if indeed it  had  happened  in  the  way  that  the
    sponsor  had  described.   She  had  obtained  that  information   from
    neighbours of hers in Eritrea, who were  now  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    There was however no evidence from those neighbours  presented.

18.  Ms Boyle who represents the appellant today and indeed represented  him
    at the hearing, contends that it  was  unreasonable  of  the  Judge  to
    expect other evidence.  I fail to see what was unreasonable as  to  the
    approach taken by the Judge on that matter when the  central  challenge
    that is made by the respondent is the lack of documentation.  That  was
    a matter that should have been properly addressed in evidence if relied
    upon.

19.  The clear conflict of account is highlighted by the Judge in  paragraph
    7 of the determination.

20.  The appellant, in his witness statement, sought to  indicate  that  the
    marriage certificate was with the Pentecostal  priest  and  gives  very
    little detail as to what steps, if any, had been taken to try and trace
    him down or indeed to obtain a copy of the  marriage  certificate  from
    the Pentecostal Church.  The explanation offered by  the  appellant  in
    his statement was of  course  that  they  had  no  contact  with  their
    families as it would put them in danger with the  Eritrean  authorities
    to so do.  However, it has been noted that the sponsor in  her  witness
    statement, at paragraph 27, indicated that despite the lack of  contact
    with family members, the appellant was  able  to  gather  some  further
    evidence of identity from his brother who was still in Eritrea, contact
    being made through people trading between Uganda and Eritrea.  In  such
    circumstances the question clearly arises as to why the brother, having
    obtained some documents, could not have obtained others.  It is perhaps
    in that context that remarks in paragraph 6 of  the  determination  are
    made.

21.  The Judge recognised that contact had been made as between the  sponsor
    and appellant in Uganda, highlighting  certain  matters  as  raising  a
    question as to the nature of that relationship.  Although  contact  had
    been made in 2014 the application for  entry  clearance  was  not  made
    until 2015.  The appellant in the interview was unaware as  to  whether
    or not the  sponsor  was  working.   The  Judge  comments  that  it  is
    surprising in  the  circumstances,  with  the  prolonged  communication
    between them, that such would be a factor which he did not know.   Once
    again the explanation given by the sponsor is noted in paragraph 11  of
    the determination that she had not told him she was not working as  she
    did not want to worry him.  That is not an explanation that is accepted
    by  the  Judge  as  explaining  a  lack  of  his   knowledge   of   her
    circumstances.  Although contact between the sponsor and the  appellant
    was not in doubt, the frequency of it was a relevant  matter.   In  the
    interview the appellant had indicated that his last contact had been by
    email some three or four weeks before the date of interview  which  was
    conducted on 4 May 2015.  No email was presented.  Indeed the  evidence
    of the sponsor was that the contact was more frequent than that.

22.  Ms Boyle submits that it is notoriously difficult for  those  who  have
    fled  Eritrea  to  make  contact  with   family   members   or   obtain
    documentation and that that was something that the Judge ought to  have
    borne in mind before  making  that  criticism   in  the  determination.
    Whilst there may be some merit in the contention that perhaps the Judge
    should have been a little bit more understanding of the difficulties of
    contacting  the family  that of course was not the focus of enquiry  or
    of concern.  The central issue was the inconsistent evidence  given  as
    between the appellant  and  the  sponsor  as  to  the  absence  of  the
    documentation and/or the inability to obtain it.

23.   The  issue  of  family  contact  and  identification  were,   in   the
    circumstances, perhaps more peripheral.  Contrary  to  the  contentions
    made in the grounds of appeal it is  clear  that  the  Judge  had  paid
    careful regard to the statements that had  been  submitted  and  raised
    certain matters with the sponsor.

24.  It is difficult to understand what  further  matters  could  or  should
    have been put before the sponsor for her  comment.   As  indicated  the
    statements submitted contain obvious  inconsistencies,  highlighted  by
    the respondent both in the original decision  of  refusal  and  in  the
    managerial review on the matters that should have been dealt with  more
    fully by those instructed to represent the  appellant.   The  appellant
    was represented at  the  hearing  and  in  those  circumstances  it  is
    entirely reasonable for the Judge to expect that those matters be fully
    and properly dealt with in evidential terms.

25.  I can find no unfairness  in  the  manner  in  which  the  hearing  was
    conducted nor in the conclusions come to by the Judge.  The  fact  that
    an explanation is offered either by the appellant  or  by  the  sponsor
    does not oblige the Judge to accept it.  It is clear that the Judge had
    regard to the overall context and of the evidence that  was  presented.
    In  the  perspective  of  the  Judge  the  inconsistencies   were   not
    satisfactorily explained.  It is entirely understandable therefore  why
    the appeal was dismissed.

26.   In  those  circumstances  the  appellant's  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    shall stand,  namely  that  the  application  for  entry  clearance  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and human rights

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                 [pic]                 Date 8 November 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

