
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02393/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13th May 2019                       |On 30 May 2019                        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                 cristel [e]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Ogunbiyi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of a  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Shanahan) promulgated on 6th March 2019  in  which
    the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of the  Philippines  who,  aged  17  years,
    applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK as the dependent  child
    of her mother, Mrs [CE] "the Sponsor".  The Sponsor  became  a  British
    citizen in 2013.  The application was refused  on  19th  December  2017
    against which the Appellant appealed on human rights grounds.

 3. The Sponsor, who appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  confirmed
    that the application for entry clearance  was  submitted  in  September
    2017 at which time, the Appellant was aged 17 years 4 months.

 4. Having considered the  evidence  before  her,  the  FtTJ  set  out  her
    findings of fact and conclusion in [13 to 22] of her decision.

 5. The basis of the application for entry clearance was that  the  Sponsor
    had sole responsibility for her upbringing and therefore the  Appellant
    met the requirements of paragraph 297(1)(e) of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge noted the evidence  given  with  regard  to  the  Appellant's
    arrangements in the Philippines.  She considered firstly that  part  of
    the Respondent's  refusal  centred  on  concerns  in  relation  to  the
    involvement of the Appellant's natural  father.   She  made  a  finding
    however  which  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  natural  father   had
    abandoned the Sponsor before the  Appellant  was  born,  and  therefore
    played no part in the Appellant's life.

 6. The FtTJ then considered the evidence and made the following  findings.
    The Sponsor left the Appellant in the Philippines  when  the  Appellant
    was a very young child (aged 2 or 3 years old)  and  went  to  work  in
    Dubai.  The Appellant was left in the care of her grandmother  and  she
    has remained living with her grandmother since that time.

 7. The judge accepted that there was  evidence  of  financial  remittances
    which covered a period of December 2016  to  October  2018.   She  also
    considered photographic evidence and was satisfied that the Appellant's
    mother visited the Philippines on an annual basis to see her family and
    her daughter.

 8. However, when weighing the evidence before her, the  judge  noted  that
    there was a lack of evidence to establish that the Sponsor had had sole
    responsibility for her daughter's upbringing and indeed made a  finding
    that the evidence showed at its highest,  there  was  shared  or  joint
    responsibility with the Appellant's grandmother.

 9. The judge then looked at Article 8 outside the Rules.  She  noted  that
    the Appellant had grown up in the Philippines, had remained  there  all
    her life and was now almost 19 years of age.   There  was  no  evidence
    from the Appellant herself giving her views about the appeal,  and  the
    FtTJ found any family life which the Appellant had with her mother  had
    been conducted from a distance.   She  noted  that  there  were  annual
    visits and communication over social  media  but  also  noted  that  no
    reason had been put forward as to why these could not continue.   There
    was no evidence put forward of  any  difficulties  that  the  Appellant
    faced in the Philippines.  It was said that her grandmother  was  aged,
    but the evidence from the Sponsor's husband who also attended  the  FtT
    hearing, was that this lady is 55 to 56 years of  age.   There  was  no
    evidence to justify any finding that the  Appellant's  grandmother  has
    any health or other problems which  would  adversely  impact  upon  the
    Appellant's care.  The judge therefore concluded that the  Respondent's
    refusal was not disproportionate in the context of Article 8 ECHR.

10. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  asserting  that  the  judge
    erred in failing to adequately or at  all  apply  the  guidance  in  TD
    (paragraph 297(i)(e): sole responsibility) Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.
    It was asserted that the judge had failed to adequately engage with the
    evidence before her, because she had discounted 278 pages  of  messages
    provided as evidence of contact between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    because they were not translated [19].  It was further claimed that the
    FtTJ had taken into  account  an  extraneous  matter  when  looking  at
    Article 8 outside the Rules, because she had noted that  the  Appellant
    is now almost 19 years of age and there was no evidence from her giving
    her views on the matter [24].  It was asserted  that  the  FtTJ  should
    have confined her decision making to considering the Appellant's age at
    the date of application (when the Appellant was still a minor).

11. Permission having been granted the matter comes before me to  determine
    whether the FtTJ's decision discloses such error that it  must  be  set
    aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

12. Before me Mr Ogunbiyi appeared for the Appellant and Miss Pal  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Ogunbiyi's submissions followed the lines of the  grant
    of permission.  He submitted that  the  judge  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's  mother  was  responsible  for  financial  support  of  the
    Appellant [14] and accepted that the Appellant made  annual  visits  to
    the Philippines since 2004.

13. With regard to the evidence that was not translated, he submitted  that
    the judge had taken the wrong approach.  Even if the contents were  not
    translated, the judge should have noted the volume of communication and
    thereby accorded it some weight of showing contact.

14. He added that the Sponsor's evidence had been that she had  chosen  her
    daughter's school and that if her daughter had problems at  school  she
    called her.  He submitted that the Sponsor's evidence was that when she
    visited the  Philippines  she  would  go  to  the  school  to  see  her
    daughter's teachers.  Altogether there was overwhelming  evidence  that
    the Sponsor had sole responsibility  for  the  Appellant.   The  appeal
    should be allowed.

15. Miss Pal on behalf of the Respondent served a Rule  24  response.   She
    emphasised that the grounds were essentially a reasons challenge.   The
    judge had adequately considered  the  evidence  before  her.   She  had
    rejected the Sponsor's evidence that she had  sole  responsibility  for
    the Appellant.  The judge properly directed herself on the case  of  TD
    Yemen and came to the conclusion that responsibility for the  Appellant
    rested primarily with the Appellant's  grandmother.  That  finding  was
    open to her.  So far as the evidence was concerned,  the  letters  from
    the school did not demonstrate that the decision making  was  taken  by
    the Sponsor's mother.

16. The judge properly directed herself on Article  8  outside  the  Rules.
    The reasons are sound  and  the  grounds  amount  to  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with those reasons and therefore fail to  demonstrate  any
    error of law on the part of the FtTJ.

Error of Law Consideration

17. In TD (paragraph 297(i)(e) "sole responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049, the Tribunal said that "sole responsibility" is a factual matter
    to be decided upon all the evidence.  Where one parent is not  involved
    in the  child's  upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned  or
    abdicated responsibility (as in this case), the issue may arise between
    the remaining parent and others who have day-to-day care of  the  child
    abroad.  The test is whether the  parent  has  continuing  control  and
    direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,  including  making  all  the
    important decisions in the child's life.  The guidance in TD  was  that
    the decision should be made on the basis  of  all  the  evidence.   The
    assessment of whether a parent had sole responsibility would include  a
    consideration as to the nature of the relationship between  parent  and
    child in a given case, and the decision maker would be able  to  assess
    whether particular decisions were or were not  important  ones  in  the
    context of the evidence as a whole.

18. What the case law shows is that the question of sole responsibility  is
    one of fact.  In  the  present  case,  the  judge  analysed  the  facts
    including the degree of involvement in the Appellant's life by both her
    mother and her grandmother.  Whilst finding that the Sponsor  played  a
    significant part in her daughter's life in terms of providing  elements
    of financial support and visiting the Appellant's school on her  annual
    return  to  the  Philippines,  nevertheless  it  was  the   Appellant's
    grandmother who exercised the day-to-day care and control of her.   The
    judge assessed the nature of that involvement and concluded that it was
    of a degree that prevented the Sponsor establishing that she  exercised
    sole responsibility for the Appellant.  It has not been shown that this
    conclusion is perverse, irrational or outside  the  range  of  findings
    available to the judge on the evidence.

19. The judge considered Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules  having
    accepted that the fact that the Appellant and Sponsor  are  related  as
    claimed, they have a family life together.  She accepted therefore that
    the decision to refuse entry clearance is an  interference  with  their
    wish to enjoy family life in the UK.  However she found  that  she  was
    satisfied that the proposed interference with the family  life  was  in
    accordance with the law on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

20. Having analysed  the  evidence  the  FtTJ  concluded  that  whilst  she
    understood the reasons why the Sponsor had made the decision  to  leave
    her daughter in the care of her grandmother, the situation was that the
    Appellant had grown up in the Philippines and had been  brought  up  by
    her grandmother from the  age  of  3  years.   The  Appellant  was  now
    reaching 19 years  when  undoubtedly,  she  would  have  established  a
    significant private life for herself.  There was no evidence before the
    judge from the Appellant herself expressing her views  and  wishes.   I
    disagree with Mr Ogunbiyi's objection to the FtTJ's  comments  at  [24]
    concerning this point.  At the date of application the Appellant albeit
    a minor was over 17years of age. The  views  of  any  teenager  who  is
    approaching adulthood are clearly relevant to an  application  of  this
    nature.

21. The judge noted that the family life with her mother had been conducted
    from a distance with annual visits and communication over social  media
    and there was no reason put forward why this could not continue.  There
    was no evidence of any other significant issues such as ill  health  or
    difficulties faced by the Appellant in the Philippines.   It  was  said
    that her grandmother is aged 55 to 56 years of age  but  there  was  no
    evidence to show that she has any health or other problems which  would
    adversely affect the Appellant's care, bearing in mind the  Appellant's
    age.

22. Accordingly, I conclude that no arguable legal error  material  to  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal is made out.  It follows therefore  that
    the Appellant's appeal fails.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  6th  March  2019
discloses no error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     25 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made  because  the  decision  of  the  FtT  to  dismiss  the
original appeal stands.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     25 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

