
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02684/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 August 2020                     |On 18 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     S B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Norman, instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundle of 264 pages, the contents of which I have recorded. The order
made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 2 July 1985.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge B A Morris, dated  22
    January 2020, dismissing his appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK as an unaccompanied minor in 2001 when  he
    was 16 years old. He claimed to be a citizen of Kosovo and was  granted
    refugee status. When the Appellant applied for naturalisation in  2014,
    the Respondent discovered  that  he  was  a  citizen  of  Albania.  The
    Appellant's refugee status was revoked in July 2017 and his  indefinite
    leave to remain was revoked in June  2018.  He  did  not  appeal  these
    decisions. The Appellant married his  British  citizen  partner  on  10
    November 2018.  He applied for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds  on
    29 November 2018.

3.   The Appellant accepts that he was aware he lied about  his  nationality
    and he did not seek to correct it after 2004 when  he  received  advice
    that an application to change his nationality would have  a  less  than
    50% chance of success. The Appellant's family live in  Albania  and  he
    has visited them several times since he came to the UK. The  last  time
    was in 2011.

4.   The Respondent refused the  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  24
    January 2019 on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements  (paragraph  S-LTR  2.2)  and  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the  UK  and
    therefore paragraph E.X. 1 did not apply. Further, there were  no  very
    significant obstacles to re-integration and  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. The Respondent considered
    the  Appellant's  deception  in  finding  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances and concluded the refusal of leave did not breach Article
    8. The application was refused under D-LTRP 1.3 with  reference  to  R-
    LTRP 1.1(d)(iii) of Appendix FM and paragraph 276CE with  reference  to
    276ADE(1).

5.   At the appeal  before  Judge  Morris,  the  Appellant's  representative
    argued that paragraph S-LTR 2.2 did not apply because the Appellant had
    not provided false information in this application.  The  discretionary
    nature of paragraph S-LTR 4.2 was not raised at the  hearing,  although
    the judge recorded the Appellant's evidence that he was told to by  his
    solicitor  to  lie  about  his  nationality  at  [7].  The  Appellant's
    representative submitted there were insurmountable obstacles to  family
    life continuing outside the UK because the Appellant's wife  was  about
    to give birth to their British  citizen  child  and  she  required  the
    Appellant to administer injections during her pregnancy.

6.   The Respondent's  representative  relied  on  the  refusal  letter  and
    submitted the Appellant had given false information on arrival  in  the
    UK and had failed  to  correct  it.  The  false  information  had  been
    discovered by the Respondent in  2014.  The  Appellant  had  family  in
    Albania and support was available there.

7.   Judge Morris made the following findings:

    (i)  The Appellant accepted he made false representations when  stating
         he was a citizen of Kosovo and therefore he failed to show  he  met
         the suitability requirements [17];

    (ii) There were no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
         outside the UK. Paragraph E.X. 1(b) did not apply [19] and [20];

    (iii)    There were no very  significant  obstacles  to  re-integration
         under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) [21].

    (iv) The Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements  under  S-
         LTR 4.2 [17] and [21];

    (v)  The Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(1)(i) [21].

    (vi) The Appellant had established family and private life  in  the  UK
         and the decision interfered with his Article 8 rights. The decision
         was in accordance with the  law  and  the  issue  was  whether  the
         refusal of leave was proportionate [22];

8.   At [24] the judge made the following findings:

         "... Nevertheless, the Appellant has  always  been  aware  that  he
         obtained asylum and indefinite leave to remain in 2001 on  a  false
         basis.  The  Appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules and I repeat and adopt here  all  the  matters  I
         have set out above in this decision. Further,  by  claiming  asylum
         falsely stating that he was born in Kosovo, the Appellant  has  had
         the  advantage  of  all  matters  associated  with  asylum  as   an
         unaccompanied minor, including housing, maintenance, education  and
         healthcare.   [The   Appellant's   representative]   accepted    in
         submissions that such  matters  are  relevant  considerations  when
         considering the public  interest,  but  argued  that  such  matters
         should be balanced against the positive use the Appellant has  made
         of his time here by  obtaining  qualifications  and  paying  taxes.
         Paying taxes is expected  of  all  people  working  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

9.   The judge concluded that the decision was  proportionate.  The  factors
    in the Appellant's favour did not outweigh the public interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control. The judge  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

10.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the grounds that  the
    judge failed to appreciate the discretionary nature of paragraph  S-LTR
    4.2 and failed to consider the Appellant was a minor when he made false
    representations. Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ford on both grounds on 12 May 2020.

Submissions

11.  Ms Norman relied on her grounds  and  submitted  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the discretionary nature of paragraph S-LTR 4.2  and  to  take
    into   account   the   Appellant's   explanation   for   making   false
    representations which was accepted by  the  Respondent.  The  Appellant
    would have been granted a period of discretionary leave as a minor  and
    he  should  be  treated  differently  in   applying   the   suitability
    requirements. The Respondent wrongly relied on paragraph S-LTR 2.2. and
    the judge wrongly treated paragraph S-LTR 4.2 as a mandatory ground  of
    refusal. Ms Norman accepted paragraph S-LTR 4.2 applied  but  submitted
    the judge did not appreciate its  discretionary  nature.  Although  the
    judge recorded the Appellant's explanation given in  cross-examination,
    she failed to take it into account in applying paragraph S-LTR 4.2.

12.  In relation to ground 2, the Appellant was in  a  worse  position  than
    someone who had committed a criminal offence because the  discretionary
    suitability requirements applied to someone who was  16  years  old.  I
    indicated that I failed to see the relevance  of  comparing  this  case
    with the exceptions to deportation as submitted in the grounds  and  Ms
    Norman did not pursue the point save to say there was an imbalance with
    16 year  olds  who  commit  an  offence.  Ms  Norman  stated  that  the
    Appellant's daughter was born in February 2020 and she  was  a  British
    citizen.

13.  Mr Walker submitted that the Appellant was still claiming he  was  from
    Kosovo when he applied for British nationality. It was only  after  the
    Respondent's investigations with Tirana that it was discovered  he  was
    Albanian. The  Appellant  continued  to  lie  in  his  application  for
    naturalisation and his indefinite leave to remain was revoked  on  this
    basis. Although the  judge  did  not  refer  to  the  discretion  under
    paragraph S-LTR 4.2 there was no material error of law in her  decision
    to dismiss the appeal.

14.  Ms Norman submitted that the falsehood flowed from an earlier  lie.  If
    the judge had taken into account the discretionary framework she  would
    have said so. The judge had failed to consider the Appellant's evidence
    on this issue. The Respondent did not rely on paragraph S-LTR 4.2,  but
    the judge considered it anyway.

15.  I asked Ms Norman why an error of law in relation  to  the  suitability
    requirements was material given that the judge concluded the  Appellant
    could not satisfy paragraph E.X.1. Ms  Norman  submitted  that  if  the
    Appellant succeeded in satisfying the suitability requirements, he  did
    not have to satisfy paragraph E.X.1 because the Respondent accepted  he
    satisfied the eligibility requirements in relation to his partner.  She
    submitted that if the decision  was  set  aside,  the  Appellant  would
    succeed on any re-hearing  of  the  appeal  because  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to  expect  his  British  citizen  child  to  leave  the  UK
    following SF Albania.

16.  Mr Walker agreed that if the appeal was re-heard  the  Appellant  would
    succeed because he had a British citizen  child.  Ms  Norman  submitted
    that if the Appellant succeeded in this appeal on suitability  grounds,
    then the Appellant would succeed under Appendix FM on the basis of  his
    relationship with his partner. If the appeal was re-heard the Appellant
    would succeed under section 117B, even if  he  could  not  satisfy  the
    suitability requirements.

Conclusions and reasons

17.  It is worth noting at the outset that this is a  human  rights  appeal.
    It is not appropriate to convert a human rights appeal into  a  precise
    calculation under  the  Immigration  Rules,  although  the  Appellant's
    ability to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules  will  be  relevant  to  the
    assessment of proportionality.

18.  I find that the judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  appreciate  the
    discretionary nature of paragraph S-LTR 4.2. However,  this  conclusion
    was not material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on human  rights
    grounds for the following reasons.

19.   The  Respondent  failed  to  apply  the  correct  paragraph   of   the
    Immigration  Rules  and  therefore  she  has  failed  to  consider  her
    discretion under paragraph S-LTR 4.2. The judge also failed to consider
    that discretion. The Appellant had been deprived of the opportunity  of
    having his case considered under the correct Immigration  Rule  and  no
    more.

20.  In any event, on the facts, the Appellant could not  satisfy  paragraph
    S-LTR 4.2. Even if his explanation for his failure to disclose his true
    nationality when he arrived in the UK  is  accepted,  he  continued  to
    claim a false nationality for many years and  in  his  application  for
    naturalisation in 2014. I am not persuaded by  Ms  Norman's  submission
    that this matter  was  not  raised  on  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and therefore it cannot be  relied  upon.  The  Appellant  was
    aware he had falsely represented his nationality  and  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his nationality. The factual
    matrix relevant to the proportionality assessment is not changed by any
    misapplication of the Rules by the Secretary of State or error  of  law
    on the part of the judge.

21.  Further, the error was not material because  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy paragraph R-LTRP 1.1 (d) (iii) or the eligibility  requirements
    at E-LTRP 2.2(b). The Appellant has remained in the  UK  without  leave
    since June 2018. The Appellant had to satisfy paragraph E.X.1  for  the
    following reasons.

22.  Paragraph R-LTRP 1.1 states: "The requirements to be  met  for  limited
    leave to remain as a partner are -

         (a)  the applicant and their partner must be in the UK;

         (b)  the applicant must have made a valid application  for  limited
             leave to remain as a partner; and either

         (c)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  Section  S-
             LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and

             (ii) the applicant meets all the requirements  of  Section  E-
             LTRP: Eligibility for leave to remain as a partner; or

         (d)  (i) the applicant must not fall for refusal under  Section  S-
             LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and

             (ii) the applicant meets the requirements  of  Section  E-LTRP
             1.2 - 1.12 and E-LTRP 2.1-2.2; and

             (iii)    paragraph E.X.1 applies.

23.  It is not  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  can  satisfy  all  of  the
    eligibility requirements. There was nothing in the  application  or  on
    the court file to  show  that  the  financial  requirements  were  met.
    Paragraph R-LTRP 1.1(d) is therefore applicable. Even if the  Applicant
    can satisfy the suitability  requirements,  he  still  has  to  satisfy
    paragraph E.X.1

24.  I am not persuaded by Ms Norman's submission (summarised  at  paragraph
    15 above), but I can understand why she put her case as  she  did.  The
    Respondent's decision stated that under paragraph  R-LTRP  1.1  (d)(ii)
    the Appellant satisfies the eligibility immigration status requirements
    at E-LTRP 2.1 to 2.2. However,  the  Appellant  still  has  to  satisfy
    paragraph R-LTRP 1.1 (d) (iii). The Respondent did go  on  to  consider
    paragraph E.X. 1. The grounds of appeal  address  this  point  and  the
    issue was properly argued on appeal.

25.  In any event, the  Appellant  remains  in  the  UK  in  breach  of  the
    immigration laws. He cannot satisfy E-LTRP 2.2(b) which states:

         "The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration  laws
         (except that, where paragraph  39E  of  these  Rules  applies,  any
         current  period  of  overstaying  will  be   disregarded),   unless
         paragraph E.X.1 applies."

26.  There was no challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.  The
    Appellant could not satisfy Appendix FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration  Rules,  even  if  he  succeeded  in  showing  he  met  the
    suitability requirements.

27.   The  judge  took  into  account  all  relevant  factors  in  assessing
    proportionality at  [24]  and  the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  was
    proportionate. Even if discretion was applied in the Appellant's favour
    and the judge concluded the suitability requirements were met, it  does
    not alter the factual situation  that  the  Appellant  lied  about  his
    nationality.  On  the  facts,  the  public   interest   outweighs   the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights.

28.  Accordingly, I find there was no material error of law in the  decision
    dated 12 February 2020 and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 11 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 11 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

