
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02722/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st March 2019                   |On 3rd April 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     m r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alam of Counsel instructed by Syeds Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Hall made following a hearing at Birmingham on 20th November 2017.

 2. The claimant is a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  in  January  1979.   He
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision dated  3rd  February
    2017 refusing his human rights claim and his application for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of his family life as the parent of three
    children, and his private life.

 3. The claimant arrived in the UK as a visitor on 10th September 2006.  He
    overstayed his leave and remained illegally in the  UK.   He  formed  a
    relationship with MS, whom he  did  not  marry,  but  they  have  three
    children all of whom  were  born  in  the  UK.   The  couple  have  two
    daughters born in August 2011 and April 2013 and a son born in  January
    2015.  At the date of the hearing the children were aged 6, 4 and 2.

 4. MS and the children are citizens of Pakistan.  They have  been  granted
    refugee status in the UK and have limited leave to  remain  until  18th
    March 2020.  According to the Secretary of State's records, MS  applied
    for asylum on the basis of being a parent without male support and  she
    was granted  status  on  that  basis  following  an  appeal  which  was
    promulgated on 7th January 2015.

 5. The Presenting Officer before the present judge put him on notice  that
    the Secretary of State's position was that questions needed to be asked
    about the relationship between the claimant and MS.

 6. The claimant was asked a number of  questions  about  his  relationship
    with MS.  He initially said  that  it  had  ended  before  their  first
    daughter was born and when the question was repeated he  said  that  he
    had not ended the relationship because of the children.   He  was  then
    asked whether he and MS were still partners and he  replied  "partner".
    When asked whether he and MS were still together he said that they  did
    not live together  but  they  wanted  to  be  together  and  they  were
    sometimes in a physical relationship.

 7. The  judge  recorded  the  evidence  and  at  paragraph  27  wrote  the
    following:

         "I note  the  absence  of  any  evidence  from  MS.   The  position
         regarding the relationship between the appellant  and  MS  was  not
         made clear following the oral evidence of the appellant.   What  is
         clear is that the  appellant  lived  separately  from  MS  and  the
         children.  This was confirmed by the independent social worker.   I
         find it somewhat difficult to understand why  the  appellant  would
         make an application for leave to  remain  on  the  basis  that  his
         relationship with MS was over if in  fact  they  were  still  in  a
         relationship.   If  the  relationship  is  still   subsisting   the
         appellant may have been able  to  rely  upon  Appendix  FM  and  in
         particularly EX.1(b) and claim that he was  entitled  to  leave  to
         remain based upon a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
         partner who is in the UK with  refugee  leave.   My  conclusion  in
         relation to the relationship is  therefore  I  will  consider  this
         appeal on the basis on which the application was made in  that  the
         appellant is seeking leave to remain to maintain contact  with  his
         children who have refugee leave."

 8. Having concluded that the couple were not in a genuine relationship the
    judge went on to consider the best interests of the children.  He  said
    that their best interests outweighed the weight which must be given  to
    the public interest in this case, and on that basis allowed the appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had materially misdirected himself in law and had  failed  to
    take into account the relevant provisions of Sections 117A to  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer who said that it  was  arguable  that  the
    findings of the judge could not be reconciled with the  claimant's  own
    evidence.  It  was  also  arguable  that  when  addressing  the  public
    interest, the judge failed to direct himself and to  make  findings  on
    the Secretary of State's allegations of deception and bad faith on  the
    part of the claimant and MS.

11. Mr Tarlow relied on his grounds.

12. Mr Alam submitted  that  they  were  a  simple  disagreement  with  the
    decision.  There was no evidence of deception here.  This was  not  the
    correct forum for the Secretary of State to make such an allegation but
    in any event the judge was entitled to accept  the  evidence  that  the
    couple were not living together  from the independent social worker and
    to conclude that they were not in a subsisting  relationship.   Whether
    or not his ex-partner had gained refugee  status  on  the  basis  of  a
    deception was not a question before the Tribunal and in any  event  was
    immaterial since the Secretary of State has  produced  no  evidence  of
    deception.

Consideration of Whether there is a Material Error of Law

13. I conclude that the judge did err.  He had evidence  before  him,  from
    the claimant, that even though the couple were not living together  the
    relationship had not ended, and that they wanted  to  be  together  and
    they were sometimes in a physical relationship with each other.

14. The point made by the judge at paragraph 27 above, that it was  not  in
    the claimant's own interests to say that he was not in  a  relationship
    with MS because he would have a better claim to stay if they were in  a
    relationship, does  not  take  account  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    submission that MS  had  gained  refugee  status  on  the  basis  of  a
    deception. She claimed that she was a lone woman without  male  support
    but the evidence suggests this may not be true.  The matter is material
    because if MS did gain status on the basis of deception  it  is  likely
    that her status will be revoked and the family could then all return to
    Pakistan together.

15. The judge erred in law in making findings without taking  into  account
    all relevant matters and his decision is set aside.

16. Further evidence will need to be taken both from the  claimant  and  if
    possible from MS.  It will also be necessary to obtain  the  Record  of
    Proceedings and the determination in the case of  MS  when  her  asylum
    appeal was allowed.  For these reasons it is necessary for this  matter
    to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal  before  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Hall.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 31 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
