

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/02185/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |             Decision & Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 22 December 2017                   |             On 3 January 2018       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                ARJAN TOCILLA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms P Duffy (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:        Mr J Collins (counsel instructed by Nova Legal
Services)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  of  Arjan  Tocilla,  a
       citizen of Kosovo born 4 April 1983, against the Home Office  refusal
       of his human rights claim, which took the form of an application  for
       indefinite leave to remain on the basis of having achieved ten years'
       lawful residence in the United Kingdom. Its refusal  was  treated  as
       the refusal of a human rights claim.


    2. The Respondent entered the United  Kingdom  on  5  October  2009  and
       claimed asylum. That application was refused, though he  was  granted
       discretionary leave to remain on 13 February 2001  until  4  February
       2001, doubtless, given its duration, to allow him to reach the age of
       18. According to the history given by the Secretary of State, he then
       lodged an "out of time" application for further leave to remain on  6
       September 2004 and this was withdrawn on 3 August 2012.  Nevertheless
       on 8 May 2014 a decision was taken to grant him  discretionary  leave
       to remain, until 7  November  2016.  On  21  July  2015  he  made  an
       application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his  claim
       to have achieved a decade long lawful residence.


    3. The case for the Respondent was that,  contrary  to  the  immigration
       history summarised above, he had in fact made an application  for  an
       extension of his original discretionary  leave  shortly  prior  to  4
       February 2001: he had instructed his representative to do so, and was
       confident that they had done so.  All  his  actions  thereafter  were
       predicated on the basis that such an application had been made (as he
       put it, "My Solicitors have constantly chased for a decision on  this
       application and enquired about the progress ... but the  Home  Office
       would tell them my application  is  still  under  consideration".  He
       denied making any further application in September 2004, although his
       representatives had chased the progress of his case at that time; and
       nor had he ever withdrawn any application.


    4. The case is  accordingly  somewhat  unusual,  in  that  there  is  no
       documentary evidence to support any  of  the  three  critical  events
       variously  alleged  by  the  parties:  not  of  the  2001   extension
       application the Respondent claims to have made, nor of  a  subsequent
       application that the Home Office asserts it received and nor  of  any
       withdrawal of such an application.


    5. Faced with  this  conflict  of  assertion,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       surveyed the material which was available  to  it,  directing  itself
       that it was to determine the issue on balance of probabilities. As it
       saw things, the Respondent  had  provided  a  "formidable  bundle  of
       documentary evidence" consistent with the thesis he  advanced.  There
       were in total  ten  strands  of  evidence  indicating  that  such  an
       application had been made, including a letter from  the  Respondent's
       original lawyers stating that such an application was  under  way  in
       1999, various letters seeking information as to the progress of  this
       application, and a letter from the Home Office in January 2007  which
       acknowledged the previous making of a prior application for leave. On
       1 April 2009 the Secretary of State wrote granting him the  right  to
       work and stating that that dispensation  would  continue  during  the
       ongoing consideration of his asylum related representations.


    6. The Tribunal decided that absent any documentary  evidence  or  other
       material from the Home Office to confirm  the  existence  of  another
       application made in 2004, there was no other application  that  could
       have  founded  the  various  suggestions  from  all  sides  that   an
       application had indeed consistently been under way, other  than  that
       which the Respondent had credibly asserted  his  representatives  had
       originally made in 2001. He had therefore been  lawfully  present  in
       the United Kingdom for a short period  with  discretionary  leave  to
       remain, and then for a very long period with section 3C leave, before
       receiving a further grant of discretionary leave. Accordingly he  had
       passed the milestone of ten years' lawful residence  some  time  ago.
       Accordingly the appeal was allowed.


    7. The Secretary of State appealed  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
       explanation by the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  why  a  copy  of  the
       application was not presented to it. Other histories could be posited
       for the chain of events  in  question:  the  Respondent's  solicitors
       might have failed to lodge the application they implied to  him  they
       had made, due to negligence or other reasons. The First-tier Tribunal
       was wrong to place reliance on the absence of evidence put forward by
       the Secretary of State as to the existence and withdrawal of the 2004
       application: any such application, having been made late,  would  not
       have attracted the protection of section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
       1971 in any event.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there might be  an
       inconsistency between the Respondent's evidence that he had  made  an
       in-time application through his legal representatives,  and  a  later
       legal  representative's  letter  stating  that  the  Respondent   had
       informed them of having made such an application.


    9. Before me Mr Duffy candidly admitted that the Home Office grounds  of
       appeal amounted to a challenge to the rationality  of  the  reasoning
       below, and he  could  not  add  to  the  points  made  on  paper.  He
       acknowledged that the only evidence of the  application  asserted  by
       the Secretary  of  State  to  have  been  made  in  2004,  and  later
       withdrawn, was via the Home Office's electronic case  record  system:
       there was no copy of the supposedly underlying paperwork. Mr  Collins
       responded that the Home Office's administrative systems had been  the
       subject of well-known criticism over this  period  and  it  would  be
       unsurprising  if  they  had  misunderstood  the  true  position   and
       misattributed actions to the Respondent based on inadequate casework.



Findings and reasons

   10. Lord Sumption in Hayes v Willoughby [2013] UKSC 17 stated:


           "14. Rationality is a familiar concept in public law........
           Rationality is not the same as reasonableness. Reasonableness is
           an external, objective standard applied to the outcome of a
           person's thoughts or intentions. The question is whether a
           notional hypothetically reasonable person in his position would
           have engaged in the relevant conduct for the purpose of
           preventing or detecting crime. A test of rationality, by
           comparison, applies a minimum objective standard to the relevant
           person's mental processes. It imports a requirement of good
           faith, a requirement that there should be some logical
           connection between the evidence and the ostensible reasons for
           the decision, and (which will usually amount to the same thing)
           an absence of arbitrariness, of capriciousness or of reasoning
           so outrageous in its defiance of logic as to be perverse."


   11. There is no absolute requirement for corroboration of  oral  evidence
       in immigration  appeals.  I  do  not  consider  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in law in coming to the conclusion  that  it  did.  It
       weighed up a number of sources of evidence that were before it, noted
       that neither side was able to provide the ideal form of corroborative
       evidence, and concluded that on balance of probabilities it was  more
       likely than not that the Respondent was correct in his ongoing belief
       that an extension application had been made.  Given  he  had  clearly
       instructed his representatives to make such an application, that they
       stated some time earlier that they had the matter in hand,  and  that
       the Home Office at  one  point  acknowledged  there  having  been  an
       outstanding  application  before  them,  that  conclusion  is  wholly
       unexceptional. I do not consider that  the  Home  Office  grounds  of
       appeal show any lack of logical connection between the  evidence  and
       the reasoning underlying the decision.


   12. The comment of the First-tier Tribunal granting permission to appeal,
       when it alighted upon a possible  discrepancy  in  the  evidence,  in
       truth seems to identify no such thing; there is nothing  inconsistent
       between one representative accepting that their client advisor made a
       particular application when informed to such effect by their  client,
       and  in  the  client  themselves  stating  that  they   believed   an
       application had truly been  made:  any  difference  is  down  to  the
       perception of the observer.


   13. The Secretary of State's other ground of appeal falls away  once  the
       first ground is rejected. It is obviously true  that  an  application
       made late in 2004 would not have attracted section 3C  leave.  It  is
       equally a true that timely application made in 2001 would have  done,
       and until determined, such leave would have continued.


   14. The Secretary of State did not challenge the ultimate disposition  of
       the appeal once ten years of  long  residence  were  established.  Of
       course, the only available ground of appeal was based  on  the  Human
       Rights Convention. The First-tier Tribunal's allowing of  the  appeal
       effectively acknowledges that, absent  any  reason  of  character  or
       conduct  to  contraindicate  the  grant  of  leave  to  remain,   the
       provisions of the Immigration Rules acknowledging the ten year  route
       to  settlement  were  met  here.   As  those  Rules  demonstrate  the
       government's formulation of one set of circumstances in  which  leave
       should be granted, it would be odd to come to  any  other  conclusion
       other than that a failure to grant such leave is disproportionate  to
       the strong private life that the Respondent has  clearly  established
       during his lengthy period of lawful residence in  this  country  from
       his late teenage years onwards.


   15. Accordingly the Home Office appeal is dismissed.




Decision:

    The appeal is dismissed.


 Signed:                                           Date: 22 December 2017


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


