
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02722/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2017                          |On 23 January 2018            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    [S K]
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER,
                                  SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghayere of Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Widdup promulgated on  24  February  2017  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against a refusal of entry clearance.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  2006.   He  made  an
    application  for  entry  clearance  to  join  his  father,  [MK]  ('the
    sponsor'), who is settled in the UK.  The application was  refused  for
    reasons set out in a Notice of Immigration Decision dated 17 June 2015.
     Amongst other things the refusal made reference to the absence of a TB
    certificate and the unsatisfactory nature of DNA  test  results  relied
    upon in support of the application.  These are no  longer  live  issues
    before me.   The  issue  that  detained  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    primarily in relation to the extent of the sponsor's involvement in the
    life of the Appellant and in particular whether or  not  he  had  'sole
    responsibility' for the Appellant.

3.   The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reasons set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Widdup.

4.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which was granted on  9  October  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farrelly.  In granting permission to appeal Judge  Farrelly  identified
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  consideration  of  the  case   with
    reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  particular  paragraphs
    297(i)(e) and (f) in respect of 'sole responsibility' and 'serious  and
    compelling circumstances'.  Judge Farrelly observed  that  "Insofar  as
    the judge considered if the  relevant  rule  was  met  [there  was]  no
    arguable error".  However, permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  the
    basis that there was some uncertainty as to the  extent  to  which  the
    Judge had properly identified and considered the case with reference to
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Judge Farrelly said this:

         "However, the decision suggests the appeal was  proceeding  on  the
         basis the ability to meet the rule was  the  central  issue.   This
         impression is supported by the comments made and the absence of any
         reference to the jurisprudence.  It is arguable such  a  restricted
         approach infected the consideration of article 8."

5.   The Respondent has filed a Rule 24  response  dated  16  November  2017
    which resists the challenge in the following terms:

         "The grant of permission is limited to  the  consideration  outside
         the Rules.  It is contended that the  test  for  an  appeal  to  be
         allowed outside the Rules is  now  set  out  in  MM  (Lebanon)  and
         Agyarko  that  the  decision  must  lead  to  unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences for the Appellant and other family members.  Given the
         FtTJ's finding in respect of there being no serious and  compelling
         circumstances  in  this   appeal   and   the   finding   that   the
         responsibility for  the  Appellant  is  shared  with  the  maternal
         grandmother, who is able to take care of him, it is  asserted  that
         it cannot be shown that the decision leads to  unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences and as such it is asserted that there is  no  material
         error in the determination."


6.   Ms Fijiwala  essentially  relied  upon  that  argument  before  me  and
    additionally directed my  attention  to  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11,  in
    particular at paragraph 48 where the reference to a  refusal  resulting
    in "unjustifiably harsh consequences" is to be found.

7.   Inherent in the reasons given  for  the  limitation  of  the  grant  of
    permission  is  that  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  so  far  as   a
    consideration of  the  case  by  reference  to  the  yardstick  of  the
    Immigration Rules was concerned were not arguably impugnable.  In those
    circumstances I turn to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    which are set out in substance from paragraphs 30 onwards.   I  do  not
    propose to rehearse in full detail all such  findings  as  they  are  a
    matter  of  record.   However,  it  is  appropriate  to  highlight  the
    following matters.

    (i)  The Judge found that the  evidence  provided  in  respect  of  the
    mother's consent to the Appellant's relocation  to  the  UK  was  "very
    unsatisfactory" (paragraph 35).


    (ii) The Judge also considered that evidence purportedly emanating from
    the Appellant by way of a handwritten  letter  was  such  that  "little
    weight" was to be attached to the letter (paragraphs 37-38).

8.   The Judge concluded that he was not  satisfied  "that  the  mother  has
    indeed consented to the application nor am I satisfied on the  evidence
    before me that  the  mother  has  no  role  in  the  Appellant's  life"
    (paragraph 39).  It seems to me that that  was  a  conclusion  entirely
    open to the Judge given  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  evidence
    provided in respect of consent of the mother and the letter purportedly
    written by the Appellant.

9.   This is perhaps a convenient juncture to pause  to  note  that  in  his
    submissions Mr Aghayere raised a matter not identified in  the  grounds
    of appeal, namely the absence of a copy of the mother's consent  letter
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  initially  suggested  that  in
    circumstances where the letter itself was not before  the  Tribunal  it
    was not open to the  Judge  to  express  the  concerns  and  reach  the
    findings in respect of the mother's consent.

10.  Putting aside for a moment that this was  not  a  ground  of  challenge
    raised in the grounds in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal and that there has been no  attempt  to  amend  or  augment  the
    grounds, it seems to me that this is ultimately a point with no  merit.
    It was not the  contents  of  the  letter  that  caused  the  Judge  to
    marginalise its significance and characterise the issue of the mother's
    consent as being "very unsatisfactory".  Rather it was  the  manner  in
    which it was said that the letter had come into existence.  Bearing  in
    mind that it was common ground between the parties that such  a  letter
    had indeed been submitted as part of the application, it  seems  to  me
    that the absence of a copy of  the  letter  was  not  material  to  the
    Judge's consideration of the narrative account of how  the  letter  had
    come to be written.

11.  In any event, the logic of Mr Aghayere's position  was  to  the  effect
    that in the absence of the letter no findings could be made on it.   If
    that was indeed the case then that would have been a matter that  would
    have, as it were,  cut  both  ways.   It  would  have  meant  that  the
    Appellant had no supporting evidence of his claim that his  mother  had
    consented to him joining his father in the UK.  In the circumstances Mr
    Aghayere did not pursue the point any further.

12.  At paragraph 41 of the Decision the  Judge  noted  that  there  was  no
    evidence from the paternal grandmother, in whose care it had been  said
    the Appellant had been left by his mother at the age of about 4.  Other
    omissions in the evidence were identified by the Judge from  paragraphs
    43 onwards: the Judge considered that  there  was  little  evidence  in
    respect of money transfers to  Nigeria;  it  was  noted  there  was  no
    evidence from the Appellant's church to the effect that his father  had
    been responsible for choosing the church at which he attended;  it  was
    also noted that there was only  post-decision  evidence  by  way  of  a
    single letter  from  the  Appellant's  school;  no  receipts  had  been
    produced to show for how long expenses had been paid, and there was  no
    evidence to show what involvement the sponsor had had in the choice  of
    school or in the Appellant's  progress  at  the  school;  although  the
    Sponsor had claimed that he sent  money  for  the  Appellant's  medical
    expenses no evidence had been provided about any such medical needs.

13.  The Judge in all of the circumstances - which, as I have  noted  above,
    Judge Farrelly did not consider were arguably impugnable - reached  the
    conclusion that the  Appellant  had  failed  to  demonstrate  that  the
    sponsor had sole responsibility for him, and also "that the reality  is
    that the responsibility for the Appellant  has  been  shared  with  the
    paternal  grandmother  and/or  with  other   family   members".    This
    evaluation in respect of paragraph 297(i)(e) informed the evaluation in
    respect of paragraph 297(i)(f): e.g. see paragraph 49.

14.  It may be seen that in significant part the Judge  made  findings  that
    rejected aspects of the premises of the Appellant's case; moreover,  he
    reached conclusions that undermined the notion that was at the core  of
    the case - that the Appellant's father was the  primary  adult  in  the
    Appellant's life and solely responsible for him.

15.  Further to the above, and for the avoidance of any doubt, it  seems  to
    me that the substance of the grounds as pleaded and the majority of the
    submissions advanced by Mr Aghayere before the Tribunal today  were  to
    seek to challenge the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    by attempting to re-argue the case and not by identifying any error  of
    law.  This seemed to be the approach notwithstanding the basis  of  the
    grant of leave to appeal.

16.  Mr Aghayere reiterated the substance of paragraph 6 of the  grounds  of
    appeal to the effect that the Judge's evaluation of best interests  was
    unsustainable in circumstances  where  the  Appellant  had  provided  a
    statement expressing his wish to  join  his  father  in  the  UK.   For
    reasons that, in my  judgment,  were  entirely  sustainable  the  Judge
    explained why he considered that little weight could be  given  to  the
    letter from the Appellant.  The Judge considered that the language  and
    vocabulary used in that letter and the quality of the spelling was such
    that he could not overlook the possibility that  the  letter  had  been
    composed for the Appellant.  It seems to me it was open to the Judge to
    take that view.

17.  More  particularly,  as  the  Judge  identified,  the  letter  was  not
    consistent with the narrative advanced  by  the  sponsor.   The  letter
    included the phrase "I have never known my mother".  Plainly, that  was
    factually discrepant with the suggestion that he  had  lived  with  his
    mother up until the age of 4 or 5.  Charitably, the  Judge  decided  to
    also consider whether perhaps the Appellant had meant that he could not
    recall his mother but  found  that  that  was  improbable,  given  that
    somebody who had lived with their mother up until the age  of  4  or  5
    would unlikely have forgotten all about her by the time he  was  10  or
    11.

18.   Paragraph  8  of  the  Grounds  suggests  that  the  Judge  "has  been
    preoccupied with making key findings of fact (which he is entitled  to)
    against the Appellant in relation to his presumed relationship with his
    mother".  I am afraid I quite simply do not  follow  the  substance  of
    that ground.  It seems to acknowledge that it is open to the  Judge  to
    make relevant findings of fact.  Indeed, in this  context,  bearing  in
    mind that there was  an  issue  as  to  who  was  responsible  for  the
    Appellant's upbringing, it seems to me that the Judge was doing no more
    than considering and trying the issues in the appeal.

19.  I turn to the particular considerations that Judge Farrelly  considered
    merited the grant of permission to appeal.

20.  I note that at paragraph 5 of the  Decision  the  Judge  identified  in
    terms the basis of the Appellant's appeal: "The Appellant  appealed  on
    human rights grounds."

21.  This was indeed an appeal limited to human rights  grounds:  there  was
    no jurisdiction to allow or refuse  the  appeal  on  Immigration  Rules
    grounds. That of course does not mean that the Immigration  Rules  were
    not relevant to  an  evaluation  of  the  human  rights  grounds  -  in
    particular the issue of proportionality.

22.  Paragraph 7 of the Decision is in these terms:


         "The burden of proof is on the Appellant to show that at  the  date
         of the refusal he met the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.
         Alternatively he must prove to the  civil  standard  the  facts  on
         which he relies in support of his Article 8 claim."


    Whilst there is an element in that passage to suggest  that  the  Judge
    thought that he had  a  mixed  jurisdiction  in  respect  of  both  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8, it is nonetheless  clear  enough  that
    the Judge was alert to Article 8 being  a  relevant  ground  of  appeal
    before him. Ultimately any possible misconception that there  was  also
    an appeal under the  Rules  is  not  inevitably  a  material  error  in
    circumstances where it was incumbent upon the Judge to have  regard  to
    the Rules even if that was only to inform his Article 8 evaluation.

23.  In setting out his conclusions  and  findings  of  fact  the  Judge  at
    paragraph 30 embarks upon his consideration of paragraph 297(i)(e)  and
    (i)(f).  In my judgement it cannot be inferred from paragraph  30  that
    the Judge had lost sight of the  fact  that  there  were  human  rights
    grounds to be considered: indeed, at paragraph 53 the Judge  identifies
    in terms: "The final question is whether the appeal can succeed outside
    the Rules under Article 8", and the rest of the decision is then  taken
    up with a consideration of Article 8.

24.  In those circumstances I do not accept  that  the  Judge  fundamentally
    misconceived that he was required to determine 'human  rights'  grounds
    of appeal.

25.  I nonetheless acknowledge  that  the  consideration  of  Article  8  is
    somewhat brief. Be that as  it  may,  the  Judge  states  in  terms  at
    paragraph 54: "I am unable to identify any circumstances which could be
    said to be compelling enough to justify the grant  of  entry  clearance
    under Article 8." The Judge also identifies  the  significance  of  the
    Immigration Rules and their general compliance with  aspects  of  human
    rights and promoting the best interests  of  children  (paragraph  55).
    Further, the Judge identifies that the interests of the Appellant  "are
    of first consideration" (paragraph 55), which seems  to  me  to  be  an
    accurate reflection of the primary- but-not-paramount importance of the
    best interests of children in immigration cases.

26.  The simple reality is: given the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  findings
    the conclusion on Article 8 is sustainable.

27.  The Judge's findings were to the effect that  the  factual  premise  of
    the Appellant's case was rejected.  The Appellant had been looked after
    in Nigeria since his father had left for the United  Kingdom  when  the
    Appellant was approximately 1 year old.  The Appellant's father had not
    returned to Nigeria and had not seen the  Appellant  between  2007  and
    2015.  The Judge found that the evidence of the extent of the sponsor's
    involvement with the Appellant was  limited  and  unsatisfactory.   The
    Judge also found that the effect of the Respondent's decision would not
    interfere with the status quo in  which  the  sponsor  had  essentially
    acquiesced, and that there was no evidence of any adverse  impact  upon
    the Appellant - who would continue to be able to enjoy the family  life
    that  he  had  enjoyed  in  Nigeria   since   his   father's   absence,
    notwithstanding the supposed separation from his mother.

28.  The Immigration Rules were not met.  This is a  significant  aspect  of
    the public interest considerations.  No exceptional circumstances  were
    identified - a conclusion entirely open to the Judge,  and  indeed  one
    that seems to me near inevitable on the findings made by the Judge.

29.  Accordingly, notwithstanding some  reservation  as  to  the  extent  to
    which the Judge clearly identified that this was a human rights grounds
    only  appeal  -  a  reservation  in  substance  ameliorated  because  a
    consideration of the Rules was necessary as  informing  the  Article  8
    consideration) -  I am not persuaded that a material error of  law  has
    been identified.

Notice of Decision

30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
law and stands.

31.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

32.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 21 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

