



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02489/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 October 2017                     |On 06 November 2017                  |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mr adnan butT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr W Rees, Counsel instructed by Lexsure Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State in respect  of  a  decision
    made by the First-tier Tribunal (FtJ Majid) promulgated on 6 June  2017
    in which he allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    following his application for leave to remain in the UK.

2.   The grounds of appeal relied by the Secretary of State  were  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law in that it  failed  to
    give any cogent reasons as to why the appeal was allowed.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge produced a decision which commented extensively  on
    irrelevant matters  and  included  political  commentary  without  once
    referring to the comments back to the case at hand.

3.   The Secretary of State submits that neither party to the appeal  had  a
    fair hearing and that the matter should be completely reheard.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth in the following terms:-

         "1.  It is arguable that the Judge  has  set  out  an  insufficient
             analysis of the findings leading to the  conclusion  that  the
             appeal should be allowed.  At paragraph 21 of the decision the
             Judge has stated that  he  was  minded  to  allow  the  appeal
             because "the Appellant's father is in his twilight  years  and
             deserves the benefit of the ECHR".


         2.   It is arguable that this constitutes an insufficient  analysis
             taking into account  the  content  of  the  remainder  of  the
             decision.  It is arguable that the Judge has fallen into error
             by  failing  to  provide  a  sufficient  legal  foundation  in
             relation to the twin concepts of entering the  twilight  years
             and the deserving of benefit pursuant to the ECHR."

5.   The application was opposed by the Claimant. A  Rule  24  response  had
    been submitted but was not before the Tribunal.  Mr Rees on  behalf  of
    the Claimant summarised the  contents  of  the  Rule  24  response.  In
    essence he  argued  that  notwithstanding  some  general  concerns  the
    decision was sustainable.

Error of Law Hearing

6.   I heard submissions from both representatives which are set out in  the
    Record of Proceedings.

7.   I have also taken into account the recent Upper  Tribunal  decision  of
    MM v SSHD & Ors heard on 27 July 2017, a decision which was  relied  on
    by the Secretary of State.  I find material errors of law in the  FtJ's
    decision.  All of the Grounds of Appeal relied on by the  Secretary  of
    State are made out. The decision contained  multiple  errors  including
    those raised and referred to in MM  which  are  of  a  generic  nature,
    together with the particular errors specified in the Grounds of Appeal.
     The decision cannot be maintained and I reject the submissions made by
    Mr Rees. Apart for a statement that the FtJ was  minded  to  allow  the
    appeal because the Claimant's father was  in  his  twilight  years  and
    deserves the benefit of the ECHR, the decision contains  no  assessment
    of either the law or the facts.



Notice of Decision

8.   There are material errors of law and the decision is  set  aside.   The
    matter is remitted for re hearing  at  Taylor  House  (excluding  Judge
    Majid).

     No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date  3.11.2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black








