
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/02254/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 2nd January 2018                   |           On 14th February 2018      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                 rubi begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mustafa of Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  1st  January
    1989.  She first arrived in the UK on 10th May 2011 when she was  given
    leave to enter until 30th October 2012 as the dependant  of  a  Tier  4
    Migrant.  She applied unsuccessfully for leave to remain as a spouse in
    March 2013, and applied again on the same basis on 29th May 2015.  That
    application was refused on 11th January 2016 for the reasons  given  in
    the Respondent's letter of that date.  The Appellant appealed, and  her
    appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Taylor House on 20th February 2017.  He decided  to  dismiss
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules and also on human rights grounds
    for the reasons given in his Decision promulgated on 14th  March  2017.
    The Appellant  sought  leave  to  appeal  that  decision  and  on  29th
    September 2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  because  he
    found that the Appellant failed the suitability requirement of Appendix
    FM of HC 395 in that she had used a deception in respect of the English
    language proficiency test.  The Judge was satisfied that  paragraph  S-
    LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM applied and therefore that the Appellant  failed
    to satisfy the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(i)  of  HC  395.   The
    Judge went on to consider the rights of the Appellant  and  her  family
    under Article 8 ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.  He  found  that
    there was a genuine and subsisting marriage between the  Appellant  and
    her husband and their two minor children  who  were  British  citizens.
    However, even taking into account the best interests of those children,
    the Judge decided that the public interest outweighed the circumstances
    of the Appellant and her family and therefore that the decision of  the
    Respondent was proportionate.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Mustafa argued that the Judge had erred  in  law  in
    coming to these conclusions.  As regards  the  alleged  deception,  the
    Judge had failed to consider all of the evidence and in particular  had
    placed too great a weight on the fact that at the  hearing  before  him
    the Appellant had used her first language not being English.   Further,
    the Judge had not made a finding as to whether there  was  an  innocent
    explanation for the matters alleged against the Appellant.

 5. As regards Article 8 ECHR, Mr Mustafa argued that the Judge  had  erred
    in law  by  misapplying  the  provisions  of  Section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  Judge  had  treated
    the provision as if it  applied  to  the  qualifying  children  of  the
    Appellant and not the Appellant herself.  Further, the Judge had failed
    to attach sufficient weight to the  consequences  for  the  Appellant's
    children of her being excluded from the UK.  It was decided in  SF  and
    Others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC)  at
    paragraph 7 that it was never reasonable to effectively remove  British
    children from the UK and that was Home Office Policy.  At paragraph  10
    of that decision it was further decided  that  there  must  be  harmony
    between Home Office Policy and decisions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In addition, it was decided in Treebhawon and Others (NIAA 2002 Part 5A
    - compelling circumstances  test)  [2017]  UKUT  00013  (IAC)  that  if
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act was satisfied, that  was  determinative
    of the proportionality test and that Section 117B(1)  to  (5)  did  not
    apply.  Again the Judge had failed to apply this decision.

 6. In response, Ms Ahmad argued that there was no such material  error  of
    law.  She argued that the Judge had come to conclusions open to him  on
    the evidence  before  him  and  which  he  had  fully  explained.   She
    submitted that the decision in SF had no application to this appeal  as
    it could be distinguished on the facts.  She referred me to paragraph 8
    of that decision.  She then  argued  that  in  deciding  the  deception
    issue, the Judge had considered all the relevant factors and had used a
    correct approach as evidenced by what he wrote at paragraphs 14 and  16
    of the Decision.

 7. I find no material error of law in the decisions of the Judge  which  I
    therefore do not set aside.  I agree with the submission  of  Ms  Ahmad
    that the Judge came to conclusions open to him on the  evidence  before
    him and as a consequence I find that the  arguments  of  the  Appellant
    amount to no more than a disagreement with those conclusions and do not
    reveal a material error of law.  The Judge  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    deception at paragraphs 14 - 18 inclusive of the Decision.   The  Judge
    carried out a  careful  and  thorough  analysis  of  all  the  relevant
    evidence and  came  to  a  conclusion  which  cannot  be  described  as
    perverse.  It is not correct to say that the Judge did not consider  if
    the Appellant had given an innocent explanation.  At  paragraph  17  of
    the Decision the Judge dealt in detail with the  rebuttal  evidence  of
    the Appellant.

 8. As regards Article 8 ECHR,  the  Judge  again  considered  all  of  the
    relevant evidence and came to a conclusion open to him.  He  considered
    the best interests of the children  as  a  primary  consideration,  and
    demonstrated that he had carried out the balancing  exercise  necessary
    for any assessment of proportionality.  It was  not  perverse  for  the
    Judge to find that the public interest outweighed the interest  of  the
    Appellant and her family.  He considered whether it would be reasonable
    for the children of the family to leave the UK as required  by  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  The  Judge  did  not  weigh  in  the  balance
    against the Appellant any factors mentioned in Section 117B(1)  to  (5)
    of the  Act  except  for  the  Appellant's  inability  to  use  English
    proficiently.  This was not cited by the Judge as a determining  factor
    and he found what he described as  a  compelling  public  interest  for
    other reasons.  Therefore any error of  law  in  this  respect  is  not
    material.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.



Signed                              Date: 12th February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
