
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02521/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 29 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Forhad [a]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Ogunbusola, instructed by M-R Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State (whom I shall  refer  to  as  the  "respondent")
    appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Povey)
    allowing the  appeal  of  Mr  [A]  (whom  I  shall  refer  to  as  "the
    appellant") under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 24 January 2010 as a student with leave
    valid until 30 May 2013.  Applications for further leave  were  refused
    on 5 August 2013 and 6 February 2015.

 3. The present application for leave was made on 21 September 2015.   That
    application was  essentially  based  upon  his  relationship  with  his
    daughter, [LJ]  who  is  a  British  citizen.   While  the  appellant's
    relationship with his daughter's mother  no  longer  subsists,  contact
    arrangements are in place and, as Judge Povey accepted,  the  appellant
    plays an active role in his daughter's upbringing.

 4. On 25 January 2017 the respondent refused the  appellant's  application
    for leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  parent  under  para  R-LTRPT  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) and Art 8.  In
    refusing the application for leave,  the  Secretary  of  State  relied,
    inter alia, upon the  suitability  requirement  in  para  S-LTR.1.6  of
    Appendix FM, namely that the appellant's presence  in  the  UK  is  not
    conducive to the public good, on  the  basis  that  he  had  previously
    submitted a fraudulently obtained TOEIC English  language  certificate,
    having used a proxy-taker for one part of the test.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    restricted to human rights grounds, namely  Art  8.   In  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal, Judge Povey  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  a
    genuine parental relationship with his daughter and that he  played  an
    active role in her upbringing.  He accepted, for the  purposes  of  Art
    8.1, that "family life" existed between the appellant and his  daughter
    and that his removal would interfere with it.

 6. Judge Povey, however, found  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.  Applying s.117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act")  Judge  Povey  concluded  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect his daughter  to  leave  the  UK  and
    that, therefore, the public interest did not require his removal.

 7. Judge Povey's reasons are succinctly set out  at  paras  24-28  of  his
    determination as follows:

         "24. Given the existence of family life between the  Appellant  and
             hid daughter  and  the  primacy  given  to  the  child's  best
             interests, there are  compelling  circumstances  consider  the
             appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

         25.  The Respondent's decision to refuse  the  Appellant  leave  to
             remain is of sufficient gravity to engage Article 8 and  is  a
             decision made in  accordance  with  the  law.   The  issue  to
             determine is whether it is a proportionate means of  achieving
             the  Respondent's  legitimate  aim  of  effective  immigration
             control (being an aspect of the  economic  well-being  of  the
             country).

         26.  The conditions are set out in section 117B(6) of the  NIA  Act
             2002 are met.  The Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with a qualifying child  (defined  as  a
             person under 18 years of age who is a British citizen: section
             117D(1), namely his daughter.  It would not be reasonable  for
             the child leave the UK, as accepted by Mr Howells.  The public
             interest in not requiring  the  Appellant's  removal  prevails
             over the public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
             immigration control, the public interest in  English  speaking
             and the public interest in financial independence, as set  out
             in section 117B (1) - (3) of the NIA Act 2002.

         27.  I reach that conclusion even if the Respondent made it out her
             claim that  the  Appellant  had  sought  leave  to  remain  by
             deception.  That still does not tip the balance in  favour  of
             the Respondent, given the impact section  117B(6)  has  on  my
             assessment of proportionality.  In the circumstances,  I  find
             that  the  Respondent's   decision   is   a   disproportionate
             interference with respect  for  the  Appellant's  family  life
             under Article 8 of the ECHR.

         28.  For that reason, I allow the appeal."

 8. The Secretary of State sought permission  to  appeal  on  two  grounds.
    First, the judge had been wrong in applying s.117B(6) of the  2002  Act
    without making any finding, and thereby taking  into  account,  whether
    the  appellant  had,  in  fact,  practised  deception  by  fraudulently
    obtaining a TOEIC English language certificate.   Secondly,  the  judge
    had been wrong in finding that it  would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
    appellant's British citizen child to leave the UK since the  respondent
    was not expecting her to leave the UK as  she  would  remain  with  her
    primary carer (namely her mother) in the UK.

 9. On 1 May 2018, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E B  Grant)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

Discussion

10. In his oral submission on behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Howells
    acknowledged that he was  in  some  difficulties  in  respect  of  both
    grounds in the light  of  two  recent  decisions:  first,  the  Supreme
    Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2018] UKSC  53  and
    secondly, the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  SR  (subsisting  parental
    relationship, s117B(6)) [2018] UKUT 334 (IAC).

11. In respect of the first ground, Mr Howells accepted  that  the  Supreme
    Court in KO (Nigeria) had concluded that in assessing  whether  it  was
    "reasonable to expect" a  qualifying  child  such  as  the  appellant's
    daughter to leave the UK, a court or Tribunal was not to  engage  in  a
    balancing exercise, weighing the impact  upon  the  child  against  the
    public interest.  That would, of course, in this case have required the
    impact upon the appellant's child to be weighed,  inter  alia,  against
    any deception established against the appellant.

12. In my judgment, the effect of KO (Nigeria) in relation  to  the  proper
    interpretation of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act as set out in [17]-[19] is,
    as Mr Howells accepted.  The Supreme Court disagreed with the  approach
    to s.117B(6) approved by the Court of Appeal in R  (MA  (Pakistan)  and
    others) v UTIAC [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  In assessing, therefore,  whether
    it is "reasonable to expect" a qualifying child to  leave  the  UK  the
    focus must be exclusively upon the position of the child.   Of  course,
    the immigration state of a parent may be relevant in assessing "in  the
    real world" the impact a parent's removal may have on a  child's  "best
    interests".  So, for example, if  neither  parent  has  any  basis  for
    remaining in the UK, that will be relevant in assessing a child's "best
    interests" because it would "normally be reasonable for the  child"  to
    be with its parents (see [18] and [19] of KO (Nigeria)).

13. Consequently, although  at  the  time  of  Judge  Povey's  decision  MA
    (Pakistan) required him to balance the public interest  (including  any
    deception established against the appellant) against  the  impact  upon
    the appellant's child of his removal, as a result of KO (Nigeria),  and
    following the declaratory effect of the Supreme Court's decision, Judge
    Povey was correct: he  was  not  required  to  take  into  account  any
    deception by the appellant in reaching his assessment  under  s.117B(6)
    of  the  2002  Act  of  whether  it  was  "reasonable  to  expect"  the
    appellant's child to leave the UK.  (I would add that,  as  Mr  Howells
    accepted, Judge Povey also stated (at para  [27])  that  any  deception
    would not "tip the balance" in the respondent's favour.)

14. The Secretary of State's first ground of appeal, therefore, fails.

15. As regards the second ground of appeal, this also fails in the light of
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in SR.  In  the  headnote,  the  relevant
    part of the decision is summarised as follows:

         "The question of whether it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  a
         child to leave the United Kingdom ('UK') in Section 117B(6) of  the
         2002 Act does not necessarily require a  consideration  of  whether
         the child will in fact or practice leave the UK.  Rather, it  poses
         a straightforward question: would it be reasonable 'to expect'  the
         child to leave the UK?"

16. Here, as the appellant's child was a British citizen  and  living  with
    her primary carer, namely her mother who is  also  a  British  citizen,
    there could be no basis upon which she could be "required" to leave the
    UK.  But, in accordance with the approach in SR, Judge Povey considered
    whether it would be "reasonable to expect" her to leave the  UK.   That
    was indeed accepted by the Presenting Officer (who  was,  in  fact,  Mr
    Howells) before Judge Povey.

17. That concession was, no doubt, based upon the fact that the appellant's
    child was a British citizen whose primary carer (her mother) was also a
    British citizen and, given that the appellant's relationship  with  his
    former  partner  had  broken  down,  it  could   not   conceivably   be
    "reasonable" to expect the appellant's  daughter  (in  all  probability
    with her mother) to leave  the  UK  to  live  in  Bangladesh  with  the
    appellant.

18. The appellant, therefore, established that s.117B(6) applied and  that,
    as a consequence, "the public interest does not require [his] removal".
     As a  result  of  s.117B(6)  applying,  the  appellant's  removal  was
    disproportionate (see Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 at [36]).

19. Mr Howells drew my attention to [53] of the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
    in SR where it was acknowledged that:

         "the  straightforward  construction  of  Section  117B(6)(b)  might
         appear to provide an overly generous approach to those parents with
         a genuine and subsisting relationship with a British citizen  child
         living with another person in the  UK,  but  who  cannot  meet  the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules, ..."

20. That is, nevertheless, potentially the effect of s.117B(6) which,  when
    it  applies,  provides  a  conclusive  determination  of  the   "public
    interest" issue and proportionality under Art 8.2 of the ECHR.

Decision

21. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  in
    allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.  That decision, therefore,
    stands and the appeal of the Secretary of State to the  Upper  Tribunal
    is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            26 November 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Judge Povey decided not to make a fee award.  I see no reason  to  interfere
with that decision which, therefore, stands.




                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            26 November 2018

