
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02132/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 20 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               SHAHNAZ AKHTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1982 and is  a  female  citizen  of
    Pakistan. She appealed from abroad against  a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 18 November 2017 refusing her  entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom as the spouse of Safir Khan  (hereafter  referred
    to as the sponsor). The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated
    on 4 September 2018, dismissed her appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.




 2. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal had been on the papers  only.
    Before the Upper Tribunal, the appellant was represented by Mr Sarwar.

 3. The appeal was brought on human rights grounds (Article  8  ECHR).  The
    judge found that,  although  the  appellant  and  sponsor  are  legally
    married, they have no  subsisting  relationship.  Permission  has  been
    granted on the ground that the judge did not take account  of  evidence
    before him of contact between the appellant and sponsor, in  particular
    evidence from Lycamobile in the form of statements of telephone  calls.
    Mr Sarwar submitted that the appellant's application  form  showed  her
    mobile phone number whilst the telephone accounts showed regular  calls
    made from the sponsor's own mobile phone. The judge found at [13]  that
    the printouts did not show 'who is calling whom and do not  show  there
    were calls  passed  between  the  appellant  and  sponsor.'  Mr  Sarwar
    submitted that, had the judge made the  link  between  the  two  mobile
    telephone numbers, he may have taken a different view of that  evidence
    on the outcome of the appeal may have been otherwise.

 4. Mr Sarwar is correct to say that the documentary evidence  (which  runs
    180 pages) does reveal the link between the two telephone numbers.  But
    I am reminded that this was  a  paper  appeal  and  the  judge  had  no
    assistance from  a  representative  or,  indeed,  sponsor  at  an  oral
    hearing. Rather, the appellant expected the  judge  to  scrutinise  the
    documentary evidence so thoroughly as to establish a link  between  the
    two telephone numbers. The appellant chose to file a witness  statement
    which simply asserts, 'during  the  periods  we  have  been  apart,  my
    husband is kept in regular  contact  with  me  by  telephone  which  is
    clearly confirmed by the submitted Lycamobile statements...  see  pages
    73-141.' No attempt was made to assist the judge by pointing out  where
    in the written evidence the two telephone numbers may be linked to  the
    appellant and sponsor despite the fact that it would have been an  easy
    matter for the appellant to do so.

 5. There is an additional problem for the appellant. The telephone records
    show nothing more  than  the  fact  that  two  telephone  numbers  were
    connected on particular  dates.  They  do  not  show  who  exactly  was
    speaking during the telephone calls. The judge noted this fact at [13]:
    'these could be calls passing between family  members.'  The  appellant
    and sponsor are related as  cousins  so  the  judge's  observation  was
    clearly legitimate.

 6. Mr Sarwar submitted that the judge had also failed pay proper attention
    to photographic evidence in  the  bundle.  Many  of  these  photographs
    appear to relate to the wedding ceremony of the appellant  and  sponsor
    about which there is no dispute. They add nothing whatever to the claim
    of the appellant and sponsor to be in a subsisting relationship at  the
    time, some years later, of the entry  clearance  application.  Although
    there has been more recent face-to-face contact in 2019, this cannot go
    to the question of error of law and Mr Sarwar agreed that the judge was
    correct at [5] to record that the couple had not met since 2016.

 7. Ultimately, it is for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  determine  whether  the
    findings of fact reached by the judge were properly available to him on
    the evidence. It is for the parties to present evidence in a form which
    assists the judge in making those findings.  I  find  it  difficult  to
    criticise the judge for not linking the mobile telephone numbers in the
    absence of any assistance from the appellant. However,  even  if  I  am
    wrong in that regard, it was plainly open to the judge to find  that  a
    bare record of telephone calls cannot per se  establish  that  specific
    individuals were speaking during those calls and his  observation  that
    the calls may be evidence of contact between other family members  was,
    in the context of  the  family  relationship  in  which  this  marriage
    exists, entirely  reasonable.  In  the  circumstances,  I  dismiss  the
    appeal. I will add, however, that the  appellant  may  make  a  further
    application and, if she chooses to do so, she may wish to consider  the
    reasons why her  last  application  and  the  subsequent  appeals  have
    failed.



Notice of Decision

          This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 17 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

