
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02925/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Business)                                  |                                |
|On 12 March 2021                           |On 28 April 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Z Malik, counsel, instructed by Afsal Solicitors

This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of which  there  has  been
no objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by  video  (V),
the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face hearing  was  not  held
because it was not practicable and all  issues  could  be  determined  in  a
remote hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department  (the  appellant  in
         this appeal, hereafter "the SSHD") has been granted  permission  to
         appeal against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Moore ("the judge"), promulgated on 21 August  2019,  in  which  he
         allowed the human rights appeal  of  MS  (the  respondent  in  this
         appeal, hereafter "MS") against the SSHD's decision dated 8 January
         2018 (but served on 11 January 2018)  refusing  MS's  human  rights
         claim. The human rights claim was made following the service on  MS
         on 3 January 2017 of a deportation order. The deportation order was
         made following MS's conviction (after trial) on  17  June  2015  in
         respect of an offence relating to conspiracy to defraud. On 18 June
         2015 MS was sentenced to 4 years imprisonment.

      2. MS is a national of India. At the date of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision MS was 38 years  old.  He  first  entered  the  UK  on  11
         February 2005 as a student and was granted further periods of Leave
         To Remain. On 14 September 2012 he was granted entry  clearance  as
         the dependent spouse of a Tier 4 (General) Student (his wife,  FM),
         valid until 20 January 2015.

      3. MS's conviction in June 2015 for conspiracy  to  defraud  concerned
         the fraudulent acquisition of high value prescription drugs when he
         was a manager of a branch of Boots. The value of the  drugs  stolen
         through the conspiracy was around �142,000.  The  Sentencing  Judge
         found that MS, who pleaded not guilty, abused his position of trust
         as the branch manager, although  it  was  acknowledged  he  had  no
         previous convictions.

      4. Following service  of  the  signed  deportation  order  on  MS  his
         previous  legal  representatives  made  submissions  in  May   2017
         outlining his serious mental health issues and  asserting  that  MS
         was at risk of suicide. The submissions were  accompanied  by  MS's
         patient records and several  newspaper  articles/reports  outlining
         what was submitted to be a lack of assistance in available care  in
         India to those with mental health issues. MS was transferred to HMP
         Swaleside on 5 July 2017 for assessment  under  the  Mental  Health
         Act. Although he met the criteria for sectioning under  the  Mental
         Health Act, he received treatment and on 7 July was returned to HMP
         Maidstone. A letter from Dr  Rachel  Daly,  a  Consultant  Forensic
         Psychiatrist at the Mental Health Inreach Team  at  HMP  Maidstone,
         stated that MS had a diagnosis of treatment resistant schizophrenia
         and that he had started  medication  (Lamotrigine).  Dr  Daley  had
         looked after MS intensively for 9 months. She  additionally  stated
         that MS was "currently not fit for detention as  risk  to  self  is
         high and  because  treatment  resistant,  which  is  linked  to  an
         increase risk of suicide, he is not fit to fly."

      5. In her decision refusing MS's human rights  claim  the  SSHD  noted
         most of the content of the above  paragraph,  but  considered  that
         medical care was available in India (giving details of impatient or
         outpatient treatment by  a  psychiatrist  at  'Institute  of  Human
         Bheavior & Allied Sciences, in Shahadraa, Dehli', noting that a WHO
         Mental health Atlas 2011 reported that social workers were employed
         in the mental health  sector  in  India,  and  that  mental  health
         services were managed by each of the state governments in India (an
         example was the State  of  Punjab  where  there  were  36  licenced
         hospitals and nursing homes). The SSHD denied that MS's deportation
         would expose him to a risk of breaching Article 3 ECHR.

      6. In respect of MS's Article 8 ECHR based claim, the SSHD  noted  his
         length of residence in the UK,  that  his  wife  graduated  with  a
         Masters Degree and was currently employed as a  software  engineer,
         and his serious mental health issues. At the date of  the  decision
         FM had not been granted ILR and the SSHD  was  not  satisfied  they
         were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.  Nor  was   it
         considered unduly harsh for FM to relocate to India with  MS  given
         that she was an Indian national who  last  entered  the  UK  on  15
         September 2012 aged 25. Having found that there would  be  no  very
         significant obstacles to MS's private life should he be deported to
         India, the human rights claim was refused. MS appealed  the  SSHD's
         decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      7. The judge had before him the SSHD's bundle  of  documents  prepared
         for the  hearing  and  a  bundle  of  documents  prepared  by  MS's
         solicitors which included, inter alia, statements from MS  and  FM,
         and a psychiatric report prepared by Dr Aparna Wighe (a  Consultant
         Psychiatrist) dated 12 February 2019. The judge heard oral evidence
         from MS via a Tamil interpreter, and oral evidence from FM.

      8. In his decision the judge accurately  set  out  the  provisions  of
         s.117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the
         2002 Act") and  noted,  as  detailed  in  s.117C(6),  that,  as  MS
         received a sentence of 4 years imprisonment,  the  public  interest
         required  his  deportation  unless  there  were  "very   compelling
         circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2
         (the two Exceptions are contained in s.117C(4) and (5) of the  2002
         Act). The only Exception of relevance is Exception 2. This applies,
         inter alia, if MS has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         qualifying partner and the effect of his deportation on his partner
         would be unduly harsh.

      9. At [12] the judge  reminded  himself  that  the  more  serious  the
         offence committed, the greater the public interest in  deportation.
         The judge directed himself to the need to consider  whether  either
         of the Exceptions was satisfied, "and what goes  above  and  beyond
         those thresholds." The judge reminded himself of the need for  very
         compelling circumstances to be  demonstrated.  At  [13]  the  judge
         stated:

             "I am satisfied that this could be done, on the facts of  this
             case, by showing that the  effect  of  deportation  on  [MS's]
             spouse or child would be unduly  harsh,  and  thus,  that  the
             requirements of Section 117C (5) of the 2002 Act are  met,  or
             by demonstrating that cumulatively a number of  factors  reach
             the high  threshold  of  demonstrating  that  there  are  very
             compelling circumstances over  and  above  the  exceptions  to
             deportation in the Immigration Rules."

     10. At [14] the judge again directed himself as to  the  high  test  of
         demonstrating 'very compelling circumstances' by reference  to  the
         Supreme Court authority of  Hesham  Ali  [2016]  UKSC  60  and  the
         earlier Court of Appeal authority of SS  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 550.

     11. At [16] the judge summarised the details of  MS's  convictions  and
         satisfied  himself  that  MS's  offence  was  serious,   and   then
         summarised the remainder of the Reasons for Refusal Letter and  the
         submissions from the  Presenting  Officer  at  [17]  to  [21]  (the
         Presenting Officer argued that there was no evidence of remorse  by
         MS, that it was not apparent how the psychiatrist (it is not  clear
         whether this was a reference to Dr Daly or to Dr  Wighe,  or  both)
         concluded that MS could not fly, and, presumably  with  respect  to
         the psychiatric report prepared by Dr Wighe, why it  was  concluded
         that relevant treatment was unlikely to be available  and  accessed
         in India). The judge recorded the Presenting  Officer's  submission
         that the psychiatrist was a medical expert and not a country expert
         in respect of the expert's assertions relating to medical treatment
         in India.

     12. At [22] to [25] the judge summarised the submissions of Mr  Otchie,
         MS's legal representative, who placed reliance on the report of  Dr
         Wighe, with particular reference to MS's high risk of self-harm  or
         suicide and the psychiatrist's opinion that any  additional  social
         and financial stressors could precipitate a deterioration  in  MS's
         mental health and increase his risk of suicide. It was submitted on
         behalf of MS that his daughter, born in  February  2019,  was  very
         likely to be registered as a British citizen following the grant of
         Indefinite Leave to Remain to FM on 26 June 2019 and that, based on
         FM's evidence, she would not return to India and that MS  would  be
         effectively abandoned  and, bearing in mind the  stigma  of  mental
         illness and the absence of any  familial  or  other  support,  MS's
         isolation would inevitably lead to a deterioration  in  his  mental
         health.

     13. In the section of his decision headed  'My  Findings  of  Fact  and
         Conclusions' the judge again reminded himself that MS's offence was
         a serious one [27]. At [30] the judge indicated that he  found  the
         report by Dr Wighe  to  be  of  particular  assistance.  The  judge
         referred to Dr Wighe's diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia and that
         this  was  a  serious  mental  disorder  which,  according  to  the
         psychiatrist, had proved to be resistant to treatment. Dr Wighe was
         of the view that MS had "limited insight  into  his  condition  and
         relies entirely on his carer to comply  with  his  treatment."  The
         judge found that the psychiatric report was in accordance with  the
         evidence given by FM (who was MS's 'carer') relating to his ability
         to function on a daily basis. The judge referred to  FM's  evidence
         of the further deterioration in MS's condition  over  the  previous
         year.

     14. At [32] the judge satisfied himself that MS was seriously  mentally
         ill, that he had no  insight  into  his  illness  and  that  he  is
         "ambivalent about the diagnosis" made by the psychiatrist. At  [33]
         the judge noted Dr Wighe's opinion that MS's  history  of  symptoms
         was consistent with a diagnosis of schizophrenia and that,  due  to
         the treatment resistant nature of MS's disorder, he  would  require
         medication for the rest of his life. The judge set  out  what  MS's
         current  treatment  would  consist  of  (under  the   headings   of
         pharmacological    intervention,    psychological     intervention,
         occupational therapy and social intervention), the judge noted MS's
         limited insight into his condition, and that  he was reliant on his
         wife  to  comply  with  treatment.  The  judge   also   noted   the
         psychiatrist's opinion that MS remained at high risk of suicide and
         deliberate self-harm and that he was therefore not fit to fly.  The
         judge concluded, based on the psychiatric report, the evidence from
         FM and MS's presentation at the hearing,  that  MS  had  a  serious
         mental disorder and that he could not cope on  a  day-to-day  basis
         without his wife.

     15. At [34] the judge stated:

             "Whilst there are family  members  who  continue  to  live  in
             India,  due  to  [MS's]  serious  mental   condition   I   can
             understand, and indeed appreciate that [MS's] fear  of  social
             isolation and stigma if returned to India would  be  a  likely
             outcome. According to the psychiatrist factors such as  stigma
             and social isolation are well recognised risk factors and  are
             associated  with  increased  risk  of  depression   and   poor
             treatment compliance, which would  consequently  increase  the
             risk of suicide and further episodes of psychosis."

     16.  At  [35]  the  judge  reminded  himself  that  MS  had   to   show
         circumstances over and above those contained in s.117C (3) - (5) of
         the 2002 Act. At [36] the judge noted that, following  the  Reasons
         for Refusal Letter, FM had been granted ILR. The judge then stated:

             "I need therefore to be satisfied  that  [MS's]  circumstances
             are something more than being unduly harsh on his  partner.  I
             am satisfied having considered all the evidence that it  would
             be unduly harsh on [MS's] partner if [MS] was to  be  deported
             for reasons articulated earlier  in  this  determination,  and
             essentially due to [MS's] mental health condition he would  be
             unable  to  cope  on  a  day  to  day  basis,  leading  almost
             inevitably to a deterioration in his mental state, which  also
             might  lead  to  an  increased  risk  of  suicide.  Thus,  the
             requirements of Section 117C (5) of the 2002 Act are met."

     17. At [37] the judge reminded himself of the public  interest  factors
         in favour of deportation, although he  indicated  his  satisfaction
         that MS now accepted  responsibility  for  his  offending  and  was
         remorseful.

     18. At [38], having found  that  MS  and  FM  were  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship, and  that  she  now  had  ILR,  the  judge
         stated:

             "I am satisfied that it would be unduly harsh  to  any  family
             life taking place in India bearing in mind [MS's] mental state
             and the potential for isolation not  only  for  [MS]  but  for
             family members due to stigma attached to such conditions."

     19. In the same paragraph the  judge  stated  that  he  would  consider
         factors not covered by the statutory framework as part of the wider
         Article 8 assessment, and again reminded himself that  "there  must
         be a very strong Article 8 ECHR claim to  remain  to  displace  the
         public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  and  in
         this case that must amount to very  compelling  circumstances  over
         and above the exceptions to deportation." The judge concluded  that
         the test for very compelling circumstances was satisfied. The judge
         then stated:

             "I am satisfied that there would be  insurmountable  obstacles
             to family life between [MS]  and  his  partner  continuing  in
             India, and that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
             integration for [MS] in society in India. I am satisfied  that
             deportation would almost inevitably break up the  relationship
             between [MS] and his spouse since it is highly  unlikely  that
             the spouse would go to India to live with [MS]. It would  also
             impact on the relationship between [MS] and his  daughter  and
             would very likely end face to face  family  relationship  ties
             with his daughter since the daughter/child would remain in the
             United Kingdom with her mother."

     20. The judge then took into account the length of  MS's  residence  in
         the UK as a private life factor in his favour, and concluded,  "for
         all the  above  reasons",  that  the  decision  to  deport  MS  was
         disproportionate. The judge  consequently  allowed  the  appeal  on
         human rights grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     21. The grounds contend that the judge failed to give clear reasons why
         he concluded that the threshold of unduly  harsh  consequences  was
         met in respect of FM and MS's non  qualifying  child.  If  MS  were
         deported and FM and their child  remained  in  the  UK  they  would
         "undoubtedly miss [MS]  and  there  would  be  some  emotional  and
         psychological  impact,  but  it  has  not  been  evidenced  in  the
         determination that this would go beyond  what  is  normally  to  be
         expected following the deportation of a partner/parent."

     22. Nor was there said to be cogent evidence beyond MS's  illness  that
         family life could not continue in India. It was not suggested  that
         treatment was not unavailable in India or that family members would
         not be prepared to assist MS if required.

     23. The grounds contend that there was "no adequate explication" as  to
         why the alleged potential effects of deportation in respect  of  MS
         could rationally be considered as anything more than very harsh.

     24. The grounds finally contend that, although  there  is  some  stigma
         attached to those suffering from mental health conditions in  India
         and that they may face discrimination, there  was  no  evidence  to
         support a finding that treatment was  not  available  or  that  the
         stigma attached to mental health problems  reached  the  very  high
         threshold of very compelling circumstances.

     25. In granting permission to appeal Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Gumsley considered it arguable that the judge made an error in  law
         in finding that the exceptions in s.117C were met or in failing  to
         give adequate reasons for such a conclusion, and for  finding  that
         the matters relied on  by  MS  were  such  as  to  reach  the  high
         threshold of very compelling circumstances and/or failing  to  give
         adequate reasons for such a conclusion.

     26. In written submissions dated 24 July 2020 the SSHD  submitted  that
         the judge's assessment of the unduly harsh  impact  focused  on  MS
         rather than his partner and that there was no evidence as to how FM
         would be able to cope without MS. In respect of the judge's finding
         that it would be unduly harsh on  FM  to  relocate  to  India,  the
         written submissions argue that the judge failed to take account  of
         the evidence contained in the Reasons for Refusal  Letter  relating
         to the availability of  medical  treatment  in  India  "...  whilst
         seemingly relying  on  a  medical  Expert  who  professes  to  have
         knowledge of the Indian medical system and of Indian culture to the
         level of Expert." The written submissions contend  that  there  did
         not appear to be any country evidence that supported the conclusion
         that MS and his  family  members  would  be  isolated  from  Indian
         society due to the stigma of mental illness.  The  written  grounds
         further contend that  the  judge's  finding  that  there  would  be
         insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  India  were
         unreasoned and unsustainable.

     27. In his oral submissions Mr Clarke submitted that, whilst there  was
         evidence of stigma associated with mental illness in  India,  there
         was no evidence that such stigma reached the high threshold  needed
         to  demonstrate  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and   above
         Exception 2, and that the expert  only  indicated  his  familiarity
         with cultural issues within psychiatry, not  with  the  details  of
         mental health treatment  in  India.  It  was  not  clear  from  the
         psychiatric report whether the reference to MS being  'not  fit  to
         fly' took into account the possibility of FM accompanying MS  on  a
         flight. With respect to the judge's finding at [36], there  was  no
         actual finding as to how MS's condition, if he were deported, would
         mentally affect FM such that there would be an unduly harsh  impact
         on her. Moreover, there was no  reference  to  or  engagement  with
         evidence relating to stigma and societal  isolation  in  India.  Mr
         Clarke submitted that  the  judge's  finding  that  it  was  highly
         unlikely that FM would go to India to live with MS was problematic,
         but he accepted that the grounds did  not  challenge  this  factual
         finding.

     28. Mr Malik relied on UT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ  1095  (at
         [19], [26] and [27]), AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1296  (at
         [9], [32] & [38]), and KB (Jamaica) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1385 (at
         [16]) in support of the propositions that different tribunals might
         reasonably reach different  conclusions  in  respect  of  the  same
         evidence, that the Upper Tribunal  is  not  entitled  to  remake  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal  simply  because  it  does  not
         agree with it or because it is not as well-structured or  expressed
         as it might be, and that the basis for  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision may be set out directly or by  inference.  Mr  Malik  went
         through the pleaded grounds and submitted  that  no  challenge  had
         been made to the judge's factual finding that FM would  not  return
         to India and that no application had been made to amend the pleaded
         ground to challenge this finding. Whilst Mr Malik accepted that the
         judge's  direction  at  [13]  was  wrong,  read  holistically,  the
         decision indicated that the judge did  have  in  mind  the  correct
         test. The judge was entitled to rely on Dr Wighe's familiarity with
         cultural issues within psychiatry, especially in India, and he  was
         also entitled to accept the psychiatrist's assessment of MS's  risk
         of suicide and that he could not cope without  FM.  The  judge  was
         entitled to accept  the  evidence  from  FM  and  the  psychiatrist
         relating to feared social isolation for the family, and  that  this
         finding was  further  supported  by  reference  to  the  background
         evidence contained in the SSHD's  First-tier  Tribunal  bundle.  It
         must be inferred that the judge considered this evidence. Whilst it
         was accepted by Mr Malik that the  stigma  associated  with  mental
         health  issues  was  not  in  itself  enough  to  reach  the  'very
         compelling circumstances' threshold, this was not  the  basis  upon
         which the judge reached his conclusions as he  took  account  of  a
         number of factors and his conclusion was based on  this  cumulative
         assessment. [36] and [38], properly read, indicated that  splitting
         the family unit would have very serious consequences for FM and  MS
         and the judge was entitled to so conclude.

Discussion

     29. The pleaded grounds of appeal have not  suggested  that  the  judge
         misdirected  himself  according  to  the  correct  legal  test.  In
         response to my observation during the 'error of law'  hearing  that
         the judge did misdirect himself at  [13]  to  the  extent  that  he
         appeared to equate the fulfilment of Exception 2 with demonstrating
         'very compelling circumstances', Mr Malik referred me to the  other
         numerous instances  where  the  judge  properly  directed  himself,
         including [35]. Given the absence of any reference in  the  grounds
         of appeal, the SSHD's further written submissions  or  Mr  Clarke's
         oral submissions  to  a  misdirection  by  the  judge,  and  having
         considered the decision holistically, I am satisfied that,  despite
         what he said at [13], the judge has properly  directed  himself  on
         the test in s.117C(6) and that he fully appreciated the need for MS
         to demonstrate 'very compelling circumstances' over and above those
         in Exceptions 1 and 2.

     30. The pleaded grounds, supplemented by the written submissions and Mr
         Clarke's oral submissions, contend that the judge  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons why MS's deportation to India would have an unduly
         harsh impact on FM if she and their daughter remained  in  the  UK.
         According  to  the  SSHD  the  judge  inappropriately  focused  his
         attention on the impact on MS's own mental health in the  event  of
         his deportation to India without his wife and child rather than the
         impact this would have on FM (his  child  not  being  a  qualifying
         child).

     31. The judge's conclusion at [36] must be read in the full context  of
         the  decision,  particularly  the  judge's  otherwise  unchallenged
         assessment of the nature and  seriousness  of  MS's  mental  health
         condition. At  [31]  the  judge  accepted  that  MS  suffered  from
         paranoid schizophrenia and that this was a serious mental  disorder
         that had proved to be resistant to treatment.  The  judge  accepted
         FM's evidence, which has not been challenged,  that  MS  could  not
         function on a daily basis without her support. The  judge  accepted
         FM's  evidence  that,  despite  her  care,   MS's   condition   had
         deteriorated over the previous year  to  the  point  where  he  had
         become withdrawn and did very little  by  himself.  She  needed  to
         supervise his medication and to prompt him to do nearly all of  his
         self-care activities. The judge properly noted that  FM's  evidence
         was supported by the psychiatric report and the psychiatrist's  own
         assessment of MS, and that this was reinforced to the judge by  his
         own description of the difficulties MS had in  giving  evidence  at
         the hearing. It was rationally open to  the  judge  to  accept,  at
         [33], the Consultant Psychiatrist's assessment that MS remained  at
         high risk of deliberate self-harm  and  suicide  and  that  he  was
         reliant on FM for  his  care  and  treatment.  At  [34]  the  judge
         acknowledged that there were family members who continued  to  live
         in India, but he found that a likely  outcome  for  MS  if  he  was
         retuned to India would be social isolation and stigmatisation. This
         finding must be considered in light  of  the  evidence  before  the
         judge and the submissions made  on  MS's  behalf.  FM  and  MS  had
         reported to the psychiatrist that they had been estranged by  their
         families in India and that they feared further social isolation and
         stigmatisation if MS returned to India. The  judge's  note  of  the
         hearing recorded FM's evidence that MS's family in India would  not
         support him and that he was estranged from them,  that  her  family
         would not accommodate them, and she and MS would be  isolated.  The
         judge must be taken to be aware of this evidence  as  his  decision
         refers to the submissions made by MS's representative that he would
         "effectively be abandoned" if deported to India  "bearing  in  mind
         the stigma of mental illness and the absence  of  any  familial  or
         other support."

     32. Given the above, it is tolerably clear that the judge had in  mind,
         when assessing whether the deportation would have an  unduly  harsh
         impact on FM if she remained in the UK, the natural and  reasonable
         impact on her of knowing that  her  husband  would  effectively  be
         alone in India in circumstances where he would be unable to cope on
         a daily basis and in circumstances that  would  "almost  inevitably
         lead to an increased risk of suicide" [36]. The  judge's  reference
         to the "reasons" he "articulated  earlier"  clearly  point  to  the
         serious consequences to MS of being deported without his  immediate
         family, and which must, apply a modicum of  common  sense,  have  a
         corresponding  impact  on  FM.  Although  the  judge   could   have
         articulated his finding with greater clarity, I am  satisfied  that
         his conclusion in respect of the unduly harsh impact on  FM  should
         MS be returned to India without her, was one reasonably open to the
         judge for the reasons given.

     33. Having found that MS's  deportation  would  have  an  unduly  harsh
         impact on FM should she remain in the UK, the  judge  proceeded  to
         consider whether there were very compelling circumstances over  and
         above this harsh impact. At [37] the judge reminded himself of  the
         public interest factors in deportation, and then at  the  beginning
         of [38] he addressed  himself  to  the  issue  of  very  compelling
         circumstances. It is surprising that the judge did not  first  deal
         with whether it would be unduly harsh on FM if she accompanied  him
         back to India after his conclusion in [36] as any determination  of
         undue harshness has to take account not just of  the  situation  in
         which the family are separated, but also whether it would be unduly
         harsh for FM to live in India with  the  deportee.  The  judge  did
         however consider this situation at [38], albeit that it was in  the
         context of his assessment of 'very compelling  circumstances.'  The
         judge made a factual finding that it was "highly unlikely" that  FM
         would go to India to live with MS. This  was  based  on  FM's  oral
         evidence that she would stay in the UK if MS was  deported  because
         it would be "too much" for  her  emotionally  and  financially  and
         because the baby would suffer. This was a factual finding  open  to
         the judge on the evidence before him. This factual finding was  not
         challenged either in the grounds of appeal or  the  SSHD's  written
         submissions, and no application was made  at  the  'error  of  law'
         hearing to  amend  the  grounds  to  challenge  this  finding.  The
         inescapable consequence of this factual finding is  that  FM  would
         not accompany or join  MS  in  India.  The  judge's  decision  must
         therefore be assessed within the confines of this specific  factual
         framework.

     34. The grounds of appeal content that the judge failed  to  take  into
         account that treatment for mental health was available in India and
         that MS had family members who would be prepared to assist him, and
         that, although accepting there was  stigma  in  India  attached  to
         mental health problems, there was no evidence that  this  level  of
         stigma  reached  the  very  high  'very  compelling  circumstances'
         threshold.

     35. I can deal with the point relating to other  family  members  being
         prepared to assist  MS  briefly.  The  evidence  before  the  judge
         indicated that, although MS had family members in India, they would
         not be prepared to assist him (see paragraph 31 above).  The  judge
         did not therefore fail to take this into account.

     36. Contrary to the  SSHD's  written  submissions,  there  was  country
         evidence before the judge relating to the  stigma  associated  with
         mental health issues in  India.  The  SSHD's  bundle  of  documents
         prepared for the First-tier  Tribunal  contained,  in  Annex  O,  a
         number of media articles/reports that had  been  provided  by  MS's
         previous legal representatives. These included an article from  the
         Hindustan Times entitled "Voices in their heads:  how  India  deals
         with mental  disorders",  a  report  from  The  Guardian  newspaper
         entitled "India faces massive challenge to  get  mental  healthcare
         right", and a Times of  India  report  headed  "Are  mental  health
         facilities in India adequate?".  The  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
         itself made brief reference to  the  provision  of  these  reports.
         Although the judge did not expressly  refer  to  these  reports  he
         indicated at [8] that he  had  taken  into  account  the  documents
         placed before him in the SSHD's bundle, including Annex A - R.  The
         reports referred to stigma associated with mental disorders and  to
         consulting a psychiatrist, that such stigma still looms large, that
         there was no insurance coverage for people with  mental  disorders,
         and, in respect of The Guardian article, that the  stigma  extended
         to the professionals who assisted those with mental  disorders.  In
         her oral evidence, as  noted  in  the  record  of  proceedings,  FM
         indicated that the Indian population would make  the  family  "feel
         bad" because  of  MS's  mental  health  and  that  she  feared  the
         immediate family would be isolated, evidence  that  was  consistent
         with the media articles/reports.

     37. The judge therefore considered whether there were 'very  compelling
         circumstances' over  and  above  Exception  2  in  the  context  of
         unchallenged medical evidence  that  MS  suffered  from  a  serious
         mental disorder and that he was  "seriously  mentally  ill"  ([30],
         [32]), that he had limited insight into his  condition,  could  not
         cope on a day-to-day basis without FM and relied entirely on her to
         comply with his treatment ([31], [33]), and  that  he  remained  at
         high risk of suicide and deliberate  self-harm  [33],  unchallenged
         factual findings that FM would not relocate to India, and against a
         background in which MS  would  have  no  other  family  members  to
         support him in India, where there was significant stigma associated
         with mental health issues, and where, according to the  psychiatric
         evidence, factors such as stigma and  social  isolation  were  well
         recognised  risk  factors  associated  with   increased   risk   of
         depression and poor treatment  compliance  and  increased  risk  of
         suicide and further episodes of psychosis  [34].  Contrary  to  the
         assertion  in  the  grounds,  the  judge  did  not  undertake   his
         assessment of 'very compelling circumstances' on the basis that the
         stigma associated with  mental  health  issues  in  India  was,  of
         itself, enough  to  reach  the  very  high  standard.  The  judge's
         conclusion that there  were  'very  compelling  circumstances'  was
         based on a cumulative assessment of relevant factors (at  [38]  the
         judge explained that MS's  deportation  would  be  disproportionate
         "For all the above reasons") including the impact on FM  and  their
         child, the best interests of the child, the impact on  MS's  mental
         health and the increased risk of self-harm and the deterioration in
         his mental state, his remorse for his criminal conduct and  absence
         of other convictions, and his lengthy residence in the UK. Further,
         in undertaking the 'very compelling circumstances'  assessment  the
         judge demonstrably took account  of  the  serious  nature  of  MS's
         offending ([12],  [27],  [37])  and  weighed  the  relevant  public
         interest factors in his assessment ([37], [38]),  and  he  properly
         directed himself on the correct legal  test  ([10]  -  [12],  [35],
         [36], [38]). The judge's decision,  properly  considered,  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law that  requires  it
         to be set aside.



Notice of Decision

The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the respondent and to the  appellant.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum   20 April 2021

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
