
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: hu/02255/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 13 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                            mr Md Masodur Rahman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Iengar, Counsel instructed by Evolentlaw
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. As I set out in my reasons for finding that the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge disclosed a material error of law and  should
    be set aside, the crucial element of the appellant's claim is  that  he
    is married to a  British  citizen,  Ms  [ZK].   The  issue  is  whether
    paragraph EX.1 applied.

 2. In order to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules,  the  applicant  was
    required to demonstrate that this exception applied in his  case.   The
    relevant words of EX.1  are  that  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner who  is  in  the  UK  and  is  a
    British  citizen  settled  in  the  UK  and  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

 3. It was conceded by the Secretary of State that the applicant was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner  but  it  was  not
    considered there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  that  relationship
    continuing outside the United Kingdom.  The reasoning that was provided
    for this is contained in the decision letter at page 5 of 9:

         "You undertook a valid marriage in the United Kingdom  in  November
         2013.  From the evidence you have provided  it  has  been  accepted
         that your marriage is genuine and that  it  continues  to  subsist.
         You have told us that your wife is  in  employment  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  You have  also  told  us  that  your  wife  suffers  from
         endometriosis and  that  she  relies  on  you  for  assistance  and
         support.  You have provided a letter  from  your  wife's  GP  which
         states that her medical problems are having a  negative  impact  on
         her life and that she needs support from you  as  her  main  carer.
         The letter further states that your wife has  severe  endometriosis
         and  fibroids  giving   her   intermittent   pelvic   pain,   heavy
         menstruation and problems trying to  conceive.   She  suffers  from
         back pain, low mood, stress and anxiety, pains in the soles of  her
         feet, poor mobility, allergy to fruit and nuts and hypertension."

    The applicant's wife is aged 43.  The decision maker, having looked  at
    the availability of medical treatment, took the view that there were no
    insurmountable obstacles.  On the  material  before  the  Secretary  of
    State, his conclusion was correct.   The  list  of  ailments  including
    endometriosis  and  problems  trying  to  conceive,   although   highly
    distressing to the appellant and his wife, could not rationally  amount
    to insurmountable obstacles.  They were  matters  which  affected  them
    equally wherever they may be and they had to live with the consequences
    of that condition however sad that might be to  them.   Similarly  back
    pain, poor mobility and allergies, with  their  attendant  effect  upon
    both her, and perhaps both, her sense of well-being  and  psychological
    health have to be borne as being part of the situation  in  which  this
    couple are placed without them amounting to insurmountable obstacles to
    family life with that partner continuing outside the UK.

 4. One of the reasons for finding an error was the judge's approach  to  a
    report from Dr Lawrence, a Consultant Psychiatrist.  He found that  the
    appellant's  wife  was  suffering  from  a  major  depressive   episode
    secondary to PTSD resulting from the  mistreatment  that  she  suffered
    during the course of her first marriage.  The judge notes in  paragraph
    32 that the respondent did not challenge  the  appellant's  mental  and
    psychological condition nor the evidence concerning her first  marriage
    nor the help and assistance that the appellant  gives  his  wife.   The
    judge concluded:

         "I therefore found all those facts proved."

 5. Dr Lawrence's report concluded that the impact on her mental health, if
    deprived from her current family support structure in the  UK  and  NHS
    treatment and counsellor, would be a catastrophic deterioration and may
    result in hospital admission.

 6. I was satisfied that the  medical  evidence  of  Dr  Lawrence  was  not
    properly taken into account, that is,  factored  into,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's determination.  In paragraphs  31  and  32  the  judge
    accepted the evidence of Dr Lawrence but did not deal with  its  impact
    on his consideration of insurmountable obstacles.

 7. The expression 'insurmountable obstacles' is now defined  by  paragraph
    EX.2 as meaning 'very significant difficulties which would be faced  by
    the applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
    outside the UK and which could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.'

Her statement

 8. It is a central plank  of  the  appellant's  claim  that  his  wife  is
    suffering from the consequences of her first  unhappy  marriage.  In  a
    long  statement  dated  28  September  2017  she  describes  her  first
    husband's behaviour towards her since she first arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom in August 2004. Her husband's family offered  her  no  support.
    She describes  his  controlling  behaviour  including  restricting  her
    access to her own family, not allowing her to go outside the  home  and
    preventing her  returning  to  Bangladesh  to  see  her  family  there.
    Separately, she also refers to financial abuse, refusing to support her
    financially and removing funds from her  account.  The  statement  also
    continues with acts that were designed to  humiliate  her  as  well  as
    coercive behaviour which he found particularly degrading. The statement
    also describes physical violence.

 9. Unsurprisingly, this led to a deterioration in her mental  health.  She
    began suffering from anxiety and panic attacks which sometimes  reduced
    her to being unable to carry out simple day-to-day tasks. This resulted
    in increasing isolation from  her  friends  and  others  including  her
    family who might support her. After an initial separation in  2008  she
    left her husband finally in 2009 to live with her sister. She  obtained
    a non-molestation order against her husband who eventually divorced her
    in Bangladesh.

10. Ms [K] commenced counselling in December 2008 attending weekly sessions
    and, at the time of writing, continued  attend  to  attend  counselling
    each week.

11. In paragraph 68 of her statement, she  described  by  far  the  biggest
    positive influence was the presence and support provided to her by  her
    elder sister, [A]. She lived with  her  until  December  2010.  [A]  is
    married with two children and has  provided  Ms  [K]  with  substantial
    support.

12. She also describes the support provided to her by her  husband.    This
    support would, of course, continue  were  the  couple  to  relocate  to
    Bangladesh.

13. Her current support network includes both her husband  and  her  sister
    and family but also includes healthcare provided to address her various
    difficulties both physical and mental. She claims that those  would  be
    lost to her were she to return to Bangladesh. In particular, she states
    that her family members in Bangladesh know nothing of her mental health
    problems which are matters generally stigmatised  there.  Additionally,
    her gynaecological problems have resulted in her being unable  to  have
    children.

14.  Ms  [K]  suffers  from  polycystic  ovaries,   a   severe   level   of
    endometriosis, plantar fasciitis which causes pain throughout her body.
    She has undergone five operations to treat her endometriosis.

Her sister's statement

15. Her sister, in a statement also dated  28  September  2017,  dates  the
    commencement of Ms [K]'s mental health problems to her first  marriage.
    She confirms her first husband's abusive behaviour  and  the  steps  he
    took to prevent her from speaking to Ms [K] during the period in  which
    Ms [K] was living with her (March 2009 until  Ms  [K]  period  of  deep
    psychological trauma. She describes how  her  two  daughters  played  a
    positive role in her sister's recovery. Whilst Ms [K] moved out of  her
    sister's home in December 2010, her  sister  maintained  a  very  close
    relationship with her.

Dr Lawrence's report

16. Dr Lawrence assessed Ms [K] for over two hours on 12 June 2017  at  his
    clinic in Harley Street for the purpose of preparing a full psychiatric
    history and mental state examination. Ms [K]  was  accompanied  by  her
    niece who acted as her interpreter. He described Ms [K] and  her  niece
    as  intelligent.  Ms  [K]  was  described  as  both   objectively   and
    subjectively depressed but did, on one occasion, smile.

17. In the course of her describing her experiences at  the  hands  of  her
    first husband, Dr Lawrence records  that  she  had  a  full-blown  PTSD
    reaction. She started breathing fast, developed palpitations and became
    pale. His observation, as an expert, was that  this  was  a  full-blown
    PTSD reaction characterised by low blood pressure, fast heart rate  and
    a sense of breathlessness. It is similar to a panic attack. His opinion
    was based on his own observation of the physical  signs  which  were  a
    consistent reflection of the underlying biological mechanism.

18. He describes how she is clinically depressed. Dr Lawrence described her
    as a very sad  old  (cf  aged  43)  lady.  During  the  course  of  the
    examination, she was tearful, repeatedly distressed and  very  anxious,
    describing feelings of helplessness and hopelessness. Reverting to  her
    full--blown PTSD response, he stated  that  the  symptoms  were  almost
    impossible to simulate. He described her  as  a  woman  of  quite  high
    intelligence functioning below that level, fearful of what would happen
    to her if her husband were not allowed to stay. Dr Lawrence stated

         "She told me she feels sad all the time and  views  the  future  as
         hopeless and will only get worse. She feels a total  failure  as  a
         person. She gets very little pleasure from the things that she used
         to enjoy. She told me that she feels guilty all of the time and she
         feels as though she is  being  punished.  She  is  disappointed  in
         herself and blames herself for everything bad that happens.  It  is
         hard to get interested in  anything  and  she  has  trouble  making
         decisions. She feels more worthless than other people and does  not
         have enough energy to do very much."

19. He described the symptoms  as  all  completely  classical  of  a  major
    depressive illness.  It is, therefore, unsurprising that  he  described
    her as suffering from a major depressive episode secondary to PTSD. She
    had not been  given  proper  psychological  or  reasonably  appropriate
    pharmacological   treatment.   He   suggested   that    she    receives
    antidepressants and recommended  she  be  referred  to  a  psychiatrist
    working  within  a  specialist  clinic  with  expertise  in  PTSD   and
    depression. This is a treatable condition in the UK but  would  not  be
    fully effective, given the situation  where  she  is  still  afraid  of
    returning to the source of threat.

20. In answer to the various questions posed by the appellant's solicitors,
    Dr Lawrence stated that it was vital for her mental  health  that  'she
    remains within her sister's home and that she continues  to  live  with
    her husband upon whom she is  utterly  dependant.'  This  was  not,  of
    course, an accurate statement of her current domestic arrangements. She
    has not lived in her sister's home since 2010, although  she  continues
    to have a strong relationship  with  her.  She  met  the  appellant  in
    November 2011 and married in November 2012. They have remained together
    ever since in accommodation they will acquire the right to purchase  in
    2022.

21. Dr Lawrence was asked to assess the impact that there could be  on  her
    mental health if she  were  deprived  of  her  current  family  support
    structure in the UK, NHS treatment and counselling. He stated

         "This would cause a catastrophic deterioration and  may  result  in
         hospital admission.  Her psychomotor retardation  will  get  worse,
         her capacity to engage in any of the  normal  activities  of  daily
         living would be impeded. Her catastrophic expectations  would  lead
         her to believe that she would never be reunited  with  her  husband
         ever again, - this could result in an impulsive suicidal act."

22. This answer presupposes, of course, that she would remain in the United
    Kingdom whilst her husband would return to Bangladesh in order to apply
    for entry clearance. This is not a likely outcome. The  couple  do  not
    meet the requirements for entry clearance. Since  she  has  elected  to
    make a home together  with  her  husband  and  to  leave  her  sister's
    household, the more likely outcome is that she would join  her  husband
    in Bangladesh rather than end the marriage and  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The alternative outcome cannot be excluded; namely  that  the
    combined support provided by her sister (with whom she  has  not  lived
    for the past nine years), the NHS and  her  counselling  would  act  as
    sufficiently  strong  benefits  such  as  to  outweigh  the  actual  or
    potential support (emotional, physical,  practical,  financial,  social
    and domestic) that her marriage with  the  appellant  would  afford  in
    Bangladesh.  However, were she to  abandon  her  marriage,  there  must
    necessarily be the insurmountable obstacles to family  life  with  that
    partner continuing outside the UK or else she would not do so.

Additional material

23. I was also invited to consider the letter of Dr Iris Popa at pp.  111-2
    dated 10 February 2017.  She described many of the matters to  which  I
    have earlier  referred.   Reference  is  also  made  to  Carpel  Tunnel
    Syndrome affecting her writs, treated by injections, for which she  was
    referred to an orthopaedic surgeon.  Dr Popa recorded that the  support
    of the appellant and continuous counselling has allowed her to  recover
    sufficiently to bring back some normality to her day-to-day  life.   Dr
    Popa referred her, in 2017, to a psychologist.

24. In a supplementary bundle served under cover of a letter dated 10 April
    2019, there is evidence that the appellant (born 15  August  1967,  now
    aged 51) suffered what  was  described  in  the  Discharge  Information
    Summary dated February 2019 as 'an acute coronary  syndrome',  a  heart
    attack, following a 5-day period of chest pain as  a  result  of  which
    further investigations were ordered.

25. In the same bundle, Ms [K] is shown to have resumed part-time work  for
    Primark.  A letter from the Respiratory Unit of Barts NHS Trust records
    her visit to the clinic  on  18  April  2018  to  address  her  ongoing
    respiratory symptoms: 'She remains unwell but there has ben some slight
    improvement.'  The letter wonders whether 'there may be an  element  of
    asthma' but  there  was  'an  ongoing  infection'.   The  follow-up  in
    December 2018 recorded that her chest was then clear on examination but
    that the main  problem  was  cough  variant  asthma,  relatively  well-
    controlled by medication but not 'quite right'.

Analysis and conclusions

26.  The physical symptoms of which Ms  [K]  complains  are  numerous  and,
    treated separately, provide little support for the  finding  that  each
    amounts to an insurmountable obstacle to family life with that  partner
    continuing outside the  United  Kingdom.  However  great  the  couple's
    sadness may be that they are unable  to  have  children,  that  is  the
    position in  which  they  find  themselves.  Similarly,  Carpal  Tunnel
    Syndrome and respiratory symptoms amounting, probably,  to  a  form  of
    asthma do not meet the threshold. Their significance,  however,  arises
    cumulatively as contributing to her psychological state. I do not think
    that Dr Lawrence's description of her as a 'very sad old lady' when  Ms
    [K] is 43 years old amounts to  a  clerical  error.  Rather,  it  seems
    likely that, given her overall appearance and history, he was  treating
    her as someone prematurely aged as a result of her past experiences and
    current condition. If so, it  provides  a  valuable  insight  into  her
    vulnerability.

27. The diagnosis made by Dr Lawrence, which  is  not  contested,  contains
    several strands within it which, combined, present a portrait of Ms [K]
    as suffering from a significant level of  mental  health  difficulties.
    The overall picture  is  one  of  an  individual  who  is  experiencing
    vulnerability and frailty. I am not persuaded that  her  condition  can
    properly be described as simply an individual  who  is  suffering  from
    Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. There are numerous cases of individuals
    who  suffer  from  PTSD  whose  condition   does   not   establish   an
    insurmountable obstacle to family life continuing  outside  the  United
    Kingdom. The degree and of  her  disability  (as  it  may  properly  be
    described) may be inferred from the evidence of the effect upon her  of
    her first disastrous marriage. It is also  authoritatively  established
    by Dr Lawrence's personal assessment as an expert of a full-blown  PTSD
    episode during the course of his meeting with her. There is, therefore,
    no question of Ms  [K]'s  vulnerability  being  established  nearly  by
    reason of a label being attached to her that  she  suffers  from  PTSD;
    rather, it is the underlying evidence that  establishes  her  as  being
    particularly vulnerable.

28. In this assessment I have taken into account  the  fact  that  she  has
    resumed her work. This is not, perhaps,  indicative  of  a  significant
    mental illness. Furthermore, it is the nature of the evidence  in  this
    appeal that some of the recommendations made by Dr  Lawrence  have  not
    been the subject of supplementary reporting. I  have  also  taken  into
    account the fact that she will continue to  have  the  support  of  the
    appellant were she to accompany him to Bangladesh.

29. However, what is lacking in any consideration of  the  consequences  of
    her leaving the United Kingdom is the effect upon her mental well-being
    of the loss of the package of support mechanisms that currently operate
    in her favour. I acknowledge that Ms [K] has  not  lived  in  the  same
    household as her sister since 2010. I also readily acknowledge that the
    presence  of  other  family  members  in  the  UK  rarely  prevents  an
    individual from removal. Nevertheless, it cannot  be  denied  that  her
    sister played a vital role in supporting  Ms  [K]  during  a  difficult
    period of her life and continues to offer support in a variety of ways,
    including the simple presence of her family.  The  package  of  support
    also includes  counselling  which  is  unlikely  to  be  replicated  in
    Bangladesh in the same way that it is provided in the United Kingdom.

30. It is unquestionably the case that these factors amount  to  obstacles.
    As I have set out in the earlier parts of this decision,  that  is  not
    the  issue.  The  real  issue  is  whether   these   obstacles,   these
    difficulties,  these  differentials  amount  to  the  very  significant
    difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their partner  in
    continuing their family life together outside the UK and  which...would
    entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.  I  am
    unable to marginalise the professional opinion of Dr Lawrence  that  it
    is important for  her  to  continue  to  have  access  to  the  support
    mechanisms which currently exist for her benefit.  I  accept  that  the
    support provided by her husband will continue but such support is  only
    part of the package she currently enjoys and that the  absence  of  the
    support mechanisms as a package would entail serious hardship to Ms [K]
    that can properly be described as very serious.

31. In reaching this  conclusion  I  accept  that  this  must  be  a  value
    judgement and is not capable of  absolute  certainty.  I  am,  however,
    satisfied that the decision I reach must  be  made  on  a  case-by-case
    basis as I have sought to do. Accordingly, I conclude as  a  matter  of
    fact and of law  that  the  appellant  has  established  insurmountable
    obstacles within the meaning of EX.1.

DECISION

      i) I find the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  discloses  an
         error of law and should be set aside  for  the  reasons  previously
         given.

     ii) I re-made the decision allowing the appeal of the appellant against
         the decision of the Secretary of State.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                           Dated 09 May 2019
