

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02695/2018
                                                               HU/02696/2018
                                                               HU/02700/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House in London           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated: |
|On 8 May 2019                            |On 31st May 2019                |
|                                         |                                |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               O     Appellant

                               M     Appellant

                               J     Appellant


                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Waithe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. On 7 January 2018 the Secretary of State refused  applications  made
       by each claimant for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  (UK)  on
       human rights grounds. Each claimant appealed but,  on  13  September
       2018, the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) dismissed each  appeal.
       A grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal followed  and,
       on 22 March 2019, I  decided  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the
       tribunal, with respect  to  each  appellant,  and  in  doing  so,  I
       directed that the decisions be remade by the Upper Tribunal after  a
       further hearing. That hearing took place before me on  8  May  2019.
       What follows is a setting out of the  background  circumstances  and
       the issues in these appeals and an explanation  as  to  how  I  have
       remade the decisions and why I have done so in the terms in which  I
       have.

    2. By way of background, all  three  claimants  are  nationals  of  the
       Philippines. Of those, the person  I  have  called  O  is  an  adult
       female. The person I have called M is an adult  male.  The  two  are
       partners. The person I have called J is the child of O and M. O  was
       born on 21 September 1974. M was born on 18 April 1982. J  was  born
       on 11 November 2010. Put simply and briefly, O and M entered the  UK
       in 2009. They had both been  given  leave  to  enter  for  temporary
       purposes. O had leave to enter until 12 June 2012. M had leave until
       30 November 2011. Those respective periods of leave expired but they
       have remained in the UK  without  leave  thereafter.  Prior  to  the
       expiry of those periods of leave J was born in the UK. He has  lived
       all of his young life here. He is now receiving education in the  UK
       but he has health and educational difficulties and that has  led  to
       the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham (which  is  responsible
       for his education) putting in place in respect of him an  Education,
       Health and Care Plan (EHCP). On 12 June 2017 O and M sought leave to
       remain on human rights grounds and a corresponding  application  was
       made on behalf of J.  Reliance  was  placed  on  Article  8  of  the
       European Convention on  Human  Rights  (ECHR).  It  has  never  been
       alleged that any of the claimants have any other possible  basis  of
       stay in the UK.

    3. When matters came before the tribunal on 11 September  2018  it  was
       argued that J, in his  particular  circumstances,  fell  within  the
       terms of paragraph 276(ADE)(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules. It  was
       also argued that O and M could rely  upon  Article  8  of  the  ECHR
       outside the Rules bearing in mind in,  particular,  the  content  of
       section 117B (6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
       and the need to consider the best interests of a child  pursuant  to
       section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
       That section creates a duty upon  public  bodies  to  safeguard  and
       promote the best interests of children in the UK. So, when making an
       immigration decision, the Secretary of State must consider the  best
       interests of any child who is in the UK and who is a subject of  any
       such decision.

4.    Paragraph 276(ADE) relevantly provides, as follows:

           "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  on
           the grounds of private life

           276(ADE)(1). The requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  for
           leave to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the  UK  are
           that at the date of application, the applicant...

           (iv)  is  under  the  age  of  eighteen  years  and  has   lived
           continuously in the UK for at least seven years (discounting any
           period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect
           the applicant to leave the UK...".

5.    As to section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002, that provides that the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls
is in the public interest. Of  potential  importance  with  respect  to  the
position of the adult claimants in consequence of the position of the  child
claimant, section 117B(6) provides as follows:

           6. In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
           public interest does not require the persons removal where -

           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom.

6.    It has never been disputed  that  both  O  and  M  have  a  subsisting
parental relationship with J. It was not disputed before  me,  nor  does  it
seem to have been disputed previously, that J is a "qualifying child".  That
is because although J is not a British citizen he has been in the UK  for  a
period in excess of seven years.

7.    With respect to Article 8 either within  or  outside  the  Immigration
Rules, the burden of establishing entitlement rests  upon  a  claimant.  The
standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities.  In  deciding  this
appeal with respect to all three claimants, I have had the  benefit  of  all
of the documentation which was before the tribunal when it heard the  appeal
and made its decision. I have had the benefit of  further  documentation  in
the form of a bundle filed on behalf of  all  three  claimants,  a  skeleton
argument prepared on their behalf  by  Mr  Waithe,  and  a  document  headed
"Directory of Speech Therapy Centers  (Philippines  only)"  provided  by  Mr
Kotas. The bundle I have just referred to and which was filed on  behalf  of
the claimants contained, amongst other things,  a  witness  statement  of  O
dated 20 April 2019, a witness statement of M also dated 20 April  2019  and
an EHCP J dated 12 March 2019. I  also  had  the  benefit  of  hearing  oral
evidence from O and from M and then oral submissions from Mr Waithe  and  Mr
Kotas. I am grateful to all of those persons.

8.    O told me that all of the speech therapy centres referred  to  in  the
documents provided by Mr Kotas were in or around Manila which was ten  hours
away from the province in which O and M had resided in  the  Philippines  in
the past and  where  certain  of  their  family  members  still  resided.  O
explained that she had previously worked as a  teacher  in  the  Philippines
and her partner had worked  there  as  a  physiotherapist.  She  has  family
currently living in the province where she used to live,  being  her  mother
(whom she says is elderly and has health problems) and two siblings.  M  has
his parents there too but they are unwell. She thought she would be able  to
find work as a teacher in the Philippines but doubted that M would  be  able
to find work as a physiotherapist because that profession is not  in  demand
there. But anyway, O's concern, she explained, is not with her position  but
with that of J. He receives one to one specialist teaching  support  in  the
UK. He could not get that in the Philippines. He  has  speech  and  language
difficulties and mild autism.

9.    M gave much briefer evidence, doing no more than adopting his  witness
statement referred to above.

10.   The oral submissions of the representatives followed. In  summary,  Mr
Kotas pointed out that the only real issue for me to decide was  whether  it
would be reasonable to expect J to  return  to  the  Philippines.  I  should
adopt the approach set out by the Supreme Court in  KO  and  others  v  SSHD
[2018] UKSC 53. It would be in J's best interests for him to remain  in  the
UK but that is not the same as saying it would not be reasonable  to  expect
him to depart. O and M are from educated backgrounds and would  be  able  to
find employment in the Philippines. There are family members there. It  does
not appear that proper attempts have been made to find out what  educational
assistance might be available for J in the province of  the  Philippines  to
which the family would return if they had to return. Over all, it  would  be
reasonable for them to return. Mr Waithe said he  would  rely  very  largely
upon the content  of  his  skeleton  argument.  As  to  that,  the  relevant
provisions were paragraph  276(ADE)(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  O  and
M clearly had parental responsibility for J. It was in  J's  best  interests
to remain in the  UK.  He  has  severe  developmental  speech  and  language
disorder and social  communication  difficulties.  He  is  receiving  expert
assistance in the UK with respect to that. He is a qualifying child and  the
public interest does not require the removal of any of the claimants.

11.   The representatives are right to say that  matters  boil  down  to  my
assessment of the reasonableness of the  return  of  J  in  the  context  of
paragraph 276(ADE) of the Immigration Rules and  section  117B  (6)  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. It has not been argued  before
me that any of the claimants can  succeed  if  the  relevant  reasonableness
tests (or I suppose at least one  of  them)  are  met.  But  the  tests  are
essentially the same and no-one has suggested otherwise in  the  context  of
these proceedings. So, it is the  question  of  the  reasonableness  of  J's
proposed return which I have focused upon.

12.   In focusing upon that issue  I  have  had  particular  regard  to  the
judgment of the Supreme  Court  in  KO,  cited  above.  It  is  made  clear,
therein, that misconduct of the parents, in the context of the  question  of
the reasonableness of return of a child, is not directly relevant. In  other
words, a child is not to be punished for misconduct of the  parents  by  way
of, for example,  unlawfully  overstaying.  But  it  is  also  said  in  the
judgment that the conduct of parents  can  have  indirect  relevance  to  an
assessment of reasonableness in the relatively limited sense  that  it  will
normally be reasonable for a child  to  be  with  the  parents  and  if  the
parents, through their record, cease to have a right to  remain  in  the  UK
and have to leave, it might be thought that it would at least  sometimes  be
reasonable for the child to leave in order to stay with those  parents  (see
paragraph 18 of the judgment in KO).

13.   Having reminded myself of what was said in KO and the content  of  the
tests in statute and within the Immigration  Rules  which  I  have  set  out
above, it is necessary for me  to  make  findings  of  fact  concerning  the
position of J. The particular concern which has  been  stressed  and  relied
upon on his behalf and therefore on behalf of O and M,  is  his  educational
or developmental difficulties.

14.   There was evidence of such difficulties when it heard the  appeal  and
I have that documentary evidence in front of me. But I also have more up  to
date evidence in the most recent claimant bundle including, as I have  said,
the EHCP of 3 March 2019. That is a helpful document.  It  seems  to  me  to
give a good flavour of J's difficulties which is, of course, what one  might
expect. It  confirms  he  has  "a  diagnosis  of  developmental  speech  and
language disorder and social communication difficulties". It also refers  to
his having cognitive difficulties. It is said that his social  communication
difficulties "may be suggestive of autism spectrum disorder" though it  also
suggests that they might be secondary to his speech and  language  disorder.
Reference is made to his expressive language difficulties being  severe.  It
is said that he has difficulty communicating with and interacting  with  his
peers. It is noted that he attends a mainstream school setting but  receives
twenty hours of one to one educational support  each  week  in  addition  to
some speech and language therapy. There was some discussion before me as  to
whether there was or was not  a  clear  diagnosis  with  respect  to  autism
spectrum disorder. It seems to me that there  is  not,  although  there  are
indications that he might or very likely does have such a disorder.  I  have
not found it necessary to make a precise finding as to diagnosis.  It  seems
to me sufficient for me to decide that  he  has  difficulties  of  substance
which are mirrored in the quite considerable provision of  twenty  hours  of
one to one educational support each week.

15.   J would, of course, if he were to return to  the  Philippines,  do  so
with his parents. I accept Mr Kotas submission to the effect that  O  and  M
are from a professional background and  have  experience  or  qualifications
which would aid them in finding work in the Philippines. I see no reason  to
disbelieve O when she tells me that M's profession is not in any  particular
demand in the Philippines. But she acknowledged that she would  be  able  to
obtain work and I find that, given time, both would have good  prospects  of
finding employment in their respective fields (or perhaps ij the case  of  M
in another  field  which  may  be  linked  to  the  area  in  which  he  has
professional qualifications) such that they  would  be  able  to  cater  for
themselves and for J. Indeed such did not seem to be seriously disputed.

16.   O gave evidence regarding the presence of various family  members  not
only in the Philippines but also in the  particular  province  to  which  it
appears they would return if they had to  return  to  the  Philippines.  She
sought to stress that some of them are elderly and not in  good  health  but
there is no corroborative evidence  of  that.  She  did  not  refer  to  any
specific medical conditions from which any of those family  members  suffer.
I find on the material before me that of the relatives she mentioned in  her
evidence (see above) certain of them might not be in the best of health  but
any health problems there are, are not of real  significance.  I  find  that
the family members that there are  in  the  Philippines  would  be  able  to
welcome J to that country and assist  him,  at  least  to  an  extent,  with
respect to any emotional difficulties and adjustments  he  might  experience
in settling to life there.

17.   I have not been provided with very much in the way of evidence  as  to
what provision might be available for J with respect to his educational  and
developmental difficulties if he has  to  return  to  the  Philippines.  The
document produced by Mr Kotas at the hearing indicated the  availability  of
some provision. O told me, in oral evidence, that the provision referred  to
was in a location far away from where she, M and  J  would  go  to  live  if
returned. She also said that such was not provided free of  charge.  But  in
cross examination  she  also  acknowledged  that  as  to  provision  in  the
province to which she would return, she  had  simply  assumed  that  nothing
would be available without undertaking full research on the  point.  I  have
done my best to reach findings on the material  before  me  but  can  do  no
better than to conclude that the evidence does not preclude the  possibility
that some degree of support, though I accept it is very unlikely  to  be  of
the level J is currently receiving, might be available in the Philippines.

18.   My having set out my  relevant  factual  findings  together  with  the
import of the judgment in KO and the relevant legal provisions, I  must  now
consider whether it would or would not be reasonable for J to return to  the
Philippines. My conclusion, it seems to me, would  inevitably  be  the  same
with respect to the test within the Immigration Rules set out above and  the
test within the statute set out above.

19.   As I have indicated, it is accepted that J is a qualifying  child.  It
is accepted (or at least it has never been disputed at all)  that  M  and  O
have a subsisting parental  relationship  with  J.  But  those  matters,  of
themselves, are not sufficient to mean the appeals  succeed.  The  question,
as I have already said, is one of reasonableness.

20.   Neither M nor O have an independent right to be in the UK  other  than
through their connections with  J.  Ordinarily,  therefore,  they  would  be
expected to return to the Philippines.

21.   J  does  have  substantial  difficulties  as  set  out  above.  He  is
receiving a package of care and educational assistance in the  UK  which  in
my view is substantial. The nature of his particular difficulties  (although
this point was not made in terms) seem to  me  to  be  likely  to  make  his
resettlement in a country which he is not familiar with,  his  never  having
lived there, to be even more difficult than would otherwise be the case.  It
is understandable that his parents wish him to remain here  to  continue  to
receive that package of support. But in the Philippines he  would  at  least
have support  from  his  parents  and  wider  family.  He  would  be  in  an
environment where those immediately caring for him would  be  familiar  with
the culture and lifestyle. It has not been asserted that  the  family  would
have a life of poverty in the Philippines and I have  found  that  M  and  O
would have good prospects of finding employment. O tells me that she has  no
training or experience with respect to  children  with  special  educational
needs and there is no reason why I should disbelieve her as to that. But  as
a teacher she might be able to assist J with his  difficulties  at  least  a
little more than other parents in a different profession might  be  able  to
do.

22.   In light of the above I do accept, as Mr Kotas  in  fact  very  fairly
concedes, that it would be in the best interests of J to remain  in  the  UK
with both of his parents. But I also accept that a  conclusion  as  to  best
interests, whilst it informs it, does not dictate the outcome  with  respect
to an assessment as  to  the  reasonableness  of  return  for  a  child.  In
returning J will lose a great deal through his  disconnection  with  the  UK
educational and health system. He has lived here all his young life.  But  I
am dealing with matters in a context where there is an expectation that  his
parents should leave. The natural expectation  following  that  is  that  he
would go with them and I have concluded that requiring him to do  so  would,
in all the circumstances,  be  reasonable.  In  so  deciding  I  have  taken
account of the support he will receive from parents  and  other  family  and
his parents' familiarity with life in the country  to  which  they  will  be
returning. That means that  J  does  not  himself  succeed  under  paragraph
276(ADE)(1)(iv) and his parents do not succeed in an  Article  8  assessment
outside the rules on the basis of section 117B(6). It has  not  been  argued
that there is any  other  basis  upon  which  any  of  them  might  succeed.
Accordingly, in remaking the decision with respect to all  three  claimants,
I dismiss their respective appeals from the decisions of  the  Secretary  of
State, made with respect to each of them, on 7 January 2018.

23.   I have granted anonymity to each claimant. I was asked to do so by  Mr
Waithe in order to protect the privacy of J  who  is,  of  course,  a  minor
child. Mr Kotas did not oppose a grant of anonymity.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with respect to each claimant,  has
already been set aside. In remaking  the  decisions  with  respect  to  each
claimant, I dismiss their appeals from decisions of the Secretary  of  State
of 7 January 2018.

Anonymity

I grant each  claimant  anonymity  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  Accordingly,  no  report  of  these
proceedings shall name or otherwise identify any of the three  claimants  or
any family member. The grant of anonymity applies  to  all  parties  to  the
proceedings. Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.

To the Respondent: Fee Award

I make no fee award.


Signed:




      Dated: 28 May 2019



Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
