
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/02763/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |               Decision & Reasons       |
|                                   |Promulgated                             |
|On 4 April 2018                    |               On 11 April 2018         |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                NAZRUL ISLAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, Counsel, instructed by KC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Brewer (the judge), promulgated on 12 June 2017, in  which
        he  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
        decision dated 22 December 2015 to refuse his  human  rights  claim
        made in the form of an application for entry clearance to join  his
        spouse under Appendix-FM of the immigration rules.


   Factual Background


     2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, date of birth 5  January
        1987. He has a somewhat checkered immigration history. According to
        the Reasons for Refusal Letter he entered the UK  on  2002  without
        unlawfully. In 2007 he made an  application  for  leave  to  remain
        which was refused. He did  not  return  to  Bangladesh  after  this
        refusal but submitted further applications for leave to remain, all
        of which were refused. He underwent a religious  marriage  ceremony
        with his partner, Ms Jakia Begum, in 2012  and  they  were  legally
        married in 2014. The  appellant  voluntarily  left  the  UK  on  12
        November 2015 having resided in the UK for approximately  13  years
        without permission.


     3. The appellant made an online application for entry clearance  under
        Appendix FM  to  join  his  partner.  The  respondent  refused  the
        application under paragraph 320(11) of the immigration rules on the
        basis of  the  appellant's  previous  illegal  entry  and  unlawful
        residence,  and  because  it  was  said  that  he  made   frivolous
        applications and undertook fertility treatment in respect of  which
        he was not entitled. The respondent  additionally  found  that  the
        appellant failed to provide a suitable English language certificate
        pursuant to E-ECP.4.1. of Appendix FM.


     4. The respondent did not refuse the  application  under  any  of  the
        other requirements of Appendix FM or Appendix FM-SE. The respondent
        did not take issue  with  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
        partner or the financial requirements  necessary  for  a  grant  of
        leave to enter.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The judge found that the refusal pursuant to paragraph 320(11)  was
        not made out. It is not necessary for me to dwell on  this  finding
        as the respondent did not seek to challenge it by way of  a  cross-
        appeal. At the  'error  of  law'  hearing  the  Presenting  Officer
        confirmed that there was no challenge to the judge's paragraph  320
        (11) finding. I need only add that the judge gave cogent and  clear
        reasons for concluding  that  the  respondent  failed  to  identify
        aggravating features, as required by paragraph 320 (11),  and  that
        his conclusion was one rationally  open  to  him  for  the  reasons
        given.

     6. The judge also found that the appellant had provided the  requisite
        English Language certificate. Once again, I need not consider  this
        finding in depth given that there was no cross-appeal  against  it.
        Once again, the Presenting Officer at the 'error  of  law'  hearing
        confirmed that the judge was entitled to find that the requirements
        of E-ECP.4.1 were met and that  there  was  no  challenge  to  this
        aspect of the judge's decision.


     7. Having upheld the appeal in respect  of  the  only  two  bases  for
        refusing entry clearance, the  judge  then  proceeded  to  consider
        article 8 outside of the immigration rules. The judge set out the 5-
        stage approach to assessment of article  8  claims  established  in
        Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and  referred  to  a  number  of  authorities
        giving guidance on the consideration of article 8  appeals  outside
        the immigration rules, including Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11.  At  [44]
        the judge noted that there was no suggestion from  the  appellant's
        partner  of  the  existence  of  any  "exceptional   circumstances"
        preventing her from joining her husband  in  Bangladesh.  In  these
        circumstances the judge  did  not  consider  that  there  were  any
        "exceptional circumstances" warranting a grant of leave  to  remain
        outside the immigration rules. The judge  therefore  dismissed  the
        appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not
        incompatible with the appellants' rights under article 8.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

     8. The grounds  content  that  the  starting  point  for  the  judge's
        consideration of article 8 should have been the immigration  rules.
        The fact that the appellant met  all  the  requirements  for  entry
        clearance  under  the  immigration  rules  was  a  highly  relevant
        consideration, one  that  was  not  considered  by  the  judge.  In
        granting permission to appeal Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I  D
        Boyes stated,


         The Judge has purportedly  allowed  the  appeal  as  not  being  in
         accordance with the rules and found for the appellant  in  relation
         to the immigration rule specific aspects but  refused  the  overall
         appeal on Article 8 grounds.
         Permission is granted. It is  arguable  that  there  is  a  serious
         mistake in the conclusions and outcome as promulgated.


     9. At the error of law hearing the Presenting  Officer  accepted  that
        there had been an error of law in that the judge did not appear  to
        take into account the appellant's otherwise unchallenged compliance
        with the requirements for entry clearance  under  Appendix  FM  and
        Appendix FM-SE of the immigration rules. It was  submitted  however
        that this error was not material as the judge went on  to  consider
        article 8 outside of the immigration rules and was entitled to find
        that  there  were  no  compelling  circumstances   preventing   the
        relationship from continuing in Bangladesh.

Discussion

    10. The refusal of entry clearance, which amounted to a  refusal  of  a
        human rights claim, did not raise any issue with any  other  aspect
        of the application other than the refusal under paragraph 320  (11)
        and the issue relating to the English language certificate. It  was
        accepted by the Presenting Officer at the 'error  of  law'  hearing
        that the requirements for entry clearance were met. This means that
        the judge was satisfied that all material requirements contained in
        Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE were met. This certainly appears  to
        be the basis upon which the judge considered the appeal.  The  fact
        that the requirements for entry clearance were met was  undoubtedly
        a highly significant consideration when determining  an  article  8
        appeal, and in particular, the  proportionality  of  a  refusal  of
        entry clearance.


    11. It appears, although it is  not  entirely  clear,  that  the  judge
        engaged in a proportionality assessment at [44]. In this  paragraph
        the judge considered the evidence from the appellant's partner that
        she would encounter some difficulty in returning to her  family  in
        Bangladesh because she was a divorced Muslim, but found that  there
        was no real evidence as to why she could not join  her  husband  in
        Bangladesh where he resided. The judge found  that  there  were  no
        language or cultural barriers to her return.  The  judge  concluded
        that there were no exceptional circumstances warranting a grant  of
        permission outside the  rules.  Nowhere  in  [44]  does  the  judge
        consider the consequences of the appellant meeting the requirements
        for entry clearance under Appendix FM. Given that the appellant did
        appear to meet all  the  requirements  for  entry  clearance,  this
        should have been a very significant factor in  the  proportionality
        assessment. The failure to consider the appellant's compliance with
        the  immigration  rules  when   undertaking   the   proportionality
        assessment constitutes a material legal error.


    12. Nor is it clear to me why the judge proceeded to consider article 8
        outside the immigration rules when the immigration rules themselves
        reflected the balance to be struck between the right to respect for
        family life and the relevant  public  interest  factors.  Gen.1.1.,
        which can be found under the heading 'Purpose' at the beginning  of
        Appendix FM , reads,


         This route is for those seeking to enter or remain in the UK on the
         basis of their family life with a person who is a British  Citizen,
         is settled in the UK, or is in the  UK  with  limited  leave  as  a
         refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian  protection   (and   the
         applicant cannot seek leave to enter or remain in the UK  as  their
         family member under Part 11  of  these  rules).  It  sets  out  the
         requirements to be met and, in considering applications under  this
         route, it reflects  how,  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, the balance will be struck between the right to respect
         for private and family life and the legitimate aims  of  protecting
         national security, public safety and the economic well-being of the
         UK; the prevention of disorder and crime; the protection of  health
         or morals; and the protection of the rights and freedoms of  others
         (and in  doing  so  also  reflects  the  relevant  public  interest
         considerations  as  set  out  in  Part  5A  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

    13. The Secretary of State considers that the requirements of  Appendix
        FM strike a fair balance between family  life  and  general  public
        interest considerations. If the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  are
        met, a fair balance will, according to the Secretary of State, have
        been  achieved.  The  term  'fair  balance'  can  only   reasonably
        correspond to the concept  of  proportionality.  If  a  person  has
        therefore met all the requirements  for  a  grant  of  leave  under
        Appendix  FM,  and  there  is  no  other  basis  for  refusing  the
        application under the general grounds of refusal  (paragraph  320),
        then that is, in the overwhelming majority of cases,  determinative
        of the proportionality assessment.  The  judge's  failure  to  even
        consider the consequences of the appellant's  compliance  with  the
        requirements of Appendix FM unarguably constitutes a material error
        of law.


    14. Having identified a material legal error I indicated that  I  would
        proceed to remake the decision and I invited the Presenting Officer
        to make any further submissions. None were made.


    15. It was not in  dispute  that  the  respondent's  decision  did  not
        challenge any aspect of Appendix FM other than the absence  of  the
        required English language certificate. There was no cross-appeal to
        the judge's conclusions that the refusal of entry  clearance  under
        paragraph 320 (11) was not made out, and that the required  English
        language certificate had in fact been provided.  It  was  therefore
        accepted  by  the  Presenting  Officer  that  the  requirements  of
        Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE were met.  The  appellant  therefore
        meets the requirements for entry clearance under Appendix FM. Given
        the purpose of Appendix FM, as outlined in GEN.1.1, the appellant's
        compliance with  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  is  a  highly
        significant factor in determining  whether  the  refusal  of  entry
        clearance is proportionate. I fully take into account the length of
        time that the appellant resided illegally in the  UK,  but  I  note
        that the Suitability requirements of Appendix  FM  have  been  met,
        that the respondent has not made out the requirements of  paragraph
        320 (11), and that there has been no reliance placed on any of  the
        other general grounds for refusal. In these  circumstances  I  find
        that the refusal of entry clearance constitutes a  disproportionate
        interference with article 8 and I allow the appeal.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made a material  error  of  law.  I  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake it allowing the appeal



[pic]                               5 April 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
