
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02119/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th October 2018                           |On 12th October 2018         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                        CHARLES IKEMEFUNA ANYAEGBUNAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, instructed by Riverbrooke, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

         1. On 22 October 2013 Mr Anyaegbunam applied for indefinite  leave
            to remain on the grounds that he had completed 10 years  lawful
            residence in the UK. That application was refused by  the  SSHD
            for reasons set out in a decision dated 17th January 2017.  His
            human rights claim was refused and he appealed. His appeal  was
            dismissed by First-tier Tribunal judge Sullivan for reasons set
            out in a decision promulgated on 16th May 2018. Mr  Anyaegbunam
            sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal out of  time.
            Time was extended and permission granted.


         2. The grounds relied upon in the application for permission were:
                i) The rejection by the judge of the claimed residence  from
                   2001 because there  was  no  documentary  evidence  is  a
                   material error of law because had he been resident  since
                   2001 he would have completed 10 years lawful residence at
                   the date of his application.
               ii) The First-tier Tribunal judge failed to  engage  with  or
                   provide adequate reasons for not placing weight upon  the
                   evidence of failings by  previous  representatives  which
                   resulted in an earlier rejection and failed  to  consider
                   whether the discretion that exists  in  the  respondent's
                   guidance fell to be exercised in his favour.
              iii) The respondent had previously  exercised  discretion  and
                   the failure  to  exercise  discretion  on  this  occasion
                   amounted to an inconsistency with  which  the  First-tier
                   Tribunal judge did not engage.
               iv) The appellant had spent some 15 years in  the  UK  absent
                   some short periods without leave to remain and the First-
                   tier Tribunal judge failed to have regard to  SS  (Congo)
                   [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Patel & Others [2013] UKSC 72.
                v) The finding by the judge that there were no  particularly
                   strong community ties was irrational given his length  of
                   residence and that the judge failed to have regard to the
                   appellant's  evidence  in  connection  with  the   future
                   benefit the appellant can bring to the UK.


         3. Mr Karim condensed these, helpfully, to three:
            a) firstly  it  was  the  appellant's  contention  that  he  had
               initially entered the UK lawfully,  provided  a  schedule  of
               his entries and exits which  he  adopted  in  oral  evidence,
               gave  oral  evidence  of  his   schooling   and,   considered
               cumulatively, he  would  have  accumulated  10  years  lawful
               residence. The First-tier Tribunal judge had,  he  submitted,
               failed  to  make  findings  on  a  salient  aspect   of   the
               appellant's case.
            b) Secondly that the First-tier Tribunal judge did  not  grapple
               with the issues of  delay  and  asserted  negligence  by  the
               appellant's previous representatives and that  the  appellant
               had  been  misadvised,  such  contention   being   previously
               accepted by the respondent.
            c) And, finally, the finding that the appellant did not  have  a
               strong private life despite having lived  in  the  UK  for  a
               significant number of years, even if  the  first  ground  was
               not accepted.


            Ground (a)


         4. In [13(a)] the First-tier Tribunal judge found:


                  I am not satisfied as to any of the  appellant's  journeys
                  to or from the UK prior to January 2003 because  there  is
                  no documentary evidence of entry to, exit from or presence
                  in  the  United  Kingdom  prior  to  that  date  and   the
                  respondent has not conceded the issue. The detail  in  his
                  representatives' letter dated 18 October  2013,  including
                  reference to school attendance and  GCSEs,  suggests  that
                  documentary evidence should have been available."


         5. The chronology claimed is as follows:


             September 2001 to December 2001 in UK as  a  visitor  "looking
             for a school". The respondent accepts the appellant had  entry
             clearance as a visitor valid from  19th  December  2001  until
             19th December 2003.


             January 2002 arrived UK on student  visa  and  remained  until
             July 2005 save for short holidays to Nigeria.  Claims  1  term
             for GCSEs and that he obtained 9  GCSEs.  Claims  he  took  AS
             levels. In his grounds of appeal the appellant states he first
             arrived in the UK in January 2003. According to the respondent
             the appellant arrived in the UK  on  25th  January  2003  with
             entry clearance as a student valid until 31 October 2005.


             July 2005 to September 2005 - on holiday in Nigeria.


             October 2005 to 16th February 2006 at an international  school
             in Nigeria.


             16th February 2006  to  March  2006  in  UK  visiting  family.
             According to the respondent, the appellant re-entered  the  UK
             as a visitor on 28th February 2006 with entry clearance  valid
             until 3rd January 2011; and that he left the UK on  27th  June
             2007.


             March 2006 to June/July 2006 in Nigeria; returned to UK  as  a
             visitor; visited Dublin for 2 weeks.


             November 2006 returned to Nigeria; applied for student visa.


             January 2007 returned to the UK to commence a course at Exeter
             University. Claims he left Exeter at the  end  of  the  second
             year in 2008  and  returned  to  Nigeria  for  a  holiday.  He
             returned to the UK and went to Sussex University. According to
             the respondent the appellant re-entered the UK on 20th October
             2007 with entry  clearance  as  a  student  valid  until  31st
             October 2010. A letter from the University of Sussex  confirms
             that the appellant was registered as a student with them  from
             6th October 2008 until 14th June 2013.


             An application for further leave to  remain  made  in  October
             2010,   allegedly   with   mistakes   made   by   his    legal
             representatives at that time, was refused in January 2011  and
             his appeal dismissed. This refusal and dismissal of appeal  is
             acknowledged by the respondent; the  appellant  became  appeal
             rights exhausted on 20th June 2011


             A   further   application   was   made   through   the    same
             representatives and refused because of inadequate finance;  no
             right of appeal. According to the  respondent  an  application
             was made on 28th June 2011 which was refused on 23rd September
             2011 with no right of appeal.




             On 26th June 2012 a further application for  leave  to  remain
             was made and granted with leave to remain granted  until  21st
             October  2013.  According  to  the  grounds  of  appeal   this
             application was made  on  3rd  February  2012  and  led  to  a
             decision dated 26th June 2012 granting the appellant leave  to
             remain until 21st October 2013. This  accords  with  what  the
             respondent says.


             18th October 2013, the applicant applied for indefinite  leave
             to remain on the grounds of 10 years lawful residence.


         6. The respondent in the decision the subject of this appeal dated
            17th January 2017 confirms that although the  appellant  had  a
            visit visa and visited briefly in 2001, he was not issued  with
            his student visa until January 2003. The respondent  refers  to
            the lack of documentation to confirm residence in the UK  prior
            to that entry. An earlier decision refusing indefinite leave to
            remain on the grounds of long  residence  (albeit  subsequently
            withdrawn) dated 6th March 2014 also  referred  to  a  lack  of
            documentary evidence.


         7. Although the appellant  provided  evidence  to  the  First-tier
            Tribunal of his attendance at Sussex University, there  was  no
            documentary evidence of his attendance at any  school,  of  his
            GCSEs or AS levels, attendance at the International  School  in
            Nigeria or attendance at Exeter University. He did not  have  a
            student visa until January 2003. His grounds of appeal refer to
            entry as a student in January 2003.

         8. The appellant, before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  adopted  the
            schedule  of  his  entries  and  exits,  which  reflected   the
            information given to the respondent by his  solicitors  in  the
            application for indefinite leave to remain, but  he  failed  to
            produce  corroborative  evidence  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
            despite being notified that he was refused  by  the  respondent
            because of, inter alia, lack of evidence. The mere adoption  of
            a schedule and the giving of evidence does not  render  correct
            that  which  is  not.  This  appellant  was  aware   that   the
            respondent's view was that there was no documentary evidence to
            support his assertion that he had been in the  UK  since  2001,
            first as a visitor (other than briefly) and then as  a  student
            from January 2002. The First-tier Tribunal judge concurred with
            that view. The burden of proof lies with the appellant  and  he
            has failed to discharge that  burden  of  proof  despite  being
            notified of the gaps in his evidence.

         9. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not simply say there  was  no
            documentary evidence; he qualified that statement by  reference
            to the appellant's claim which could  have  been  supported  by
            available documentary evidence.

        10. The finding reached by the First-tier Tribunal judge  was  open
            to him on the evidence before him.

            Ground (b)


        11. The judge considered the evidence provided by the appellant (or
            rather lack of evidence) as to whether despite  those  mistakes
            by previous representatives, he would have been granted further
            leave because he met the Rules at the relevant dates. There was
            no evidence that he met the Rules at the  relevant  dates.  The
            judge noted the lack of evidence provided by the appellant.

        12. Unless there is a  discretion  in  the  Rules,  the  First-tier
            Tribunal judge cannot exercise that  discretion.  Nevertheless,
            those are matters that would normally fall within an assessment
            of the proportionality of the decision in human  rights  terms.
            The  judge  considered  the  explanation  put  forward  by  the
            appellant and concluded that the appellant  did  not  meet  the
            Rules. He considered the delay in the issue of a new CAS,  that
            the appellant did not know when, after 23 September 2011 he was
            able to meet the requirements of the Rules and that he had  not
            demonstrated exceptional circumstances.

        13. It seems that  the  respondent  had  exercised  his  discretion
            previously in granting the appellant further leave to remain as
            a student despite the appellant being  an  overstayer  of  more
            than 28 days. It seems this occurred because the appellant  had
            provide an explanation for the delay  which  included  problems
            with  his  previous  solicitors  and  the  evidence  from   the
            University. Because the respondent exercises discretion once in
            a different type of application (extension of leave  to  remain
            as a student as oppose to an application for  indefinite  leave
            to remain) that does not require the respondent to exercise his
            discretion in the appellant's favour. The judge considered  the
            evidence relied upon by the appellant regarding delay and noted
            that it appeared that the appellant was 'caught' by the changes
            in the Immigration Rules.


        14. Mr Karim accepted that matters of weight are for the judge  but
            submitted that the judge had not engaged  with  the  submission
            that the previous representatives were negligent. It  does  not
            appear  from  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  made  a
            complaint that the solicitors were negligent to the solicitors,
            or to the administrators or to the SRA. Even if  he  had,  that
            does not necessarily mean that discretion should  be  exercised
            in his favour, or, more correctly, that there is a  significant
            shift in the proportionality assessment. The judge engaged with
            the evidence that was before him in the context of applications
            for leave to remain and set out the areas where  the  appellant
            had not provided evidence of reasons  that  covered  the  whole
            period in question.

        15. Ms Kiss referred  to  Mansur  (Immigration  advisor's  failing:
            Article 8) Bangladesh [2018] UKUT 274 (IAC) and submitted  that
            the appellant had not established  that  the  failings  of  his
            previous advisors met the threshold in that decision. Mr  Karim
            disagreed and submitted they had been met.

        16.  The  judge  considered  the  'fairness'  of  the  respondent's
            decision in [15]. Although that is not  strictly  speaking  the
            correct approach in a statutory appeal, it  nevertheless  falls
            within the proportionality assessment. The judge  set  out  the
            factors adverse to the appellant, the gaps in his evidence  and
            reached a finding that was open to him that the  appellant  had
            not  provided  evidence  to  demonstrate  circumstances   which
            prevented him from making a timely  application  for  leave  to
            remain or explaining the delay. This despite acknowledging that
            the appellant may have  been  badly  advised.   In  this  case,
            although   not   specifically   referring   to   the   previous
            representatives, it is plain  that  the  judge  considered  the
            factual matrix including the absences from the UK, and  reached
            a decision that taking all of those factors into  account,  the
            appellant did not have 10 years lawful residence.

            Ground (c)

        17. The decision by the  judge  that  there  were  no  particularly
            strong community  ties  was  not  irrational.  Mere  length  of
            residence, which was taken into account by the judge, does  not
            of  itself  amount  to  particularly  strong  ties.  The  judge
            considered the appellant's friendships and that he  would  need
            to re-establish ties in Nigeria. The judge noted that there was
            no  witness  statement  or  oral  evidence  from   friends   or
            relatives. Although it seems the  appellant's  brother  was  at
            court he was not called to give evidence. The judge  cannot  be
            criticised for  referring  to  the  lack  of  evidence  from  a
            brother, even if he was at court.  The  judge  noted  that  the
            appellant had job offers from the UK and  Korea.  Although  the
            grounds upon which permission was granted assert that the judge
            failed to give weight to the potential benefit  to  the  UK  of
            having the appellant in the UK, the  grounds  do  not  identify
            evidence that was before the judge of such  benefit,  that  was
            not considered. The evidence was simply not  there  to  support
            the submission made.


        18.  The  decision  by  the  judge  that  the  decision   was   not
            disproportionate was open to the judge  on  the  basis  of  the
            evidence before him.


        Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

     I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.



                                    Date 8th October 2018
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
