
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02667/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                           |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ib
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In the decision below, where I refer to "the appellant", I refer to Mr
B who was the appellant in the Tribunal below but in fact he is the
respondent in the current appeal. References to "the respondent" are to the
Secretary of State for the Home Department. This appeal by the Secretary of
State is against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the
appellant's appeal on Article 8/ human rights grounds.  His appeal against
the respondent's decision to refuse him further leave to remain on the
basis of his private and family life in the UK came before Judge of the
First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf (the judge). The judge allowed his appeal
following a hearing that took place at Hatton Cross on 4 May 2018 and his
decision was promulgated on 29 May 2018. The respondent appeals that
decision, having been given permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal
on 30 August 2018.

2.   The judge granting permission, First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup,
pointed out that the judge had arguably erred in that there was no dispute
that the appellant continued to enjoy a parental relationship with his
three children when this was in fact not conceded by the respondent.
Secondly, the judge had made no finding whether the requirements of the
Immigration Rules, set within their correct statutory framework including
Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and
Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, were met.
He found the analysis legally confused and it was arguable that there was
an error of law.

3.   I considered this matter when it came before me on 16 October 2018,
when I heard argument from Mr Tarlow, who represented the Home Office. The
appellant also appeared but was unrepresented.  At that hearing, Mr Tarlow
pointed out that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to carry out a proper
analysis of the Immigration Rules or properly consider Section 117B of the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4.   I directed that a further one-hour hearing should take place. The
appellant was given an opportunity to present further evidence before the
Tribunal.  I said I would remake the decision, having set aside the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal, based on a material error of law being
found, but I decided that I would need to take further time to consider the
correct method of disposal.

5.   I have now had an opportunity to re-assess all the evidence including
the brief additional evidence given by the appellant at the adjourned
hearing on 14 December 2018. I have also had an opportunity to consider the
law further as well as the representations by both parties.  Mr B has
produced further documents, which I will summarise.  They include
photographs showing him with his three boys and they include school reports
in relation to the children concerned, evidence that he has taken an
interest in the medical treatment given to the boys and a letter from the
children's mother, who says that he does have a role in the children's
lives.  The letter describes Mr B as being committed to the children and
having a bond with them. He is described as having a proactive role in
their lives. Unfortunately, Miss [S] has not attended the Tribunal to give
evidence, but the letter is signed by her and, clearly, I have to make some
allowance for the fact that Mr B is currently unrepresented.

6.   The evidence produced before the First-tier Tribunal suggested that Mr
B did indeed have a role in the lives of his children - [I] (born 27 April
2014), [K] (born 17 September 2012) and [M] (born 21 November 2008). Those
children are British citizens. He is indisputably their father. It is
suggested that [K] requires speech and language therapy and that he is
accompanied by his father to those sessions.  There is a letter dated 18
April 2018 from the children's mother ([MS]) confirming Mr B's involvement
in his children's lives. She states in that letter that the appellant is
involved with "... every aspect of their lives ..." and is "... a caring
and loving dad to them".

7.   Mr Tufan, who represented the Home Office at the adjourned hearing,
has indicated that the requirements of LTR4.2 and 4.3 were arguably not
met, nor was Appendix FM, but, fairly, he had to accept that the
requirements of Section 117B(6) would be met - i.e. the appellant had a
genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and it would
not be reasonable to expect that child (or those children) to leave the
United Kingdom.

8.   Mr Tufan accepts that the second limb (in section 117B (6) (b)) is
satisfied here in that it would not be reasonable to expect the children to
leave the United Kingdom.  The evidence is not of the strongest in that I
have not heard oral evidence from Ms [S], but I have to bear in mind that
the appellant has been conducting the proceedings, since at least the
hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, in person. This includes the
hearing in the Upper Tribunal.  The appellant has an extremely poor
immigration history, which involves removal from the UK once and then
returning to the UK illegally, but he has been in the UK since 2002 and I
am prepared to accept that the judge's finding that the appellant had a
subsisting parental relationship with the children was justified on the
evidence before him.  I was careful to point out in my decision on the last
occasion (on 19 October 2018) that Mr B was to be given an opportunity to
submit further evidence. Having found a material error which required the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside, I reserved my position
as to the ultimate disposal.

9.   I have now considered all the evidence including the judge's preserved
findings and reminded myself of the law in relation to Section 117B (6) of
the 2002 Act. That subsection provides that "....in the case of a person
who is not liable to deportation the public interest does not require that
person's removal where-
(a) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying
child, and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
United Kingdom" (my emphasis).

10.  A "qualifying child" includes a British citizen (see section 117 D (1)
(a)).

11.  Section 117 B (6) has recently been considered by the Supreme Court in
the case of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. In that case the Supreme court
decided that the purpose of the changes produced by Part 5A of the 2002 Act
was to narrow the discretion available to the judge when considering the
welfare of children. A child is not responsible for the acts or omissions
of his parent and, still less, is to be blamed for those acts or omissions.
The Supreme Court commended the Home Office's own guidance in relation to
the factors to be taken into account in a case of this type. Misconduct by
a parent is not a balancing factor to take into account, but criminality
may outweigh all other factors in a particular case.

12.  I note there is no criminality here. If the appellant were to be
forced to leave the UK, his children would not be forced to leave the
United Kingdom with him, but it would be likely that the appellant would
effectively lose contact with them. Given the appellant's role in his
children's day-to-day education and so forth, remote contact would not be
sufficient.

13.  Accordingly, I have decided that the conclusion the judge came to in
the First-tier Tribunal was one that was in fact open to him on a proper
legal analysis.  The appellant's own human rights may not have outweighed
all other considerations in the eyes of many judges but out of fairness to
Mr B I find that the judge was entitled to conclude that he had a genuine
and subsisting relationship with his children and the need to maintain that
relationship, in their long-term best interests, outweighed all other
considerations including the need to enforce immigration control.

14.  For these reasons I have decided to allow the respondent's appeal to
the Upper Tribunal and I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
following the hearing in October 2018. However, having found there to have
been a material error of law by the First- tier Tribunal, I have to
substitute my decision. My decision is to allow the appellant's appeal to
the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
further leave to remain.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  human  rights  grounds  is
allowed to the extent that I have set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and re-made the decision.

My decision is to allow the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision to dismiss his application for  further  leave  to  remain  on  the
basis of family life UK.

The First-tier Tribunal considered it appropriate and  necessary  to  impose
an anonymity order and I continue that order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  W.E.Hanbury   Date 15 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award but have decided to make no fee  award.
The  appellant  should  consider  himself  lucky  that  despite   his   poor
immigration history he has ultimately achieved a successful outcome  in  the
Upper Tribunal. However, he has not  provided  his  evidence  timeously  and
this may have avoided unnecessary appeal hearings. For these reasons I  have
refused to make a fee award.


Signed                                  Date 15th of February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


