
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02892/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                               |On 28 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Ms Amtul Mateen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel, instructed by Rashid & Rashid
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge A J
    M Baldwin promulgated on 5 January 2017 which allowed the human  rights
    appeal of the respondent, Ms Mateen, against refusal of entry clearance
    as a visitor.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home  Department  as  the  respondent  and  to  Ms  Mateen  as  the
    appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant applied  for  entry
    clearance as a family visitor to visit  her  son  and  daughter-in-law.
    The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  1  January  1939.   The
    application for a visit visa was refused on 26 July  2015  because  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was a  genuine  visitor
    or intended to leave the UK at the end of the visit.

 4. The appellant appealed the decision on human rights grounds only. Judge
    Baldwin allowed the appeal, finding that the  appellant  had  a  family
    life with her adult son and daughter-in-law in  the  UK  and  that  the
    decision was a disproportionate interference with that family life.

 5. The respondent's first challenge is that the  judge  erred  in  finding
    that the appellant and her son and daughter-in-law had  a  family  life
    for the purposes of Article 8.  The respondent maintained that case law
    indicated that family life does not normally continue to exist  between
    adult children and parents.   More  than  normal  emotional  ties  were
    required and the facts in this case did not support such a  finding  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 6. The respondent's second challenge was that even were family life to  be
    found the decision could not be said to be  disproportionate  where  it
    concerned only a visit and denial of that limited contact could not  be
    said to amount to a disproportionate interference with family life.

 7. Judge Baldwin set out the  legal  matrix  relating  to  the  Article  8
    decision and relevant case law at [15] to [19].  He noted the case  law
    of Kaur (visit appeals; Article 8)  [2015]  UKUT  (IAC),  Adjei  (visit
    visas - Article  8)  [2015]  UKUT  and  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
    clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC).  He made proper reference to  Section
    117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act at [17] and set  out
    the correct Razgar questions at [18].

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin made the following findings on family
    life at [22] - [24]:

         "22. What came across particularly strongly in this  case  was  the
             exceptionally close bond between the Appellant  and  her  only
             son, the Sponsor, and vice versa.  They lived together for  41
             years and when he got married he continued to  live  with  his
             mother, remaining there until he was able to join his wife  in
             the UK.  I have no doubt at all that,  were  it  not  for  the
             persecution of his wife on account of her  Ahmadi  faith,  the
             son would still be living in Pakistan with both his mother and
             his wife.  Instead, he had to face what I  have  little  doubt
             was a terribly difficult decision - particularly for one who I
             accept is much troubled by anxiety.  He chose to be  with  his
             wife in the UK but was probably not expecting to find that his
             own mother would not be allowed to come and see  them.   Until
             these events, I accept there was  an  extremely  close  family
             life between the three of them - one which  was  fractured  by
             religious persecution and maintained indirectly by  the  ECO's
             Decision.   The   question   is   whether   the   Refusal   is
             proportionate, reasonable and in the  interests  of  effective
             immigration control.

         23.  This Appeal is not one under the  Rules  but,  were  that  the
             position, one would have been concerned with  the  failure  of
             the ECO  to  address  the  Tenant's  Affidavit  and  the  Land
             Ownership  Extract.   The  financial  circumstances   of   the
             Appellant, however, are wider than the issue of the  rent  and
             in any event have  to  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the
             credible   documentary   evidence   which   corroborates   the
             Appellant's claim about her pension.  If her pension claim  is
             credible, as it is, it provides support for the evidence about
             her  other  income  being  credible.   I  also   accept   that
             septuagenarian Pakistani ladies may possibly be less likely to
             favour banks than a much younger person might do  in  the  UK.
             It is not at all implausible, I find, that she might  use  the
             bank account largely for her pension credits and use rent paid
             in  cash  largely  for   general   expenses,   as   has   been
             satisfactorily explained.

         24.  This case is very fact-sensitive.  It is very  unusual  for  a
             middle-aged son to have continued to have  such  an  extremely
             close relationship with his mother and for it to continue well
             beyond his marriage.  It is also unusual in it  being  a  case
             where the son had no choice but to stop living with his mother
             if he were to continue maintaining a  full  relationship  with
             his wife.  It was no doubt an awful position in which to  find
             himself and his mother.  It is one which is also shard  to  no
             small extent by the daughter-in-law who clearly misses  having
             an opportunity to have face-to-face chats with her  mother-in-
             law.  If it were  nonetheless  the  case  that  the  Appellant
             probably did not intend to return to Pakistan I she were  able
             to get herself to her son's new home, there would still  be  a
             strong case for finding it was proportionate not to allow  her
             to come here.  I find, however, that it is the case  that  she
             is very well-established in her home in  Pakistan,  where  she
             speaks the language and is used to  the  culture,  environment
             and friendship of many people.  She has also provided  she  is
             relatively comfortably situated financially.  On the  evidence
             provided, I find that her intentions probably are genuine  and
             that it would be  unreasonable  and  disproportionate  or  all
             three of them to deny her the opportunity very occasionally to
             come over to the UK for a visit.  Limiting  close  contact  to
             the very infrequent occasions when the son can take  time  off
             and find the finance to take himself and his wife to  Pakistan
             would be unduly restrictive and would prejudice  their  Family
             Life in such a  manner  as  would  amount  to  a  sufficiently
             serious breach of their fundamental rights.   I  am  confident
             that all three of them intend  she  will  return  to  Pakistan
             after her visit(s) and that her son and  his  wife  appreciate
             that were she not to do so and were later to  be  removed,  it
             would almost certainly prove to be her last visit to the UK."

 9. Those findings take into account the material evidence  and  assess  it
    within the correct legal framework. The reasons why Judge Baldwin found
    that family life was present here are clear. The appellant and her  son
    had "an exceptionally close bond", having lived together for almost all
    of the sponsor's life. The very close relationship continued after  the
    sponsor came to the UK with his wife as he  returned  to  be  with  his
    mother extensively until prevented from doing so because he had used up
    his leave; see [10]. Daily extensive  telephone  calls  continued  even
    though he could not visit; see [10].

10. I am satisfied that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Baldwin  applied  the
    correct law on the existence of family life between adults and that the
    conclusion that it existed here, exceptionally, was one fully  open  to
    him on the materials. That was so even though  the  appellant  had  not
    lived with the sponsor and his  wife  for  three  years  prior  to  the
    decision because of the visits of the sponsor and phone calls  allowing
    their exceptionally close relationship to continue.   The first  ground
    does not have merit.

11. It is also my view that the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  find
    the decision here amounted  to  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    family life. Judge Baldwin conducted the Article 8  assessment  as  set
    down in the case law of Kaur, Adjei and Mostafa requiring the Article 8
    assessment outside the Immigration Rules to be conducted  "through  the
    lens of the Rules".   At  [23]  to  [24],  the  judge  found  that  the
    Immigration Rules were  met  here.  There  is  no  challenge  to  those
    findings.

12. Having found that the Immigration Rules were met, a factor relevant  to
    the weight attracting to the public interest, the  First-tier  Tribunal
    went on at [24] to identify exceptional circumstances that  showed  the
    decision to be disproportionate.  The judge identified that this was  a
    "very unusual" situation.  The  relationships  here  were  particularly
    strong. The family had been separated only because the  sponsor's  wife
    was a refugee  requiring  international  protection.  The  sponsor  was
    unable to visit the appellant, having done so as much as  he  could  in
    order to care for his mother whilst  she  was  unwell,  his  employment
    leave then having run out.   It  was  not  merely  a  question  of  the
    appellant being unable to visit as a result of the decision but  of  no
    direct contact being possible. In my view, the  particular  facts  here
    entitled First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin to find  that  the  decision
    was disproportionate.

13. For all of these reasons I did not find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal disclosed an error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  contain  legal  error  and
shall stand.



Signed:  [pic]                          Date: 27 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


