
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02816/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                            |On 28 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [c h]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Joseph of Counsel, instructed by Turpin &
Miller LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the Home Department appeals with  permission
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mathews  promulgated  on  24
    July 2018 allowing the appellant's appeal against the  refusal  of  his
    human rights claim.  This was on the grounds that the appellant met one
    of the exceptions to deportation, namely that  contained  in  paragraph
    399(a) of the Immigration Rules that it would be unduly harsh  for  his
    children to relocate with him to Jamaica and  also  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for them to remain in the United Kingdom without him.  For
    ease I refer below to the parties as they were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, with CH as the appellant and the Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department as the respondent.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal's decision considers in detail the evidence  of
    the appellant's current  family  circumstances  and  in  particular  in
    relation to the breakdown of his relationship with his partner and also
    the ongoing relationship he has with his children,  together  with  the
    wealth of evidence from external agencies as to  the  family  situation
    both in the years since 2016 but also more  recently.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal essentially found that it is in  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's three children to they remain in the United  Kingdom  where
    they can take advantage of the benefits of  their  British  citizenship
    and also where they have spent all of their lives.  The children had no
    clear ties or experience of life in Jamaica.  It would also be in their
    best interests to remain with their father, the appellant, who is found
    to be their primary carer and has played a  very  significant  role  in
    their upbringing in recent years in particular due to the ill-health of
    their mother.  There is clear reference to the evidence from the  local
    council and local authorities as to the position of the family and  the
    appellant's role within it.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal decision includes express consideration of  the
    appellant's children's current education and their positive pursuit  of
    that at a stage where the older  two  in  particular  are  moving  into
    secondary education. The findings in relation  to  best  interests  are
    contained in paragraph 39 of  the  decision,  which  also  considers  a
    possible future scenario as to where the children  may  live.   It  was
    noted at the time of the hearing that the local authority were  in  the
    preliminary stages of some form of care proceedings in relation to  the
    children following the breakdown of the parent's relationship with each
    other, including a planned parenting assessment of both  parents.   The
    First-tier Tribunal, having considered all of the evidence, came to the
    conclusion that there would be a positive influence from the  appellant
    on his children from a safeguarding perspective in light of concerns as
    to the mother's parenting and the First-tier Tribunal  considered  that
    the appellant is the parent most likely to be preferred as a  full-time
    carer given the positive  assessment  of  his  parenting  to  date  and
    concerns as to the care otherwise provided.

 4. There is  a  clear  finding  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  his  three  youngest   children.    The
    conclusions on the law against this factual backdrop are  contained  in
    paragraphs  43  and  onwards  of  the  decision  which  set   out   the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  deportation   and   the
    exceptions thereto.  The findings made are  primarily  focused  on  the
    situation of the children and do not consider within the assessment  of
    unduly harsh the public interest  in  deportation  or  the  appellant's
    criminal or immigration history.  These appeals  were  allowed  on  the
    basis that deportation would be unduly harsh on either  eventuality  of
    the children staying or going  therefore  the  exception  in  paragraph
    399(a) of the Immigration Rules was met.

 5. The respondent sought permission to appeal against that decision on  29
    July 2018 on the grounds that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    apply the Court of Appeal's guidance in  MM  (Uganda)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617, by failing  to  take
    into account the public interest factors in deportation, primarily  the
    appellant's immigration and criminal history,  when  assessing  whether
    the  appellant's  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  qualifying
    children.  That application for permission to appeal was properly  made
    and correct on the basis of the existing authority at the date  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision and date of application for  permission.
    The  second  ground  of  challenge  was  that  the  existence  of  care
    proceedings in the background was not determinative and that the First-
    tier  Tribunal  should  have  considered  possible   external   support
    available for the children.  The permission application however ends as
    follows:

         "Undoubtedly  if  consideration  was  based  solely  on  the   best
         interests of the children it would dictate that  the  appellant  be
         allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.  However,  Parliament  has
         decided that that is not the determinative factor, it is  something
         that has to be balanced against the public interest in  maintaining
         the Immigration Rules and  in  particular  in  this  instance,  the
         maintenance of authority of deportation orders."

 6. After those grounds are submitted to the  First-tier  and  refused  and
    resubmitted to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  Supreme  Court  gave  their
    decision in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2018]  UKSC  53,  which  found  precisely  that  the   exceptions   to
    deportation both in the Immigration Rules  and  replicated  in  Section
    117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act as to  whether  the
    effect of deportation would be unduly harsh is entirely focused on  the
    child and is not to be balanced  against  any  wider  public  interest.
    That is precisely, although not on the authorities that existed at  the
    date, what the First-tier  Tribunal  did  in  this  case.   Whilst  the
    application for permission to appeal was perfectly proper on the  basis
    of the previous authority, it no longer remains arguable  at  least  on
    the first ground of challenge that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
    in any way.

 7. The Upper Tribunal gave permission to appeal in  this  case  after  the
    decision in KO (Nigeria) and expressly referred to it in the  grant  of
    permission but did not deal with it in relation to the first ground  of
    challenge at all nor reject it as no longer arguable on  the  basis  of
    the change of authority.  In the alternative, permission was granted on
    two grounds, one of which was not relied upon by the respondent at  all
    and is not a Robinson  obvious  point.   That  ground  is  that  it  is
    arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  properly  considered
    matters at the date of hearing.  In my view, permission should not have
    been granted on any such ground which was not Robinson obvious and  not
    relied upon by the respondent.  In any event, it is not set out in what
    way the First-tier Tribunal had arguably not dealt with matters at  the
    date of hearing and on a clear reading of the decision as a  whole,  it
    is apparent that it deals with very up-to-date evidence up to the  date
    of hearing.  There is no arguable error of law let alone  an  error  of
    law on that basis that I can find in the decision.

 8. The second ground on which permission to appeal appears  to  have  been
    granted is on the basis that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    engage with the external support which may be available to the children
    in the event of any  difficulties  they  may  experience  or  would  be
    created by the  appellant's  removal.   However,  for  the  very  clear
    reasons set out by the First-tier Tribunal in their  decision,  whether
    or not  external  support  is  available  to  the  children  or  family
    remaining in the United Kingdom, this is a case which on the  facts  is
    clearly one in which there would be no material change to  the  outcome
    of the appeal even with local  authority  and  external  support.   The
    First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  rely  on  the   care   proceedings   as
    determinative.  It is clear on the wealth of evidence that  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that it would be unduly harsh for the  children
    to remain in the United Kingdom without their father.   Those  findings
    would in any event stand regardless of any additional support that  may
    be available.  The respondent has further accepted  that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for the children to return with the appellant to Jamaica.

 9. For these reasons I find no error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision which therefore stands.

Notice of Decision


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.


The decision to allow the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date         22nd February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


