
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02203/2020 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype            |                                     |
|On 22 April 2021                     |On 18 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                               akbar hosseini
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L King, instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the decision of the Upper Tribunal remaking the decision in the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR following the UT's  decision
    sent on 8 January 2021 that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Rhys-Davies) should be set aside as its  decision  involved  the
    making of an error of  law.

 2. Working remotely, the appeal was heard at Cardiff Civil Justice  Centre
    on 22 April 2021.  The appellant was represented by  Ms  King  and  the
    respondent by Mr Walker both of whom joined the hearing by Skype.   The
    appellant also joined the hearing by telephone and  briefly  gave  oral
    evidence.

Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 30 April 1991.  When
    aged 15, he arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  18  January  2007  and
    claimed  asylum.   His  claim  was  subsequently  refused  but  he  was
    nevertheless granted discretionary leave until 29 April  2009.   On  29
    April 2008, he made an in-time application for further leave  but  this
    was refused on 11 October 2010.  He subsequently lodged  an  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal which was dismissed on 6 December 2010 and  the
    appellant  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on   21   January   2011.
    Thereafter, his leave expired and he became an overstayer.

 4. On 4 March 2011, the appellant  made  further  submissions  which  were
    refused on 13 August 2012.  Then, on 28 April 2013 the appellant  again
    made further submissions.  As a result, he  was  granted  discretionary
    leave under para 353B of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) from
    28 April 2013 until 28 October 2015 for a period of 30  months.   On  5
    October 2015, he made a further in-time application  for  discretionary
    leave and on 10 December 2015 he was again granted discretionary  leave
    under para 353B of the Immigration Rules until 10 June 2018.

 5. On 14 March 2017, the appellant  was  convicted  of  possession  of  an
    indecent photograph of a child.   He  was  sentenced  to  an  Offenders
    Rehabilitation Act Community Order for a period of 36 months.   He  was
    subject to supervision by the Probation Service until 4 April 2020 and,
    thereafter, will be subject to supervision by the Gwent  Police  Public
    Protection Unit until 2022.  He was also,  as  part  of  the  Community
    Order, ordered to undertake 200 hours of unpaid work.  It would  appear
    that the appellant pleaded guilty to the offence  which  related  to  a
    single indecent photograph which was sent  to  him  and  found  on  his
    computer.  Unfortunately, no further information was available  to  me,
    and none is referred to in the Secretary of  State's  decision  letter,
    concerning the court in  which  the  appellant  was  convicted  or  any
    further details of the offence.

 6. On 16 May 2018, the appellant made a further  in-time  application  for
    leave.  This application was refused by the Secretary of  State  on  23
    January 2020.

 7. The Secretary of State refused the appellant's application, based  upon
    the private life  rule  in  para  276ADE(1),  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant  had  not  established  that  there  were  "very  significant
    obstacles" to his integration in Iran on return and  further  that  the
    suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules applied because  of  his  conviction.   The  Secretary  of  State
    considered that, as  a  result  of  that  conviction,  the  appellant's
    presence in the UK was not conducive to the public good  having  regard
    to his conduct, character, associations, or other reasons  and  it  was
    undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK.  Further, as regards  Art
    8 the Secretary of State concluded  that  there  were  no  "exceptional
    circumstances" to  justify  the  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Rules.
    Finally, as the appellant had  previously  been  granted  discretionary
    leave on two occasions for periods of 30 months under  para  353B,  the
    Secretary of State concluded that that provision did not apply as there
    had been a change of circumstances, namely his criminal offending which
    made it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK as his conduct was
    not conducive to the public good.  That was  a  significant  change  of
    circumstances such that the appellant's discretionary leave should  not
    be extended.

 8.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   his
    determination, Judge  Rhys-Davies  found  that  there  were  not  "very
    significant obstacles" to the appellant's  integration  in  Iran  under
    para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules and also that the appellant fell within
    the suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.6 on the basis of  his  criminal
    conviction.  Finally, as regards Art 8 outside  the  Rules,  the  judge
    found that any interference  with  the  appellant's  private  life  was
    proportionate.

 9. Following a hearing on 10 December 2020,  in  my  decision  sent  on  8
    January 2021 I set aside Judge Rhys-Davies' decision on the basis  that
    he had erred in law in applying the suitability provision in S-LTR.1.6.
    to the appellant and  in  finding  that  the  appellant's  removal  was
    proportionate.

The Law

10. Article 8 of the ECHR provides as follows:

         "Article 8 - Right to respect for private and family life

         1.   Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
         life, his home and his correspondence.

         2.   There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the
         country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."

11. In R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [17], Lord Bingham set out the 5-
    satge approach when applying Art 8:

         "In considering whether a challenge to  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove a person must clearly fail, the reviewing  court
         must, as it seems to me, consider how an appeal would be likely  to
         fare  before  an  adjudicator,  as  the  tribunal  responsible  for
         deciding the appeal if there were an appeal. This  means  that  the
         reviewing court must ask itself  essentially  the  questions  which
         would have to be answered  by  an  adjudicator.  In  a  case  where
         removal is resisted in reliance on article 8, these  questions  are
         likely to be:

             (1)  Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

             (2)  If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

             (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

             (4)  If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
             society in the interests of national security,  public  safety
             or the economic well-being of the country, for the  prevention
             of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or  morals,
             or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

             (5)   If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to   the
             legitimate public end sought to be achieved?"

12. The burden of proof lies upon the appellant to establish, on a  balance
    of probabilities, a breach of Art 8.  However, once Art 8.1 is  engaged
    it is for the Secretary of State to establish any  justification  under
    Art 8.2.

13. Question (5), and the issue of proportionality, (per  Lord  Bingham  at
    [20]):

         "... must always involve the striking of a fair balance between the
         rights of the individual and the interests of the  community  which
         is inherent in the  whole  of  the  Convention.  The  severity  and
         consequences of the interference will call for  careful  assessment
         at this stage."

14. Further, in determining  the  issue  of  proportionality,  a  court  of
    tribunal must have regard to the factors  set  out  in  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended)   (see
    s.117A(2)) which provides as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

15. Ultimately, whether the case is considered to concern a positive  or  a
    negative obligation, the question for the European court is  whether  a
    fair balance has been struck. As was explained in Hesham Ali at paras
    47-49, that question is determined under our domestic law  by  applying
    the structured approach to  proportionality  which  has  been  followed
    since Huang.

16. Where an individual meets the requirement of an Immigration Rule,  then
    that will be determinative of an Art 8 claim -  providing  Art  8.1  is
    engaged.  In TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1109,  the  Senior
    President of Tribunals (Sir Ernest Ryder, with whom Longmore and Moylan
    LJJ agreed) said (at [34]):

         "The policy of the Secretary of State as expressed in the Rules  is
         not to be ignored when a decision about article 8  is  to  be  made
         outside the Rules. ....where a person satisfies the Rules,  whether
         or not by reference to an article 8 informed requirement, then this
         will be positively determinative of that person's article 8 appeal,
         provided their case engages article 8(1), for the very reason  that
         it would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed."

17. Where an individual cannot meet the requirements of any of  the  Rules,
    then a claim outside the Rules will succeed under Art  8  if,  striking
    the  'fair  balance',  the  public  interest  does  not  outweigh   the
    individual's circumstances where the  individual's  removal  will  have
    "unjustifiably harsh consequences" for the individual (see R (Agyarko)
    and another v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11 at [60] per Lord Reed).

18. Paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules, so  far  as  relevant  to
    this appeal, provides:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
         the basis of private life in the UK are that at the date of
         application, the applicant:

         ...

             (vi) ...is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in
             the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

19. The relevant suitability rule relied on by the Secretary of State is S-
    LTR.1.6. of Appendix FM which provides as follows:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions which do
         not fall within paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5.), character,
         association, or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to
         remain in the UK".

20. Paragraphs S-LTR.1.3. to 1.5. provide for offences,  and  a  basis  for
    concluding that an individual's presence in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good, when an individual has been sentenced to  imprisonment
    for at least four years (S-LTR.1.3.); to a period of  imprisonment  for
    less than four years but at least twelve months (S-LTR.1.4.) and  where
    an individual's offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are  a
    persistent offender who shows particular  disregard  for  the  law  (S-
    LTR.1.5.).

21. It will be immediately apparent that  it  is  not  suggested  that  the
    appellant's offending falls within S-LTR.1.3.-1.5.  His sentence  falls
    below the thresholds  in  the  first  two  provisions  and  it  is  not
    suggested that he has caused serious harm or is a persistent offender.

22. In my earlier error of law decision,  I  found  -  and  indeed  it  was
    accepted by the Secretary of State - that  in  determining  whether  an
    individual's presence was "undesirable" under S-LTR.1.6. there must  be
    (i) reliable evidence of; (ii) sufficiently reprehensible conduct;  and
    (iii)  an  assessment,  taking  proper  account  of  all  the  relevant
    circumstances known about the individual at the date  of  decision,  or
    whether his or her presence in the UK  is  undesirable  and  that  this
    should include evidence of positive features of  their  character  (see
    paras 36-39 of my decision).  That should include taking  into  account
    any risk of future offending (see para 38).

The Submissions

23. At the resumed hearing to remake the decision, Ms King  relied  upon  a
    skeleton argument which she developed in her oral submissions.

24. Mr Walker made oral submissions to the extent that he relied  upon  the
    original refusal decision and indicated that he was not  conceding  the
    appeal.  Mr Walker accepted that the appellant had established  private
    life in the UK based upon his almost fourteen years residence since the
    age of 15.  I understood Mr Walker to accept Art 8.1  was  engaged  but
    not that the appellant's removal would be disproportionate.  Mr  Walker
    accepted, in response to a question from me, that it was  probably  the
    case that the appellant would have been granted  further  discretionary
    leave under para 353B if it had not been for his  criminal  conviction.
    Indeed, that is clear from the respondent's decision letter at paras 23-
    26.

25. Ms King submitted that, as the requirement in  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  was
    not met due to the preserved finding made by Judge Rhys-Davies, it  was
    unnecessary  to  make  a  finding  in  relation  to   the   suitability
    requirement in S-LTR.1.6 as the  appellant  could  not  rely  upon  the
    Immigration Rules.  The issue of his conviction, Ms King submitted, had
    to be taken into account in assessing  whether  his  removal  would  be
    proportionate under Art  8  of  the  ECHR.   The  simpler  course,  she
    submitted, was to make no finding in relation to S-LTR.1.6.

26. Ms King submitted that the appellant had established  private  life  in
    the UK but not at the bare minimum.  He has been here since the age  of
    15 and has spent most of his teenage years and all his  adult  life  in
    the UK.  The evidence was that he worked and continued to  work  for  a
    restaurant in Newport.  She submitted that his private life was no less
    meaningful than a claim based upon family life.  Ms King accepted  that
    the appellant had not been lawfully in the  UK  for  the  whole  period
    since his arrival in 2007.  She accepted that there was a  gap  between
    21 January 2011 (when his previous leave expired)  and  28  April  2013
    when  he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  under  para  353B.    She
    submitted, however, that throughout his period in the UK, the appellant
    had engaged with the process having made  further  submissions,  albeit
    unsuccessfully, on 4 March  2011  shortly  after  his  leave  initially
    expired.  She submitted that  the  appellant  had  twice  been  granted
    discretionary leave since that gap in his leave and he now  had  nearly
    eight years lawful continuous leave.

27. Ms King submitted that the only reason his discretionary leave had  not
    been extended was because of the single offence.  She accepted that  it
    was not proper to lessen the gravity of the offence but she noted  that
    he  had  pleaded  guilty  and  his  offending  could  be  described  as
    "passive".  He had complied with  the  requirements  of  his  Community
    Order, including  with  the  Probationary  Service  and  had  completed
    courses relevant to his rehabilitation.  His risk  of  reoffending  had
    been described by his Probation Officer, Deborah Wood, in her email  of
    31 March 2020 as a "low risk".  That email also set out the appellant's
    engagement  with  the  Probation  Service  and  the  process  for   his
    rehabilitation.  She submitted that this was a single offence  relating
    to a single photograph.  The nature of the  penalty  was  low  and  the
    level  of  rehabilitation  was  extensive.   She  submitted  that   the
    appellant had shown multiple factors relevant to his private  life  and
    integration in the UK, including friends,  work  and  activities.   His
    private life was  significant  and  his  removal  was,  she  submitted,
    disproportionate.

Discussion

    1. The Evidence

28. The appellant's evidence is set out in his witness statement and  brief
    oral evidence before me.  His witness statement (at pages  4-6  of  the
    FTT bundle) is dated 3 April 2020.

29. In para 4 of that that statement, the appellant states that:

         "I pleaded guilty in court as I accepted the image was received  by
         me.  Even though I deleted the image after receiving it,  I  cannot
         justify the wrongdoing on my part.  I deeply regret it."

30. Then at paras 5-9, the appellant deals with his post-offending conduct:



         "5.  As part of my community service, I was required to  assist  in
             trimming the grass at various places such as churches,  social
             clubs and councils.  I had to do this  twice  a  week  and  in
             total I completed 200 hours of  community  service.   I  would
             attend regularly and ensure that I always completed my task.

         6.   I started working after I finished community service.   I  was
             working in Papa John's as a Chef making  pizza.   Initially  I
             worked part-time hours, and then after two months it was full-
             time.  My employer noted my commitment and reliability to  the
             work and offered me to take up a  management  course  which  I
             successfully completed.

         7.   After my community service ended, I attended a course  at  the
             Probation Centre  situated  in  Orchard  Street,  Swansea.   I
             attended the course once a week and it  was  of  one  year  in
             duration.  During the course I  had  to  explore  the  reasons
             surrounding the committal of my offence.  I also became  aware
             of what is legal and illegal.  I learned that  possessing  any
             indecent pictures of children  was  illegal.   I  also  taught
             about managing finances, anger management,  social  intimacies
             and empathy etc.  Sometimes, I was given tasks to complete for
             homework, which included various  questions  relating  to  the
             reasons before and after committing the offences.  I also  did
             presentations on topics such as having to talk about my  past,
             my childhood, and how I was brought up etc.

         8.   The course helped me in changing my thoughts and made me aware
             of the boundaries that had been set in  the  criminal  justice
             system as to what is  and  is  not  permissible  by  law.   By
             completing this course I was able to change the introvert part
             of my personality and I learnt to socialise and  make  friends
             rather than be sat at home for the majority of  the  time  and
             surfing the internet.

         9.   My probation began in April 2018 and I  have  always  attended
             all of my appointments with the Probation Officer bar one that
             I missed due to a mix up with the dates."

31. At paras 10-13, the appellant sets out his circumstances in the UK:

         "10. I have been living in this country since I was a teenager.   I
             have made my life here and  I  have  several  friends  whom  I
             regard as family.  I have never travelled outside  the  UK  in
             the last thirteen years.  I do not  have  any  other  offences
             against my name except this one.  I have tried my  level  best
             to make amends since my committal of the offence.

         11.  I have faced the consequences of my conviction.  I  wanted  to
             study a course in healthcare at college leading to a career in
             nursing, and was  advised  I  could  not  do  it  as  I  would
             inevitably  have  to  work  with  children  in   the   nursing
             profession.

         12.  At present I am working as a Chef  at  Peri  Peri  Cottage  in
             Newport.  It has been  two  months  since  I  started  working
             there.  I have had to compromise on my career goals because of
             my conviction.

         13.  The UK is my home.  It is all I know and I am very  much  used
             to my life here.  Iran is an alien country for me and  I  have
             no desire of returning there.  I wish I could  change  what  I
             did in the past, but unfortunately  I  cannot.   I  am  deeply
             disgusted by what I did and I would  never  do  it  again.   I
             learnt the hard way and  I  humbly  request  the  Tribunal  to
             exercise compassion in my circumstances and allow my appeal."

32. In the same bundle there are a number of  documents  such  as  payslips
    relating to the appellant's employment (pages 10-16)  and  certificates
    of achievements including English language certificates  and  proof  of
    employment (pages 30-96).

33. In his brief  oral  evidence,  the  appellant  said  that  he  had  not
    undertaken the Knowledge of Life in the UK test because he had not  had
    the relevant ID documents to do it.  He had been  studying  in  college
    including skills for life but  he  had  not  done  anything  more.   He
    confirmed that he was still employed full-time as a chef.   Outside  of
    work, the appellant accepted that during the pandemic he had  not  been
    able to socialise as much as before.  He had seen a few friends on  the
    weekends or days off but that he planned to meet  up  again  with  them
    after the pandemic.  He had work colleagues, he played football and  he
    enjoyed going for meals and to the cinema.

34. The appellant was not cross-examined by Mr Walker.

35. Ms King placed reliance upon the email by Deborah Wood, the appellant's
    Probation Officer (pages 7-8  of  the  appellant's  bundle).   In  that
    email, Ms Wood confirms  that  the  appellant  has  "attended  all  his
    Probation appointments and has engaged well throughout".

36. Under the heading "Any Evidence of Rehabilitation", Ms Wood says this:

         "Mr Hosseini has complied with his Community Order and  engaged  in
         the CSOG programme.  He has a support network and chose a  positive
         attitude towards [] me as his Probation  Officer.   He  is  working
         towards a positive future to be able to  have  a  relationship  and
         stability in his life.

         Mr Hosseini has stopped using alcohol  and  drugs  and  appears  to
         understand the role they played as a coping mechanism  and  in  his
         sexual offending.  He sees employment as an  important  element  of
         his life which will enable him to achieve stability.

         Through attending the  Community  Sexual  Offending  Programme,  Mr
         Hosseini appears  to  have  made  connections  between  his  coping
         strategies and his offending and has made changes in  his  life  by
         pursuing a lifestyle which enables a desistence from offending such
         as employment, avoidance of alcohol  and  drugs  and  goals  for  a
         positive intimate adult relationship in the future.

         Mr Hosseini  was  given  the  highest  level  of  treatment  (which
         consists of 50-hour induction programme)  followed  by  a  4-module
         programme  which  covers  relationships   and   attachment,   self-
         management, empathy and sexual  fantasy;  followed  by  the  Better
         Lives Module (relapse  prevention  based  on  the  'approach  goal'
         model).  There are approximately 80 sessions in total spanning a 12
         to 18-month period.  Session feedback indicates  that  although  Mr
         Hosseini missed sessions because of work commitments, he did engage
         and  was  able  to  make  useful  connections  between  his  coping
         strategies and his sexual offending."

37. Finally, under the heading "Risk of Re-offending", Ms Wood  says  that:
    "I have assessed Mr Hosseini as being Low risk of re-offending."

    2. Findings and Conclusion

38. It is accepted by Mr  Walker  that  the  appellant  has  established  a
    private life in the UK so as to engage Art 8 of the ECHR.  I agree with
    that concession.  The appellant has been in the UK for almost  fourteen
    years since the age of 15.  He has spent most of his teenage years  and
    all his adult life in the UK.  He has friends and work colleagues  and,
    I accept, through working and his life in the  UK  he  has  established
    private life for the purposes of Art 8.1.  I  also  accept,  indeed  Mr
    Walker did not submit otherwise, that  the  appellant's  removal  would
    interfere with that private life sufficiently to engage Art 8.1.

39. As regards Art 8.2, the appellant's removal would be in accordance with
    the law, namely the Immigration Rules.  Further, his removal  would  be
    for a legitimate aim, namely effective immigration control (as he  does
    not meet the requirements of any Rule to remain in the UK) and also for
    the prevention of disorder or crime given his criminal offending.   The
    crucial  issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether  that  removal  would  be
    proportionate striking a fair balance between the public  interest  and
    the interference with the appellant's private life.

40. Mr Walker, in his submissions, simply  relied  upon  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision letter.  In that decision  letter,  the  Secretary  of
    State concluded that S-LTR.1.6. applied based upon the  nature  of  the
    appellant's conviction.  Paragraph 10 of the decision letter,  however,
    offers no reason other than  to  state  that  the  conviction  made  it
    "undesirable to allow" the appellant to remain in the UK.  In  relation
    to Art 8, the decision letter concluded that there were "no exceptional
    circumstances", despite the appellant having spent twelve years of  his
    life in the UK and having developed friendships in the UK,  to  warrant
    the grant of leave outside  the  Rules.   As  regards  para  353B,  the
    respondent noted the two previous grants  of  30  months  discretionary
    leave based upon para 353B.  The decision letter went on to  note  that
    leave was no longer warranted because of his conviction, at  paras  25-
    26, the decision letter says this:

         "25.     As noted above since your last granted Discretionary Leave
             on 10 September 2015, you have committed one  offence  on  the
             09.02.2016.  It is considered your criminal history  makes  it
             undesirable to allow you to remain in the UK.   Your  presence
             in the UK is not conducive to the public good because  of  the
             nature of the offences/convictions from 2016.

         26.  Therefore, in the light of the above, it is  considered  there
             has being a significant change  in  your  circumstances  since
             your  previous  grant  of  leave  on  10  December  2015.   As
             previously it  was  stated  that  there  was  no  evidence  of
             criminality.  Therefore, the conditions of the previous  grant
             of leave are no longer prevail, and so further grant of  leave
             should not be granted."

41. As I have already indicated, the respondent  has  provided  no  further
    information concerning the appellant's offending.  Ms King accepted, in
    her submissions, the gravity of the appellant's offence has to be taken
    into account by its mere nature.  However, the offence  concerned  only
    one photograph which, and the respondent has not  sought  to  challenge
    this, was received by the  appellant  and  deleted  from  his  computer
    subsequently.  The offence undoubtedly warrants  condemnation  and  the
    engagement of the criminal process.  However, the best indicator of the
    seriousness of the offence - certainly absent any other evidence - must
    be the sentence imposed by the  court.   This  was  a  community  order
    rather than a custodial sentence whether of immediate imprisonment or a
    suspended sentence.

42. The evidence from the appellant - which  is  wholly  supported  by  the
    Probation Officer, Ms Wood - is that the appellant fully  engaged  with
    the Probation Service and the measures put in place to rehabilitate the
    appellant.  The appellant was not cross-examined so as to suggest  that
    his  evidence  concerning  his  remorse,   his   learning   about   and
    understanding of his offending (set out in his witness  statement)  was
    other than genuine.  I accept Ms King's submission that  the  appellant
    has complied with  his  community  order  fully  and  has  demonstrated
    considerable rehabilitation post-offending.   I  note,  of  course,  Ms
    Woods' assessment that he is still at "low" risk of re-offending.   The
    offending is now over 6 years ago.  As I  referred  to  in  my  earlier
    error of law decision, as a result of a police raid on his work  place,
    when a cannabis factory was found in  the  flat  above  his  work,  the
    appellant's possessions were scrutinised and searched and there was  no
    evidence of any repeat offending by him.  As I made clear in my earlier
    decision, the appellant was not, in fact, implicated in the  activities
    of the cannabis factory.

43. I fully take into  account  the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    offending (including the sentence imposed) and his engagement with  his
    sentence and the Probation Service.   I  also  take  into  account  the
    positive aspects of his life  including  undertaking  courses  and  his
    commitment to work which he continues to undertake.

44. Although Ms King is  right  that  the  direct  relevance  of  S-LTR.1.6
    falters once para 276ADE(1) cannot be relied upon, it  is  nevertheless
    helpful  to  consider  S.LTR.1.6  as  it  formed  the  basis  for   the
    respondent's adverse Art 8 decision set  out  in  the  decision  letter
    which is relied upon by Mr Walker.

45. Taking all the factors I have identified above into account I find that
    the suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.6 is not met.  The  presence  of
    the appellant in the UK has not been shown, in my judgment, to be  "not
    conducive to the  public  good"  because  his  conduct,  including  his
    convictions, his character, his associations and other reasons make  it
    "undesirable" to allow him to remain in the UK.

46. While I accept that the appellant's private life has  been  established
    when his immigration status was "precarious" within  s.117B(5)  of  the
    NIA Act 2002, I note that the appellant has  on  three  occasions  been
    granted leave to remain based upon his circumstances  in  the  UK,  the
    latter two falling within para  353B  on  the  basis  that  there  were
    "exceptional circumstances which mean  that  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom  is  no   longer   appropriate".    That   provision   requires
    consideration of the individual's character,  conduct  and  association
    including criminal offences; their compliance with conditions of  their
    previous leave; and the length of time spent in the UK.   It  is  clear
    from the respondent's decision letter, and  this  was  accepted  by  Mr
    Walker, that the only reason this provision  was  not  applied  to  the
    appellant on his most recent application for further leave was  because
    of his criminal conviction.  In my judgment, that conviction is not  of
    sufficient weight to warrant a reversal of  the  position  taken  under
    para 353B previously.  The earlier decisions were,  undoubtedly,  based
    upon the length of the appellant's time in the UK - which has only been
    lengthened since those decisions; the fact that he arrived  in  the  UK
    aged 15 years; and his circumstances in the UK.

47. I accept, of course, Judge Rhys-Davies' unchallenged finding in respect
    of para 276ADE(1)(vi) that he was not satisfied that there would not be
    "very significant obstacles" to the appellant's integration  on  return
    to Iran.  The strength of the appellant's claim  is,  in  my  judgment,
    based not upon the impact to him of  living  in  his  own  country  but
    rather of interfering with his life formed in  the  UK  since  2007  as
    reflected in the earlier grants of discretionary leave for two  periods
    of 30 months.  I accept that the appellant has become integrated in the
    UK over the last 14 years.  If removed, the substance of  that  private
    life will be lost. In my  judgment,  given  the  circumstances  of  the
    previous grants of leave to the appellant, his private life in  the  UK
    formed since the age of 15 on arrival is entitled to due weight.

48. Under Art 8, I accept that, not only the public interest  reflected  in
    the appellant's offending, but also the public  interest  in  effective
    immigration control, is engaged applying s.117B(1) of the NIA Act 2002.
     All the evidence, however, establishes that the appellant is  able  to
    speak English and is self-sufficient such that the public  interest  in
    ss.117B(2) and (3) is not engaged.  The contrary was not argued  before
    me.

49. Weighing up the public interest that I have identified  above,  against
    the circumstances and impact  upon  the  appellant  of  removal,  I  am
    satisfied that there would be  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  such
    that the public interest is  outweighed  and  the  appellant's  removal
    would be a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

50. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal was set aside, on the basis of an error of law, in  my  decision
    sent on 8 January 2021.

51. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under  Art  8  of
    the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                  5 May 2021


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appellant's appeal,  I  am  satisfied  that  an  award
should be made for any fee paid or payable by the appellant.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                  5 May 2021
