
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02456/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 October 2019                    |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                 GEORGE [M]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Y Din, ADA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya. His date of  birth  is  1  January
    1977. His application for leave to remain on human rights  grounds  was
    refused by the respondent on 22 August 2016.  The  appellant  appealed.
    His appeal was dismissed by FTT Judge Hawden-Beale, following a hearing
    at on 1 November 2018.  The appellant was granted permission to  appeal
    by FTT Judge Easterman on 22 August 2018. Thus, the matter came  before
    me to determine whether the FTT made an error of law.

 2. The appellant came here to study in 2003, having been granted leave  as
    a student which was extended.  His leave expired in 2010.  He has  been
    here since then as an overstayer.

The decision of the FTT

 3. The appellant was not represented before the FTT.  He attended with  Mr
    Welsh who was acting as a McKenzie  friend.  He  relied  on  a  witness
    statement dated 1 October 2018 and grounds of appeal of the same  date.
    He gave oral  evidence.  There  were  no  other  live  witnesses.   His
    evidence was that he studied here in 2003.  He had gained a degree  and
    a Masters. He wanted to work in the health  sector.  He  raised  tribal
    conflict in Kenya although he  had  not  made  a  claim  on  protection
    grounds.  His evidence was that his parents were living in an IDP camp,
    but he did not know whether they were  still  there.  He  had  not  had
    contact with them  since  2014.  They  had  been  displaced  in  tribal
    clashes.  He has no home to return to in Kenya.  The  family  home  was
    destroyed in tribal clashes and the family displaced.  The  family  was
    attacked in 1992, 1997, 2002 and 2007.  His siblings  were  in  the  UK
    with their families and they and the church supported him.  He was aged
    41 and would find it difficult to start again in  Kenya.   His  sister,
    [C], came here in 2006. Siblings [B1] and [B2] were also here.  In  his
    grounds the appellant said that he was dependent on [B2] and [B1]  with
    whom he lives.  There was a letter from [B2] of 18 March  2018  stating
    that the appellant lived with her and that she is responsible  for  his
    accommodation expenses. Her evidence  was  that  they  have  a  "strong
    family relationship."  There is another sibling, a brother in Kenya but
    he like their parents has been displaced and  the  appellant  does  not
    have contact with him.

 4. In the appellant's witness statement he said that [C] has PTSD and that
    she is on medication and always needs help. He gives her emotional  and
    physical support. He said  that  she  cannot  live  independently.  His
    evidence was that [C] lives with Mr Welsh. However, Mr  Welsh  attended
    the hearing as a  McKenzie  friend  and  he  was  not  a  witness.  The
    appellant's oral evidence was that when Mr Welsh and [B2] are at  work,
    the appellant looks after [C].  In  oral  evidence  he  said  that  the
    family has applied for social care for [C], but this had been  refused.
    The care offered was not appropriate because it was at set times  which
    does not accommodate her needs.

 5. The appellant relied on a witness statement from his sister, [C], dated
    2 January 2012.  This statement was her evidence at her  asylum  appeal
    which was allowed. Her evidence is that she was at risk  on  return  to
    Kenya. She feared her ex-husband, the Kalenjins and  the  Mingiki.  She
    did not know her father's whereabouts, but her mother  was  in  an  IDP
    camp.  She said that the appellant was in the UK, but that she had very
    little contact with him and that she does not have a good  relationship
    with him. She said that none of her siblings are close to her. There is
    a report from  Dr  Roxanne  Agnew-  Davies  dated  19  June  2010.  She
    specialises in Mental Health and Violence against women. She  diagnosed
    [C] suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress  Disorder  (PTSD)  with  Major
    Depressive Disorder.

 6. At the start of the hearing before the FTT the appellant  explained  to
    the judge that [C] was rushed to hospital  for  emergency  surgery  and
    would not be able to give oral evidence. He was distressed but did  not
    want the matter to be adjourned. The judge proceeded in [C]'s  absence.
    There is no challenge to this decision.

 7. The judge correctly  identified  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (iii) because he had  not  been  here  for  twenty
    years. She considered  whether  he  had  established  very  significant
    obstacles to integration into Kenya, pursuant to para 276ADE (1)  (vi).
    At [24] she considered his evidence of inter-tribal conflict  and  that
    his family had been displaced and that he has no job, house  or  anyone
    in Kenya to support him. She decided that she could not consider  [C]'s
    evidence or the medical evidence concerning her because  the  appellant
    had not made a claim on protection grounds and  because  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge that [C] had agreed to the disclosure of  the
    evidence.  At [25] the judge concluded that she was satisfied that  the
    appellant could re-establish himself in  Kenya  having  spent  29  year
    there. She said that the appellant realised when  he  came  here  as  a
    student that that he would have to return.  The judge said that he  was
    born and raised in Kenya and he would understand life there and be able
    to participate in it. She questioned the appellant's evidence  that  he
    had not been in contact with his parents since 2014. She found at  [18]
    that the relationship that the appellant has with [B2] or [B1] did  not
    go beyond the usual emotional ties albeit he had been dependant on them
    since 2011.  The judge considered s.117B of the 2002 Act and  concluded
    that the decision was proportionate.

 8. At the hearing before me a second witness statement/letter prepared  by
    [C] dated 2 October 2018 was produced. I was told by Mr Din that it had
    been before the FTT. The appellant was not represented at  the  hearing
    before the FTT.  Mr Melvin was not able to assist in establishing  what
    evidence was before the judge. I was concerned because I could not find
    the statement in the file before me and there is no reference to it  in
    the documents. The first time I became aware of it was at  the  hearing
    before me.  The judge granting permission said that he understood  that
    the statement in questions had been made for the purposes of the appeal
    before the FTT.  The position is ambiguous. Looking at the decision  of
    the Judge Hawden-Beale and the appellant's own grounds, I  can  see  no
    reference to this specific piece of evidence. I would have expected  it
    to be specifically mentioned at [12] of the grounds which were prepared
    by the appellant's solicitors.  The judge does not mention  the  second
    statement in her decision.  She does, however, refer to  statements  in
    the plural, albeit not consistently throughout the decision. The  judge
    excluded [C]'s evidence because she had not agreed to be a witness  and
    she had not consented to the evidence that she  relied  on  her  asylum
    appeal being produced by the appellant at the hearing before  the  FTT.
    This suggests that she overlooked the second statement or that  it  was
    not before her for whatever reason. I was told by Mr Din, that  as  far
    as he was aware, having not represented the appellant at  the  hearing,
    the second statement/letter from [C] was or should have been before the
    judge.  The position is far from clear. However, I proceed to determine
    the grounds on the basis that the judge had before her or  should  have
    had the evidence in question.

 9. [C]'s second  statement/letter  is  brief.  The  witness  confirms  her
    address, that the appellant is her brother, that their family  suffered
    persecution (as a result of tribal clashes), that she "deemed it fit to
    submit my asylum notes, professional  reports,  witness  statement  and
    tribunal determination as my account of what transpired and affected by
    family also affected my brother"; and  that  she  has   lost  two  more
    relatives since coming to the UK. Her  evidence  is  silent  about  her
    relationship with the appellant or any care needs she may. It does  not
    disclose evidence of dependency.  It  does  not  corroborate  what  the
    appellant says about her care needs.

The grounds of appeal

10. The grounds challenge the  decision  of  the  judge  to  exclude  [C]'s
    evidence. It is asserted that it corroborated the  appellant's  account
    of risk on return and insurmountable obstacles. There is a challenge to
    the  decision  under  para  276ADE  (1)  (iv)  and  the  assessment  of
    proportionality outside of the  rules.  The  grounds  assert  that  the
    decision to exclude Carron's evidence was unfair. Mr Din submitted that
    the judge did not consider the appellant's relationship with  [C]  when
    assessing proportionality.

The Law

11. The UT considered the principles governing fairness in MM  (unfairness;
    E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 and said as follows:-

    "14. The matrix of this appeal, rehearsed above, prompts reflection  on
         the content and reach of one of the cornerstones of the common law,
         namely the right of every litigant to a fair hearing. The right  in
         play  is  properly  described  as  fundamental,   irreducible   and
         inalienable.

    15.  The law reports  and  texts  are  replete  with  formulations  and
         manifestations of this right. For present purposes, and bearing  in
         mind the doctrine of precedent, we focus upon two  of  the  leading
         decisions of the superior courts. The first of these is  R  -  v  -
         Chief Constable of Thames Valley Police,  ex  parte  Cotton  [1990]
         IRLR 344. It may be observed that, in both the reported  cases  and
         the  leading  text  books,  this  decision  has  not  received  the
         prominence it plainly merits. This might  be  attributable  to  its
         appearance in one of the minority series  of  law  reports.  Having
         said that, Cotton  has  been  recently  quoted  with  approval  and
         applied by Moses LJ in McCarthy v Visitors to Inns of Court and Bar
         Standards Board [2003] EWHC 3253 (Admin) and by Underhill  J  in  R
         (Hill) v Institute of Chartered Accountants [2013] EWCA Civ 555. In
         Cotton, the issue, in a nutshell, was whether the decision  of  the
         Chief Constable  to  dismiss  a  police  officer  was  vitiated  by
         procedural unfairness on account of inadequate  disclosure  to  the
         officer  of  the  case  against  him.  We  distill  the   following
         principles from Cotton:

         (i)  The defect, or impropriety,  must  be  procedural  in  nature.
             Cases of this kind are not concerned with the  merits  of  the
             decision under review or appeal. Rather, the superior  court's
             enquiry focuses on the  process,  or  procedure,  whereby  the
             impugned decision was reached.

         (ii) It is doctrinally incorrect to adopt the two-stage process  of
             asking  whether  there  was  a  procedural   irregularity   or
             impropriety giving rise to unfairness and, if so, whether this
             had any material bearing on the outcome.  These  are,  rather,
             two elements of a single question, namely  whether  there  was
             procedural unfairness.

         (iii)    Thus, if the reviewing or  appellate  Court  identifies  a
             procedural irregularity or impropriety  which,  in  its  view,
             made no difference to the outcome, the appropriate  conclusion
             is that there was no unfairness to the party concerned.

         (iv) The reviewing or appellate Court should  exercise  caution  in
             concluding that the outcome would have been the  same  if  the
             diagnosed  procedural  irregularity  or  impropriety  had  not
             occurred.

    16.  These last two propositions are expressed with  admirable  clarity
         in the judgment of Simon Brown J, which was under appeal  (at  page
         13B/D):

             "It is sufficient if an Applicant can establish that there  is
             a real, as opposed to a purely minimal, possibility  that  the
             outcome would have been different."

         The complaint in Cotton was that certain information,  damaging  to
         the police officer's case, had not been  disclosed  to  him.  Simon
         Brown J concluded that even if this disclosure had taken place -

             "...  there  would  have  been  no  real,  no   sensible,   no
             substantial  chance  of  any  further   observation   on   the
             Applicant's part in any way altering the final decision in his
             case."

         The Court of Appeal upheld both his conclusion  and  the  governing
         principle which he formulated: see the uncritical rehearsal of  the
         Applicant's argument in the judgment of Slade LJ (at pages 10 - 11)
         and the endorsement of the conclusion of Simon Brown J by all three
         members of the Court of Appeal. Slade  LJ  espoused  the  following
         formulation of the governing principle:

             "Natural justice is  not  concerned  with  the  observance  of
             technicalities, but with matters of substance."

         [At page 14.]

         In  the  second  of  the  three  judgments  delivered,  Stocker  LJ
         considered the threshold for intervention by the Superior Court  to
         be "a real risk of injustice or unfairness [page 15]".

Conclusions

12. The decision to exclude [C]'s evidence for the  reasons  given  by  the
    judge discloses a procedural irregularity.  The second statement/letter
    supports [C] having consented to be a witness in the proceedings  which
    undermines the judge's reason for excluding it. In addition, the  judge
    did not give the appellant the opportunity to address her before making
    the  decision  to  exclude  evidence.  This  amounts  to  a  procedural
    impropriety.

13. I must consider whether there was unfairness caused  to  the  appellant
    whilst reminding myself  that  if  the  reviewing  or  appellate  Court
    identifies a procedural irregularity or impropriety it should  exercise
    caution in concluding that the outcome would be the same if it had  not
    occurred.   In  addition  to,  or  as  a  result  of,  the   procedural
    impropriety, Mr Din submitted that the  judge  did  not  give  adequate
    consideration to the appellant's Article 8 rights in respect of [C].

14. The effect of removal on the family unit must  be  taken  into  account
    when considering Article 8 rights. In Beoku-Betts v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 39,  Lord  Brown  (with  whom  Lord
    Bingham, Lord Hope, Lord Scott and Lady Hale agreed) said at  paragraph
    [20].:

         "[20].   [Section 65  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999]
         allows, indeed requires, the appellate authorities, in  determining
         whether the appellant's article 8 rights  have  been  breached,  to
         take into account the effect of his proposed removal upon  all  the
         members of his family unit. Together these members enjoy  a  single
         family  life  and  whether  or  not  the  removal  would  interfere
         disproportionately with it has to be looked at by reference to  the
         family unit as a whole and the impact of removal upon each  member.
         If overall the removal  would  be  disproportionate,  all  affected
         family members are to be regarded as victims."

    Whether or not  'family  life'  exists  between  adult  family  members
    depends on the circumstances of the particular case and requires  proof
    of dependency "more than  normal  emotional  ties"  (per  Arden  LJ  in
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31, at paragraph [35]).  Financial  dependency
    is a relevant factor but there is no case in which it  alone  has  been
    held to be sufficient.

15. Whilst there was some evidence of financial  dependency  and  that  the
    appellant was accommodated by [B2], he is educated and able and willing
    (with permission) to work.  Mr Welsh, with whom the appellant said  [C]
    lives, came to the hearing to act as a McKenzie friend.  There  was  no
    evidence from [C] or independent evidence  that  the  appellant  looked
    after her or that she has care needs. They do not  live  together.  The
    medical report submitted was prepared in 2010 and is  woefully  out  of
    date.  The appellant said in his witness statement that she is not able
    to live independently; however, this is wholly unsupported.  There  was
    no evidence to support that the appellant cared for [C] when  [B2]  and
    Mr Welsh were at work. Furthermore, [C]'s evidence  in  2012  does  not
    support that she has any relationship with the appellant. The  totality
    of the evidence was not  capable  of  establishing  that  there  was  a
    relationship between the  appellant  and  [C]  or  indeed  between  the
    appellant and any of his siblings that would engage Article 8.

16. The appellant's case was advanced on the  basis  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to integration. There was  evidence  of  historic
    persecution towards [C]  and  tribal  problems  effecting  the  family;
    however, this  evidence  was  not  capable  of  establishing  that  the
    appellant would face very significant obstacles in  2018.   The  second
    statement does not contain evidence about the situation now  on  return
    to Kenya.  Whilst the appellant has been out of the country since 2003,
    there was no cogent evidence capable of establishing  very  significant
    obstacles on his return in 2018.

17. The appellant's  evidence  of  the  extent  of  family  life  here  was
    unsupported. He is an overstayer. He has no  employment  here.  Despite
    having been here since October 2003, evidence of his family and private
    life was lacking.  The appellant could not meet the immigration  rules.
    The evidence does not disclose compelling circumstances. The  dismissal
    of his appeal was inevitable. The  procedural  irregularity  identified
    made  no  difference  to  the  outcome  in  this  case.  There  was  no
    unfairness.  Any defect in the assessment  of  proportionality  is  not
    material.

18. The decision of the FTT to dismiss the appellant's appeal under Article
    8 is maintained.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 2 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
