
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02469/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th September 2018                         |On 12th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                             mr Vashish Sohodeb
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Gherman (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   On 2nd July 2018, the appellant was given permission to appeal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence ("the judge"),
    dismissing his appeal against refusal of his human rights claim.

2.   Mr Jarvis said that there were difficulties in the  decision  with  the
    starting point in the analysis.  It appeared that the judge  failed  to
    begin with the appellant's ties to the United Kingdom  in  relation  to
    private life and family life.  In issue was whether there  had  been  a
    proper assessment of obstacles to family life continuing abroad or very
    compelling circumstances in the case.  Overall, there may have  been  a
    mistaken starting point.

3.   Ms Gherman formally adopted the  grounds.   The  family  life  ties  in
    particular  were  not  properly  assessed  and  there  were  inadequate
    findings of fact.

4.   Having read the decision, the grounds of application and the  grant  of
    permission  carefully,  and  having  taken  into  account   the   brief
    submissions, I conclude that the decision contains a material error  of
    law.  The findings and conclusions appear in paragraphs 13 to 21.   The
    judge found that the appellant could  continue  to  enjoy  family  life
    abroad and continue his studies after removal but there is insufficient
    anterior  reasoning  to  fully  explain  how  the  judge  reached   his
    conclusion.

5.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and must be set aside and remade.  The decision will be  remade  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, de novo,  in  the  light  of  the  substantial
    findings of fact that will be required, particularly concerning  family
    life.  The decision will be remade at Hatton Cross before a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17th May 2018 is  set
aside.  It will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton  Cross  by  a
judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge N M  K  Lawrence,  on  the  first
available date.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

Anonymity

There has been no application for anonymity in these proceedings and I  make
no order or direction on this occasion.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
