
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/02676/2016
                                                               HU/03273/2016
                                                               HU/02677/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2017                           |On 12 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    I. t.
                                    A. I.
                                    A. I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Mustafa, Counsel instructed by Solicitors Inn


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant before  me  is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the Respondents to this appeal are a  family  consisting
    of father, mother and eldest son.  However, for ease of  reference,  in
    the course of this determination I shall adopt the parties'  status  as
    it was before the First-tier Tribunal ["FtT"].

 2. The members of the family applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK  and
    those applications were refused in January 2016. Their appeals  against
    those refusals came before Judge Clark in Taylor House  on  25  January
    2017 and by a decision promulgated on 9 February 2017 he allowed  their
    appeals on Article 8 grounds.

 3. The Respondent has challenged that  decision  with  relatively  lengthy
    grounds which, as indeed Mr Wilding has summarised  them  this  morning
    before me, amount to the assertion that the judge  misdirected  himself
    in law, and despite a lengthy analysis of the evidence before him,  and
    reference to a large number of decided cases on the point, nevertheless
    mis-formulated the true question that he had to answer in the course of
    paragraph 43 of his decision. The result, it is asserted,  is  that  he
    inevitably failed to start from the correct position in  asserting  the
    proper balance of proportionality.  The  grant  of  permission  to  the
    Respondent was  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  on  4th
    September 2017 on all grounds.

 4. The family consist of a married couple with  three  children,  although
    only the parents and eldest child  had  appeals  before  the  FtT.  The
    inevitable focus of the appeal was upon  the  position  of  the  eldest
    child. The parents could not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    their own Article 8 appeal depended upon the success of any  appeal  by
    their eldest child, as indeed  did  the  cases  of  their  two  younger
    children.  As Mr Wilding accepts before me this is one  of  many  cases
    that could have gone either way given the facts.

 5. The judge looked at the position of the eldest child who was 9 years at
    the date of the hearing, and who had lived his entire life in  the  UK.
    He was well settled in school and his local community to the point that
    the judge accepted that when his parents wanted to move house, and  did
    in fact move house, he had insisted on remaining in his existing school
    even though he had moved to the catchment area of other schools. So  it
    was that his parents had to accommodate his wishes by arranging for him
    to travel out of his  catchment  area  to  his  original  school.   His
    argument, as his father had accepted, had been that he was well settled
    with a good group of friends, and also with his teachers.  His  parents
    after some reflection had accepted that argument, and thus accommodated
    that desire.  The judge accepted that this was in no way a device being
    used to prop up an appeal and that this was something that had happened
    well before the hearing  of  the  appeal.  She  accepted  all  of  that
    evidence placed before her by the Appellants  as  true.   She  reminded
    herself that at the age of 9 this child was not yet of an age where  he
    was at critical point in his  education,  or  about  to  undertake  key
    examinations.  She reminded herself of the evidence as to  his  fluency
    in languages.  He was fluent in English, both spoken and  written,  but
    his fluency in Urdu was only as a second spoken language and the  judge
    accepted that he could  neither  read,  nor  write  it.   There  is  no
    challenge to that finding.

 6. The judge reminded herself of the public interest in Section  117B  and
    particularly the test in Section 117B(6).  She also reminded herself of
    the guidance to be  found  in  the  decision  of  Treebhawon  &  Others
    (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) and also in the  decision  of
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  She did not set out  passages  from
    either of those decisions at length but it is  clear  in  my  judgement
    that when her decision is read as whole (as indeed she is  entitled  to
    have it read) she took into account the proper test  and  the  relevant
    evidence, and applied the correct principles. What the Judge was  faced
    with was a "qualifying child" as defined in s117D.  Indeed  this  child
    was well beyond the threshold definition of one who had lived for seven
    years in the UK, and the Judge had accepted that this child  was  going
    to have difficulties if  he  was  required  to  go  into  education  in
    Pakistan because he did not have the tools to be able to  prosper  from
    that education by way of fluency in written Urdu. The Judge  took  into
    account the precariousness of the position of the adults, but also  she
    was right to take into account as she did  the  fact  that  whilst  the
    parents held lawful but precarious status  in  the  UK,  there  was  no
    additional feature to suggest either  any  criminal  conduct  on  their
    part, deceptive conduct, or, abuse of the  immigration  system  in  any
    way.  So the public interest that she took into account  was  what  one
    might describe as the standard, rather than one in which there was  any
    enhanced public interest in the removal of the adults.  All of that  as
    I say was right and proper.

 7. Ultimately I have reached the conclusion, as Mr Wilding very fairly has
    accepted is the case, that this was one of many appeals that could have
    gone either way. It was open to the judge to reach the conclusion  that
    she did, even if many other judges would not  have  reached  that  same
    conclusion on the basis of those findings.  It  is  moreover  perfectly
    plain from the decision that there was a careful analysis of all of the
    relevant evidence.  There is no suggestion that any irrelevant evidence
    was taken into account, or that any relevant evidence was omitted,  and
    it is clear from the decision that the judge  has  fully  set  out  her
    reasons.  In those circumstances I am not satisfied that there  is  any
    material  error  of  law  disclosed  by  her  decision,  and   in   the
    circumstances that decision must be confirmed.

Notice of decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes
