
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/02452/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th March 2018                            |On 20th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 julieth [t]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on [ ] 1983.  The Appellant
    entered the United  Kingdom  on  22nd  December  2001.   The  Appellant
    entered the United Kingdom with six months leave to enter and that  was
    further extended as a student until 28th February 2006.   On  19th  May
    2016 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK based upon her
    private life.  In addition within the application the Appellant pointed
    out that she resided with her mother in the UK and that she was heavily
    dependent upon her  for  emotional  and  financial  support.   She  had
    pointed out that her mother was the only family member living in the UK
    and that her father had passed away in 2002.  Both of  the  Appellant's
    brothers fled Zimbabwe and lived overseas  and  the  Appellant  claimed
    that returning her there would put her at risk of rape and  trafficking
    and that she would be returning to significant hardship and destitution
    as she has no ties within that country.

 2. The Appellant's application was refused by the Secretary  of  State  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 23rd January 2017.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Alty sitting at Manchester on 2nd November 2017.  In  her
    decision and reasons promulgation on 13th November 2017 the Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 4. On 27th November 2017 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 28th December  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parker granted permission to  appeal.   Judge  Parker  noted  that  the
    grounds allege the judge had failed to attach appropriate weight to the
    compelling and exceptional circumstances in which the  Appellant  found
    herself.  The judge it was contended had failed to properly  understand
    the circumstances the Appellant would face in Zimbabwe particularly  in
    the rural village where her remaining relatives reside and had  wrongly
    assumed  that  they  could  look  after  the  Appellant.    The   judge
    misinterpreted the medical evidence about the  Appellant's  chest  pain
    and since the hearing the Appellant had had an MRI scan and was  likely
    to have to have further surgery.  It was contended that the  judge  had
    erred in failing to recognise the  Appellant's  relationship  with  her
    mother as family life; failed to apply Razgar  and  reached  the  wrong
    conclusion concerning proportionality.

 5. Judge Parker noted that the judge accepted that the  Appellant  enjoyed
    family life in the UK and referred to the public interest  factors  but
    did not make a proportionality assessment of the  interference  in  the
    Appellant's relationship with her  mother.   The  judge  had  noted  at
    paragraph 28 that the concern of the Appellant was "lack  of  practical
    support for her medical problems ... that would cause  difficulty  upon
    return."  He found that the judge's decision that the  Appellant  would
    not face "very significant difficulties upon return"  because  she  had
    relatives and could receive financial support from her mother  did  not
    engage with the Appellant's mobility difficulties and the remoteness of
    the village where her remaining relatives live.  The grounds identified
    particular  difficulties  (if  her  relatives  would  accommodate  her)
    including accessing public transport to collect remittances;  the  lack
    of toilet facilities and running water.  He considered that the judge's
    assessment did not engage meaningfully with the practicalities  of  the
    Appellant's situation and found that there was an arguable error of law
    in  the  assessment  of  whether  she  would  face   very   significant
    difficulties in re-

    integrating upon return.  He accepted that there could be no  criticism
    of the  judge  for  failing  to  have  regard  to  post-decision  facts
    concerning the Appellant's medical condition.   There  is  no  Rule  24
    response served by the Secretary of State.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Chohan.  Mr Chohan is very familiar with  this  matter.   He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and is I believe the author  of
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Bates.

Submission/Discussion

 7. Mr Chohan starts by adopting his Grounds of Appeal.   He  accepts  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge has provided a detailed determination  in
    dismissing the appeal but submits that the judge has failed  to  attach
    appropriate weight to the compelling and exceptional  circumstances  to
    her case when making an assessment of whether it would a breach of  her
    rights under  Article  8.   Further  he  submits  that  the  judge  has
    determined this case both irrationally and disproportionately  in  view
    of the Appellant's complicated and ongoing medical conditions.

 8. He  points  out  that  the  medical  condition  of  the  Appellant  has
    deteriorated and that since December 2017 she has been in hospital  and
    that she only attends before the Tribunal today on a day release  basis
    and that she is in fact not due to be released from hospital until 20th
    April 2018.  She suffers from arachnoiditis which has confined her to a
    wheelchair and she has the further complication of having  a  collapsed
    lung.  He submits that the Appellant tried to explain  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge that her medical condition was not
    manageable  within  Zimbabwe  and  that  she  is  under  a   specialist
    neurosurgeon in the UK.  He points out that her mother is a  nurse  and
    attempts within the UK to assist the Appellant.  He emphasises that the
    Appellant's family come from a remote area in Zimbabwe where there  are
    no facilities.  As a matter of law he submits that there is a  material
    error of law in that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take  into
    account the Appellant's condition when making his assessment.

 9. He submits that considering the Appellant's condition her prospects  of
    getting the required support in Zimbabwe are virtually nil and  reminds
    me that her mother is settled here and a nurse and that the question to
    be answered by the Tribunal was whether the Appellant could return  and
    cope with life back in Zimbabwe and he indicates that  the  finding  of
    the judge is quite frankly perverse.

10. He submits that the judge failed to include  key  information  provided
    during the Appellant's oral testimony including the fact  there  is  no
    running water or electricity and that the community uses the bush as  a
    bathroom and toilet.  He points out that the judge was made aware  that
    the nearest water source in the form of a  community  borehole  was  at
    least an hour's walk away and the nearest clinic  is  a  two-hour  walk
    away as well as the nearest convenience store.   There  is  further  no
    public transport to get to and fro  and  that  the  only  relative  the
    Appellant has in Zimbabwe is an aunt who is in her late  70s  and  that
    she has her own medical issues to contend with.  It is pointed  out  to
    me that the Appellant states that her condition requires equipment  for
    personal hygiene purposes and as such she would need  a  bath  lift  or
    shower chair.

11. Mr Chohan submits that the judge has entirely  misdirected  herself  as
    reality does not afford the Appellant the luxury of  having  disability
    equipment fitted into a non-existent bathroom in Zimbabwe  and  neither
    she nor anyone close to her can raise or be  expected  to  provide  the
    cost of such items.

12. He points out that the Appellant disagrees  with  the  contention  made
    that the Appellant was being dishonest in stating in her oral testimony
    that she had no contact with her siblings since she  left  Zimbabwe  in
    2001 and she is aware that they are in no position whatsoever  to  take
    care of her.  Further it is emphasised  that  she  does  not  have  two
    brothers living in Zimbabwe.  They live in South Africa and  they  only
    travel to and fro across the border in order to renew their visas.

13. Mr Chohan takes me to paragraph 29 of the judge's decision  which  sets
    out the Appellant's medical condition.  He had noted  therein  (and  at
    paragraph  33)  that  a  planned  review  of  the  Appellant's  medical
    condition was planned.  Whilst accepting that the judge  could  not  be
    criticised for not knowing what that review said he points out that  it
    shows that she is physically unable to work and that living  where  she
    does with  her  mother  in  a  terraced  house  such  accommodation  is
    unfortunately unsuitable for her.

14. In all the circumstances he considers that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    consider and/or give adequate and  insufficient  consideration  to  the
    evidence in support of why her case is exceptional.   He  asked  me  to
    find that the decision is riddled with material errors of  law  and  to
    set it aside and to remit the matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.

15. Mr Bates  suggests  that  I  am  being  invited  to  speculate  on  the
    Appellant's ongoing medical condition and that at paragraph 29  of  the
    decision the judge dealt with the  facts.   He  submits  that  for  the
    Appellant to succeed under Article 8 the case would be a rare  one  and
    that the right is  qualified.   He  reminds  me  of  the  authority  of
    Trebowan pointing  out  that  what  is  required  is  more  than  "mere
    difficulty".  He contends that at  paragraph  26  the  judge  has  made
    findings rejecting that there is no contact with the Appellant with her
    family and contends that her mother is not providing 24-hour care.   He
    accepts that funds are not a problem in this case  and  on  that  basis
    indicates the Appellant would not have difficulty in reintegrating into
    society.

16. Whilst acknowledging that there is a change  in  medical  evidence  now
    available he submits that this does not indicate long-term health needs
    and certainly that that was not the position that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  He submits that the judge had regard to  all  the
    circumstances and noted that the Appellant was capable of  self-caring.
    He submits that this is a case of mere hardship and that the  threshold
    set in Trebowan was not reached.  He contends that if there  is  change
    in the Appellant's medical condition then there would be an option  for
    a further application to be made at that time.  He  asked  me  to  find
    that there is no material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.



The Law

17.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Appellant's Current Medical Condition

19.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Appellant  has   substantial   health
    difficulties.  These stem from her having a benign tumour on her spinal
    cord.  Following a scan in January 2017 the tumour was removed but that
    left residual scarring and a possible tumour and in April 2017 she  was
    diagnosed with a cyst  on  her  spinal  cord  which  was  asymptomatic.
    However in May 2017 that became symptomatic and that is  documented  in
    letters.  That remained the position when the Appellant appeared before
    the First-tier Tribunal judge.

20. On 8th November a further MRI scan  confirmed  the  cyst  and  on  20th
    November following an appointment with her consultant she  was  advised
    that there was the risk that she would lose the use  of  her  legs  and
    that she could suffer from paralysis.  On 13th  December  2017  surgery
    was undertaken to remove the cyst and the  Appellant's  lung  collapsed
    during surgery.  Fortunately the lung has been re-inflated.

21. The Appellant having been sent to rehabilitation on  2nd  January  2018
    had difficulty in breathing and had fluid  in  her  lung  and  she  was
    thereafter readmitted to the Walton Centre.  Her spinal fluid  was  not
    being drained and the surgeon put in a valve to  control  the  rate  of
    drainage.  She now has  a  magnetic  valve  inserted  and  pressure  is
    regulated but she does point out that the stent that was  inserted  can
    move and the valve requires regular adjustment and that this  can  only
    take place at the Walton Centre.  She is also having regular checks  as
    to whether the benign tumour has regrown.

22. The result of this invasive procedure is  that  the  Appellant  suffers
    from arachnoiditis.  Arachnoiditis is inflammation of the nerve endings
    of the spinal column.  It is a most debilitating and painful  condition
    and can lead to paralysis and a complete failure for  a  person  to  be
    able to self-care.  It is against this  current  background  that  this
    appeal has to be considered.

Findings on Error of Law

23. Although Mr Bates does not actually use these words  the  Secretary  of
    State's argument appears to be that what the Appellant seeks to  do  is
    merely disagree with the findings of the judge.  That I do not  accept.
    I conclude that there are errors of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  At the date of hearing  the  Appellant  had  been
    living in  the  UK  continuously  for  close  on  sixteen  years.   The
    Appellant's credibility is unchallenged and I find that the findings of
    the judge fail to properly consider  whether  the  Appellant's  medical
    conditions are ongoing, require support of a medical team to  help  her
    recovery and that by stating that she expects the Appellant  to  return
    to Zimbabwe where it is accepted there  is  inadequate  healthcare  and
    entirely incomparable to the medical facility provided in the  UK  that
    the judge may bearing in  mind  where  the  Appellant  would  be  being
    returned to be placing her in a position that would present significant
    obstacles to her integration back into the country.  The judge erred in
    law in failing to  consider  to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the
    evidence in support of why the Appellant's case  was  exceptional.   In
    all the circumstances the correct  approach  is  to  find  there  is  a
    material error law and to set aside  the  decision  and  to  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  with  none  of  the
    findings of fact to stand.

24. I do acknowledge that the Appellant comes before me  with  a  differing
    and more serious set of medical conditions than were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  Bearing in mind  the  errors  of  law  I  do  not
    consider the approach suggested by Mr Bates on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State to be the correct one namely that  it  would  be  open  to  an
    Appellant to make a fresh application based on the  change  of  medical
    condition.  The pragmatic and practical approach is for these issues to
    be dealt with at the rehearing.  To that end I enclose a direction  for
    the Appellant to produce further medical evidence to the court.

Decision and Directions

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and the matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing.  Directions are given hereinafter for the rehearing of  this
    matter:

      a) On the finding that there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision is set aside
         and the matter is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
         Manchester on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of
         three hours with none of the findings of fact stand.

      b) That the appeal be reheard  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Alty.

      c) That there be leave to either party to serve on the other party and
         file at the Tribunal a bundle of  such  further  subjective  and/or
         objective evidence upon which they intend to rely  at  least  seven
         days prior to the restored hearing.

      d) That there be leave to the Appellant  to  file  and  serve  updated
         medical evidence in support of the Appellant's claim at least seven
         days prior to the restored hearing.

      e) That the Appellant do  attend  court  for  the  purpose  of  cross-
         examination.

      f) That whilst it is not envisaged that the Appellant will require  an
         interpreter in the event that an interpreter is required  then  her
         instructed solicitors must notify the Tribunal within seven days of
         receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
