
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02124/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2018                           |26 March 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               Gaurav Bhakhri
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by Connaughts
For the Respondent:    Ms I Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of India, brings a challenge to  the  decision
    of Judge G Clarke of the  First-tier  Tribunal  sent  on  7  June  2017
    dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the respondent on 11
    January 2016 refusing him leave to remain.

2.   There are two aspects to this appeal, one concerning  where  the  judge
    erred in deciding that the appellant had  used  deception  in  a  TOEIC
    speaking test through ETS on 17 April 2012 at  Elizabeth  College,  the
    other  concerning   the   judge's   assessment   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances under Article 8 ECHR outside the Rules.

3.   It is convenient to take the  second  aspect  first  because  Ms  Ahmed
    concedes that the judge's decision as  regards  Article  8  is  legally
    flawed.  Despite noting that the appellant has a British citizen child,
    the judge did  not  apply  the  guidance  set  out  in  SF  and  Others
    (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017]  UKUT  120  (IAC)  and  indeed
    wrongly concluded that it was reasonable to expect  a  British  citizen
    child to leave the UK.  The judge did seek to qualify  this  by  adding
    "that it will be a practical choice for the  Appellant  and  his  wife"
    (paragraph 68), but such qualification could not redeem the  fact  that
    the judge was reversing the  established  principle  set  out  in  Home
    Office IDIs.

4.   The judge's error in this regard suffices as a reason  for  me  to  set
    aside his decision.  Nevertheless it is necessary for me to address the
    first aspect of the appeal because it has a  potential  impact  for  my
    later decision on disposal of the appeal.

5.   The challenge to the judge's finding  of  deception  is  brought  under
    three heads.

6.   First it is contended that the judge erred in  respect  of  the  burden
    upon the appellant in respect of the ETS allegation, applying  a  legal
    burden  rather  than  an  evidential  burden  of  raising  an  innocent
    explanation.  I reject this contention.  Not only did  the  judge  cite
    and apply established case law on ETS cases, but  he  expressly  stated
    (i) that the initial evidential burden to prove deception rested on the
    respondent (paragraph 33); (ii) and that the burden then shifted to the
    appellant to provide an innocent explanation (paragraph  46).   If  the
    judge introduced confusion by citing a passage from SM &  Qadir  [2016]
    EWCA 615 dealing with the legal  burden,  it  remains  that  his  focus
    thereafter was solely on whether the appellant had provided an innocent
    explanation  evidentially.   Mr  Pipe  takes  issue  with  the  judge's
    statement at paragraph 43 that "I find that the Appellant had failed to
    prove that there has been a system  error  on  the  part  of  the  Home
    Office" rightly observing  that  one  cannot  expect  an  applicant  to
    establish something as generic as that.  However, this statement refers
    to the  one  immediately  before  in  which  the  judge  addresses  the
    appellant's attempted explanation for how it was that there was an ETS,
    SELT Source Date document naming the appellant with his correct date of
    birth as sitting  the  test  at  Elizabeth  College  on  17  April  and
    recording his result as "invalid".  The references to system error  was
    simply to the appellant's own proffered explanation  ("maybe  a  system
    error, that's all I can think of").   Thus  the  judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 43, read in context, simply operates to find that explanation
    unsatisfactory.  Paragraph 43 reads in full:

         "(43)    We are conscious that the only TOEIC  invalidated  is  the
             second one and, further, that the  impugned  decision  of  the
             Secretary of State is founded on the speaking element  of  the
             second certificate.  However, given the run of the hearing  we
             consider that the main factual issue to be determined  by  the
             Tribunal in this appeal is whether the Appellant underwent the
             four English language proficiency tests on the separate  dates
             and occasions to which the two TOEIC certificates relate.   We
             deduce from the submissions  of  both  parties'  counsel  that
             there is no disagreement about this  approach.   The  discrete
             factual issues upon which we  have  focused  above  are  those
             which emerged as the most important  during  the  hearing  and
             received most attention.  All of them have a bearing, directly
             or indirectly, on the central issue."


7.   The second head  of  challenge  to  the  deception  finding  alleges  a
    failure to give adequate reasons; it being argued that at paragraph  41
    the judge failed to properly give reasons for rejecting the account  of
    the appellant's wife.  Issue is taken with the judge's finding that the
    appellant's  wife's  statement  that  the  appellant  would  never  use
    deception was "not objective evidence."  Whilst  it  is  arguable  that
    "objective" was the incorrect term to use here, read in context  it  is
    quite clear why the judge  decided  to  attach  little  weight  to  her
    evidence.  First of all, she had not been able to provide any  specific
    details about where the appellant was on 17 April 2012; she was  simply
    asking the judge to accept her view that the appellant was  a  truthful
    person.  Second, she being his wife, she was not an independent witness
    nor had she and the appellant  been  able  to  adduce  any  independent
    evidence of his movements that day (e.g.  such  as  a  work  rota:  see
    paragraph 38).

8.   The final head of the challenge to  the  deception  finding  asserts  a
    failure  to  consider  material  matters,  namely  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's possession of a City and Guilds Certificate "lends credence
    to his account and shows that he had no reasons to use a proxy taker in
    an ETS test and the fact that he had taken an IELTS test before  coming
    to the UK showing proficiency in English".  The  judge  addressed  both
    those matters at paragraphs 40 and 45

         "40. First, there is the landing card completed by  the  Appellant.
             This also contains notes made  by  a  Border  Force  official.
             These document the Appellant stating that he had undergone  an
             English language proficiency test for the purpose of  securing
             an Entrepreneur visa.  The record continues:


                  '[He] had to ring home to get details of his test date and
                  place ... [and] ... provided name of the  test  centre  as
                  Claudon College in 3/2013.'


             It is convenient to interpose here the Appellant's evidence to
             the Tribunal concerning the issue.   The  Appellant  testified
             that his  driver  was  waiting  to  collect  him  at  Heathrow
             Airport.   He  telephoned  the  driver  for  the  purpose   of
             ascertaining where he had  taken  the  test  (singular).   The
             driver was unable to provide him with  this  information,  but
             stated that he would have to park the car and would then  call
             the Appellant.  According to the Appellant, he then remembered
             the text that had been sent to him by his  friend  Ahmed.   He
             produced this text to the Tribunal.  It is dated 19 March 2013
             and timed 14.26 hours.   Its  contents  consist  of  the  name
             Cauldon College and its address, including the postcode.   The
             Appellant did not provide any satisfactory explanation of why,
             on 19 March 2013, he needed this information having regard  to
             his claim that he had been to Cauldon College  and  had  spent
             some time there just three weeks previously.


         45.  In SM and Qadir, the following was stated by this Tribunal, at
             [102]:


                  'We take this opportunity to re-emphasise that every  case
                  belonging to the ETS/TOEIC stable will invariably be  fact
                  sensitive.  To this we  add  that  every  appeal  will  be
                  determined on the basis of the  evidence  adduced  by  the
                  parties.'


             This is echoed in the statement of Beatson LJ in Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department v Shehzad and  Chowdhury  [2016]
             EWCA Civ 615, at [23]:


                  'I do not address the question of what  evidence  will  be
                  sufficient to enable a Tribunal to conclude that there has
                  been no deception.  That is likely to be an intensely fact-
                  specific matter.'


             We draw attention to two further statements in SM  and  Qadir.
             First, the tentative prediction in [103]:


                  'We take note of the indications in the conduct  of  these
                  appeals that, in some future case, the Secretary of  State
                  may seek to adduce further evidence, likely to  be  expert
                  in nature.'


             This type of 'entirely new  ingredient'  has  materialised  in
             these three conjoined cases, in the shape  of  three  experts'
             reports.  Finally, this Tribunal stated at [80]:


                  'In some of the FtT decisions  in  this  field  one  finds
                  observations concerning the appellant's  apparent  fluency
                  in, and command of, the  English  language.   We  consider
                  that Judges should be cautious in  adopting  his  approach
                  for at least three reasons.  The first is the  passage  of
                  time.  The second is that Judges are not language  testing
                  or linguistics experts.  The third is that, to date, there
                  has been no expert linguistic evidence  in  any  of  these
                  cases.'"


    This head amounts to a mere disagreement with the judge's  findings  of
    fact.  The  judge  took  cognisance  of  both  these  matters  and  her
    assessment  of  them  was  entirely  within  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses.

    Re-making of the Decision

9.   I consider I am in a position to re-make the decision  without  further
    ado.  The question arises whether the appellant's is a case in which he
    is entitled to succeed in his appeal against the respondent's  decision
    on the basis of a straightforward application of the guidance given  by
    the UT in SF and Others.  Ms Ahmed does not dispute that  it  would  be
    right for me to apply the respondent's guidance but with the caveat

      1) that I must now apply the updated guidance dated 22 February  2018;
         and






      2) that there remains  the question  whether  he  appellant's  use  of
         deception would exclude the appellant.


10.  Having considered the matter I note first of all that Ms Ahmed must  be
    right that the policy I have to  have  regard  to  now  is  the  latest
    version dated 22 February 2018.

11.  I am satisfied that the  appellant  is  not  caught  by  the  exclusion
    limits set out in the latest version where under the subheading  "Where
    the child is a British citizen" it is stated that

         "In particular circumstances it may be  appropriate  to  refuse  to
         grant leave where [the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer]
         gives rises to considerations of such weight as  to  justify  their
         removal...


         The IDI's go on to state that the circumstances  envisaged  include
         'those in which to grant  leave  could  undermine  our  immigration
         controls, for example, the applicant has committed  significant  or
         persistent criminal offences.... or has  a  very  poor  immigration
         history,  having   repeatedly   and   deliberately   breached   the
         Immigration Rules."


12.  Clearly the appellant's use of deception is an  action  undermining  of
    UK immigration controls and its seriousness cannot  be  minimised.   On
    the other hand there are three factors of particular  relevance  of  in
    this case.  First, the appellant has never been an overstayer (this was
    expressly conceded by Ms Ahmed).  He came to the UK  as  a  student  in
    October 2009 and received extensions before  being  granted  (following
    appeal) Tier 1 Entrepreneur leave in April 2014.  Apart  from  the  ETS
    deception there is no suggestion of any failure on his part  to  comply
    with conditions or to  observe  the  substantive  requirements  of  the
    student and the Tier 1 Rules.  Second, whilst if the ETS deception  had
    come to light sooner he would not have  received  further  leave  after
    April 2012, it arose out of one act.  There was no pattern of  repeated
    acts in disregard of immigration control.  Third, another factor I have
    to take into account is whether the appellant is  entitled  to  succeed
    under s.117B(6) by virtue of being a parent of a British citizen  child
    when it is not reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK.   In
    assessing reasonableness I am  obliged  to  take  into  account  public
    interest factors, which include the appellant's  use  of  deception  in
    2012.  However, in this context there is no suggestion that  there  has
    been any other misconduct and it occurred nearly  six  years  ago.   As
    regards s117B considerations, the appellant speaks English; whilst  not
    financially independent his wife works as a  Head  of  Chemistry  in  a
    school and ensures the  couple  are  not  a  burden  on  public  funds;
    weighing against the appellant is the fact that the appellant  and  his
    wife met when his immigration status was precarious in the  sense  that
    he did not have settled status, but his ETS misconduct took place after
    their marriage.

13.  In short,  the  balancing  exercise  I  have  to  make  when  assessing
    s.117B(6) leads me to conclude that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

14.  For the above reasons I consider that the appellant benefits  from  the
    respondent's aforementioned guidance and accordingly I allow his appeal
    leaving it for the respondent to determine the period of leave.

15.  To conclude:

    The FtT judge materially erred in law.

    The decision I re-make is to allow  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
    right (Article 8) grounds

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 22 March 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

