
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02646/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2018                               |On 8 March 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             mr murtaza kocakaya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Officer Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Maka, Counsel, 4 Kings Bench Walk


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Turkey, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) of 31  December
    2015 to refuse his application for entry clearance as a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid
    allowed the Appellant's appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  25  July
    2017.  The Secretary of State now appeals with  permission  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on 16 January 2018.

 3. It appears from the papers before me that the background to this appeal
    is that the Appellant made an application for entry clearance  to  join
    his partner in the UK. The ECO refused the  application  on  the  basis
    that certain documents in relation to the  financial  requirements  had
    not been submitted with the application and accordingly  the  mandatory
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE had not been  met.  The  appeal  against
    that decision came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Majid  and  was
    allowed.

 4. The Secretary of State challenges the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Majid on the grounds that it is unclear from the judge's decision
    what the  case  is  about  and  there  has  been  no  full  and  proper
    consideration of the application or the finances. The grounds highlight
    that Judge Majid makes reference to an 'asylum claim' and coming to the
    UK as a 'visitor' [12-13]. It  is  pointed  out  that  there  are  also
    references to the best interests of the child and to reports on Radio 5
    Live without any explanation as to the relevance of these  matters.  It
    is contended that it is not clear why the Appellant has won his case.

 5. In correspondence submitted in advance and at the hearing before me  Mr
    Maka accepted that there are errors of law in the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Majid. He accepted that the decision should be  set
    aside and requested that the decision be remade in the Upper  Tribunal.
    He made this submission on the basis that the issue was narrow and  the
    Appellant had already been prejudiced by the  delay,  having  made  his
    application for entry  clearance  in  2015.  He  highlighted  that  the
    Appellant had missed the recent birth of his twin children in  the  UK.
    However Ms Fijiwala said that  she  had  a  number  of  concerns  about
    aspects of the evidence and was unable to agree that the appeal  should
    be allowed.

Error of law

 6. In my view the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid  is  fatally
    undermined in a number of respects.

 7. Firstly this was an appeal under Article 8 but the judge referred to it
    being an asylum appeal [12] and referred to a  visit  to  grandchildren
    [13]. Much of the rest of the decision comprises case law  and  general
    statements. There is no analysis  of  Appendix  FM  or  of  Article  8.
    Accordingly the judge has failed to consider the very  basis  on  which
    the  appeal  was  brought.  There  is  no  proper  explanation  of  the
    background or of the facts or of the factors relevant  to  the  judge's
    decision.

 8. In considering the decision in this appeal I have taken account of  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in the case of MM and Others (unreported
    appeal number AA/06906/2014) which levels criticisms in relation  to  a
    number of decisions made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid.   I  take
    into account paragraph 47 where the Tribunal says:
         "We regard the body of his work that we have examined in the course
         of these appeals as wholly failing to meet the standards  that  are
         demanded by the office of a judge and expected by the parties.   As
         a result, every one of the decisions under appeal shows  errors  of
         law, in most cases serious error, in  most  case  multiple  serious
         errors.   Whether  the  decisions  are  looked   at   together   or
         separately, they show that nobody should assume  that  Judge  Majid
         has an adequate knowledge of the law of his task as  a  judge.   If
         his decisions continue to have the features we have  identified  in
         the foregoing examination, they are clearly open to criticism".

 9. The decision in the instant appeal contains a number of the  paragraphs
    highlighted by the Tribunal in the case of MM and therefore does have a
    number of features identified in that case as demonstrating  the  wrong
    approach on the part of the judge.

10. Considering the decision in the instant appeal I find that the decision
    discloses the material errors of law identified above which are capable
    of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  In these circumstances and, as
    no findings of fact have been made, I set aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

11. Although Mr Maka requested that the decision be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal I bear in mind the Presidential Practice Statements and I take
    into account that the effect  of  the  error  identified  has  been  to
    deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be  considered
    by the First-tier Tribunal and the nature or  extent  of  the  judicial
    fact finding in relation to  Article  8  which  is  necessary  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
    overriding objective  in  rule  2  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law.

I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No award for costs is made as the matter is  still  outstanding  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
