
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/02190/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (via Skype)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2021                   |On 19 February 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     BOE
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Inoma of Highland Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Abdar ('the Judge') promulgated on 18 November 2019,
        in which the Judge dismissed her appeal on human rights grounds.
     2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24  August  2001  who
        applied for entry clearance on 19 September 2018 to enable  her  to
        join her mother, a Nigerian national, in the United  Kingdom.  That
        application was refused on 19 December 2018.

Background

     3. Having considered the documentary and oral evidence for Judge  sets
        out findings of fact from [19] of the decision under challenge.
     4.  In  relation  to  the  question  of  whether  the  appellant   had
        established that her mother had sole  responsibility  for  her  the
        Judge clearly considered the decision in TD (paragraph  297  (i)(e)
        "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049,  setting  out  the
        guidance as  to  how  consideration  of  that  question  should  be
        approached at [20] of the decision under challenge.
     5. Having considered the evidence, the Judge sets out  conclusions  in
        relation to this aspect between [21 - 25] in the following terms:


        21.  I have considered all the evidence before me and I  find  that
             the Appellant has failed  to  discharge  the  burden,  on  the
             balance of probabilities, in showing that the Sponsor has sole
             responsibility for the Appellant. The evidence  before  me,  I
             find, is almost negligible of the Sponsor's involvement in the
             Appellant's life. I also find this lack of evidence  from  the
             Sponsor, particularly corroborating evidence or an explanation
             for the lack of the same, to be an indication of the Sponsor's
             evidence being unreliable.


        22   There is evidence of the  Sponsor  sending  money  to  [K]  in
             Nigeria.  However  financial  support  alone  is  not,  in  my
             judgement, sufficient demonstration of sole responsibility  or
             evidence of directing the Appellant's upbringing.


        23.  I have considered the WhatsApp messages, which I  find  to  be
             very generic well wishes and they only cover a few  months  of
             2018.  The messages do not appear to be regular either and are
             sporadic with long gaps between messages.  I do not  find  the
             messages to show the Sponsor having  sole  responsibility  for
             the Appellant for directing her upbringing at all.


        24.       I have no evidence of any other family that the Appellant
             may have in Nigeria or the Sponsor as in the UK though I  note
             that there is a reference to the  Appellant's  sister  in  the
             WhatsApp messages.  It  was  in  response  to  the  Tribunal's
             enquiry at the hearing, the Sponsor gave evidence of  visiting
             the Appellant in 2018 for the first time since entering the UK
             in 2007. I have no evidence of why the Sponsor did  not  visit
             the Appellant previously or how the Sponsor engaged  with  the
             Appellant and directed her upbringing over the years.


     6. Having found the appellant had not established that her mother  had
        sole responsibility for her the Judge went on to  consider  whether
        the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) relating to the question of
        whether serious and compelling considerations existed warranting  a
        grant of leave to the appellant in any event between [26 - 30]. The
        Judge considered the guidance provided by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88 at [26]  and  bore  such  guidance  in  mind
        including,   in   particular,   that   the   assessment    involves
        "consideration as  to  whether  the  combination  of  circumstances
        sufficiently serious and compelling to require admission",  as  the
        Judge confirmed that [27].
     7. The Judge's findings on this issue are set out at [28 - 30] in  the
        following terms


        28.  I find that the Appellant applied for entry clearance  shortly
             after turning 17 years of age and has lived in Nigeria all her
             life, with friends and family of the Sponsor and has completed
             the first stages of her education at a  boarding  school  with
             the financial assistance of the Sponsor. On all accounts,  the
             Appellant was a healthy teenager approaching  young  adulthood
             at the date of the application and remains so. The Sponsor has
             previously assisted  the  Appellant  financially  in  securing
             accommodation and  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's
             inability to continue to support the Appellant as before.


        29.  On a holistic assessment of the little evidence before me  and
             on balance, in my  judgement,  the  Appellant  has  failed  to
             discharge the burden  of  showing  that  she  meets  the  high
             threshold of paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules.  In  making  my
             finding, I keep in mind that the Appellant's best interest, as
             encompassed within the Rules, and  I  do  not  find  that  the
             status quo of Appellant at the date of the application or  now
             to  be  such  that  it   makes   the   Appellant's   exclusion
             undesirable.


        30.  For these reasons, I do not find any serious or compelling  or
             other considerations of any kind which  make  the  Appellant's
             exclusion undesirable.


     8.  Thereafter  the  Judge  considered  whether,  notwithstanding  the
        inability of the appellant to succeed under the Immigration  Rules,
        any interference with a protected right as a result of the decision
        under challenge was proportionate to the legitimate aim relied upon
        by the respondent, pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.  The  Judge  accepts
        that the relationship between the appellant  and  sponsor  to  have
        been proved as mother and daughter sufficient to support a  finding
        that family life recognised by article 8 exists.
     9. The Judge, bearing the 'balance sheet' approach in mind,  concludes
        the issue is the proportionality of the decision and sets  out  the
        findings in relation to this aspect at [34 - 36]  of  the  decision
        under challenge in the following terms:


        34.  I repeat my findings of above in respect of the Appellant  and
             the Appellant's circumstances in  Nigeria.  I  have  not  been
             directed to any other  factors  and  I  find  nothing  in  the
             evidence which countermands the balance against the Appellant.


        35.   In  the  proportionality  assessment,  I   also   take   into
             consideration the Sponsor's rights under article 8. However, I
             do not find any interference  with  the  Sponsor's  rights  by
             maintaining the current status quo to sway  my  assessment  in
             the Appellant's favour. On the evidence before me, the Sponsor
             has minimally engaged with the Appellant in  Nigeria  and  has
             only visited the Appellant once in over 10 years and I have no
             reliable evidence or argument to find the maintaining of  that
             balance now to be disproportionate.


        36.  I do not find the positive factors in the Appellant's  favour,
             either exclusively or cumulatively, to  outweigh  the  factors
             against  the  Appellant,  particularly  the  public   interest
             elements. Therefore, I find that the decision under appeal  is
             reasonable and proportionate in all the  circumstances  and  I
             dismiss the appeal.


    10. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
        refused by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal but granted  by
        the Upper Tribunal on a renewed application, the operative part  of
        the grant being in the following terms:


         1. It is not without some hesitation that  I  grant  permission  to
            appeal. The  evidence  directly  relating  to  the  control  and
            direction that one would normally expect to see being  exercised
            by the sponsor over the appellant's life, to support a claim  of
            sole responsibility, was limited. The FtJ's  assessment  of  the
            issue of sole  responsibility  at  [21]  to  [24]  does  however
            arguably fail to proper consider the evidence from the sponsor's
            nephew [K] and the evidence from the appellant's head teacher at
            pages 56 to 58 of the appellant's bundle. There is certainly  no
            engagement with that evidence in the  section  of  the  decision
            containing the FtJ's findings, and  there  are  no  findings  in
            respect of the appellant's claim that she was no  longer  living
            with [K] and had been supervised,  and  then  living  with,  her
            headteacher, and that she is now living with different  friends.
            Even if the sponsor did not have  sole  responsibility  for  the
            appellant before she left [K's] home (if this was accepted), she
            may nevertheless have assumed sole responsibility afterwards. It
            is arguable that the judge failed to make adequate  findings  in
            respect of the material issues before him, and that he failed to
            take account of relevant evidence.
         2. The remaining grounds (from paragraph 3 onwards of the  grounds)
            have less merit, but I  nevertheless  grant  permission  on  all
            grounds.

Error of law

    11. The grounds seeking permission to appeal assert the requisite  test
        was in fact satisfied on the evidence. The appellant further claims
        an inconsistency in the Judge's findings at [22] and that  at  [25]
        in the Judge accepting that there was financial  support  from  the
        sponsor to the appellant but then claiming that the sponsor was not
        solely responsible. The appellant asserts that is  a  finding  that
        was not plausible and is illustrative of  the  Judge's  failure  to
        consider all the evidence provided. In relation to article 8  ECHR,
        it is asserted the Judge did  not  consider  all  relevant  factors
        including the claim the appellant did not have a place to  live  in
        Nigeria and taking into account her age at the date of application.
    12. It is settled law that a judge is  not  required  to  set  out  the
        evidence in full or to findings  in  relation  to  each  and  every
        aspect of the same in  the  determination,  provided  all  relevant
        evidence was adequately considered.
    13. The Judge was clearly aware of the evidence relating to the history
        of this matter including the involvement of [K] and the payment  by
        the sponsor to this individual of funds to meet  the  cost  of  the
        appellant's school fees and upkeep. Notwithstanding this, the Judge
        finds, having considered documentary and  oral  evidence,  at  [24]
        that there was no evidence as to how the sponsor engaged  with  the
        appellant including directing her upbringing over  the  years.  The
        grounds fail to identify  any  specific  evidence  that  the  Judge
        failed to take into account in undertaking the required analysis or
        to identify alternative findings that the Judge  should  have  more
        rationally  made  on  the  evidence  that  would  make  a  material
        difference.
    14. The Judge clearly took into account the relevant case law  and  the
        finding that the provision of financial support was not  sufficient
        to satisfy the test of sole  responsibility,  without  more,  is  a
        finding within the range of those reasonably open to the Judge.
    15. The Judge was aware of the appellant's history and background which
        is set out between [4 - 6]. As Mrs Aboni  noted,  at  the  date  of
        application the appellant was a full-time border being cared for by
        the school headmaster. The Judge  clearly  took  into  account  the
        appellant's age, lack of own accommodation,  and  evidence  of  the
        availability of continued ongoing adequate financial support.
    16. The grant of permission makes specific reference to the evidence at
        pages 56 to 58 of the appellant's bundle. At page 56  is  a  letter
        from the Amannachi Secondary Commercial School dated 11  July  2019
        stating that the sponsor introduced her nephew [K]  to  the  school
        management team as the primary contact for the appellant should the
        school require the attention of an  appropriate  adult  during  the
        appellant's time at the school. The letter states that [K] has been
        very regular for many years during school visiting periods as  well
        as paying all the school fees and dues. At pages 57 is  a  document
        dated 12 September 2019 written by  the  Principal  of  the  school
        confirming that she agreed that the appellant, who was in her final
        year, could stay with her and her family  until  she  finished  her
        exams. The letter states it was because her mother  approached  the
        Principal explaining there was a relationship breakdown as a result
        of which [K] could no longer accommodate the appellant in his house
        and because she had no other place to stay.
    17. The Judge was clearly aware of the guidance  in  TD  in  which  the
        Upper Tribunal found that  "Sole  responsibility"  is   a   factual
        matter  to  be  decided  upon  all  the   evidence,  and  that  the
        test  is  whether   the   parent   has   continuing   control   and
        direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,  including  making   all
        the  important  decisions  in   the   child's   life.  The  Judge's
        conclusion  that   having   carefully   considered   the   evidence
        insufficient material had been provided to show  that  the  sponsor
        had made all the important decision in the  appellant's  life  such
        that she had not established she had sole  responsibility  has  not
        been shown to be a conclusion infected  by  arguable  legal  error.
        The  guidance  in  TD was  that  the  decision  should be  made  on
        the basis of all the evidence  and  the  assessment  of  whether  a
        parent  had  sole  responsibility  would  include  a  consideration
         as  to  the  nature of the relationship between parent  and  child
        in a given case and the decision maker  would  be  able  to  assess
        whether particular decisions were  or  were  not   important   ones
        in  the  context  of   the   evidence   as   a   whole.  The  Judge
        clearly noted the poor quality of the evidence relating to  ongoing
        contact between the appellant and the sponsor  which  included  one
        visit in 10 years, a  limited  number  of  WhatsApp  messages,  and
        inadequate evidence to show the sponsor had maintained control  and
        direction over the appellants life.
    18. It is not made out the weight the Judge gave  to  the  evidence  is
        irrational. The Judge had the benefit of forming an opinion on  the
        merits of the claim having considered both  the  written  and  oral
        evidence, as noted above. The weight to be given to  that  evidence
        was a matter for the Judge. It is not made out the  Judge  did  not
        consider all the material provided or that the weight given to  the
        evidence is infected by  legal  error.  Whilst  the  appellant  may
        disagree with the Judge's conclusion the grounds fail to  establish
        the decision to dismiss the appeal is  one  outside  the  range  of
        those reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence. It has not
        been shown to be either unfair or  unreasonable  in  light  of  the
        factual findings made.
    19. No error of law material to the decision to dismiss the  appeal  is
        therefore made out. Disagreement with the same or desire for a more
        favourable outcome does not establish it is appropriate in all  the
        circumstances for the Upper Tribunal to interfere  any  further  in
        this matter.

Discussion

    20. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        decision which shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    21. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 29 January 2021












