
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
HU/02182/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 September 2019                   |On 2 October 2019                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                      Mr MD Mohiuddin Bahadda Chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, HOPO

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lodge  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision dated 21  January  2019  refusing  him  leave  to
    remain in the UK.

2.   The respondent's position was that the appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability  requirements   having   obtained   a   TOEIC   certificate
    fraudulently.  Consequently,  the  appellant  did  not  meet  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  and  outside  the  Rules  there   are   no   exceptional
    circumstances that would warrant a grant of leave.

3.   Looking at the evidence in its totality, the judge was  satisfied  that
    the appellant had discharged the burden of proof upon him to rebut  the
    respondent's prima facie case.  The judge was not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent has  established  that  the  appellant  obtained  his  TOEIC
    certificate fraudulently.

4.   The judge turned to consider the appellant's submission that  it  would
    be disproportionate to require him to be removed to Bangladesh  in  the
    light of the fact that he is living in the  UK  with  his  partner  and
    young child.  His partner is presently studying in the UK.   The  judge
    found that the only paragraph applicable to the appellant is  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

5.   The appellant's evidence was that he had come to the UK  as  a  student
    in 2010.  He had stopped studying after the  award  of  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma.  He had stopped studying when he was  served  with  his  IS151
    notice.  He had been studying up to March 2015.

6.   He was in a relationship with a girl he had met in Bangladesh in  2015.
     She had been studying in Bangladesh.  She came to the UK  in  February
    2017 to study.  They started living together when she came  here.   The
    plan was for her to complete her studies and they would both return  to
    Bangladesh.  He had not returned and did not want to return  before  he
    had obtained his MBA.  His parents had passed away.  His intention  all
    along had always been to leave when he had passed his  course.   If  he
    had passed his exams, he would have gone back.

7.   The reason he cannot go back is because of the ETS issue.  His  partner
    could not continue studying in the UK because she now had a 1 year  old
    baby.  He looked after the baby while she  studied.   His  partner  had
    brothers and sisters in Bangladesh.  His partner's  visa  lasted  until
    October 2020.

8.   He had a level 5 Business Diploma, a  postgraduate  qualification  from
    Plymouth University.  He needed at least an MBA  in  Bangladesh  or  he
    would not be able to get the job he wanted.

9.   The judge rejected the appellant's submissions that he  had  meaningful
    no ties to Bangladesh,  his  parents  have  died  and  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to his reintegration, having lived in the UK  for
    a number of years.  The judge found that even accepting that his father
    and mother are dead, it is unlikely he does not have  wider  family  in
    Bangladesh.  His partner who is here on a student visa  has  family  in
    Bangladesh.  Whatever the position, the judge found that the  appellant
    has the resources to re-establish himself and his family in Bangladesh.
     The judge considered that the appellant made reference in his  witness
    statement to having inherited valuable property along  with  cash  from
    his parents.

10.  The judge found that the partner does  not  have  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK.  She is here on a student  visa.   There  is  nothing
    stopping her returning with the appellant.  It is clearly in  the  best
    interests  of  the  child  for  her  to  remain  in  the  family  unit.
    Ultimately, it will be a matter of choice for  the  appellant  and  his
    partner whether she remains here with the baby and completes her course
    or whether they are returned to Bangladesh.

11.  The judge found that any private life the appellant has established  in
    the UK has been established whilst his immigration status is precarious
    and he attached  little  weight  to  it.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant  speaks  English  and  on   the   evidence   is   financially
    independent, but those are neutral factors.

12.  The judge was satisfied that there are no  very  significant  obstacles
    preventing the appellant's  integration  into  Bangladesh.   The  judge
    found that the appellant does not meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

13.  In the light of  his  findings  the  judge  held  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances which required  him  to  consider  Article  8
    outside the Rules.

14.  Mr Karim argued that the  appellant  was  the  subject  of  an  earlier
    Section 10 decision which had ended his lawful residence/leave  in  the
    UK on the basis of an ETS allegation.  The judge accepted having regard
    to all the  factors  that  the  respondent  had  not  proved  that  the
    appellant had cheated and that the appellant had discharged the  burden
    on him.

15.  Mr Karim  argued  that  the  judge,  however,  erred  in  law  when  he
    proceeded to consider the appeal like an ordinary human  rights  claim.
    It was argued before the  judge  that  in  the  light  of  the  earlier
    unlawful ETS decision of the respondent, which  unlawfully  brought  an
    end to the appellant's lawful status, the appeal ought  to  be  allowed
    following the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Khan and  Others
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1684, as well as Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009.  He argued
    that the judge failed to recognise the guidance given by the  Court  of
    Appeal in several judgments.  The judge failed to appreciate  that  but
    for the ETS allegation the appellant's lawful leave would not have been
    curtailed or ended and  because  of  the  ETS  decision  in  2015,  the
    appellant found himself without leave and  having  to  pursue  a  human
    rights claim and a judicial review.

16.  Mr Karim argued that the appellant should be returned to  the  position
    he was in in 2015 when he had lawful leave to remain as a student.

17.  Mr Karim relied on an unreported case by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Storey (HU/09477/2018 plus 3) in which  Judge  Storey  had  accepted  a
    similar argument from him.  Judge Storey had allowed that appeal  under
    Article 8 using the Razgar approach to  the  third  question  that  the
    decision by the Secretary of State was not in accordance with  the  law
    and to the fifth question finding that the decision by the Secretary of
    State was disproportionate.

18.  Mr Karim relied on paragraph 120 of the Court of Appeal's  decision  in
    Ahsan where the Court of Appeal held

         "120.    The starting point is that it seems to me clear that if on
                a human rights appeal an appellant were found  not  to  have
                cheated, which inevitably means that the Section 10 decision
                had been wrong, the Secretary of State would be  obliged  to
                deal with him or her thereafter so far  as  possible  as  if
                that error had not been made, that is as if their  leave  to
                remain had not been invalidated ...".

19.  Mr Karim relied on the Court of Appeal's decision  in  Khan,  paragraph
    37, which relied on the Secretary of State's confirmation that

         "(i) For those individuals whose leave  was  curtailed,  and  where
             that leave would still have time to run as at the date  of  an
             FtT determination that there was no deception, subject to  any
             further appeal to the UT, the curtailment  decision  would  be
             withdrawn and  the  effect  ...  would  be  that  leave  would
             continue and the individuals would not be disadvantaged in any
             future application they chose to make; ...".

20.  The Secretary of State further stated that

         "    For those whose leave had expired, and who had made an in time
             application for further leave to remain which was  refused  on
             ETS grounds, the effect of an FtT determination that there was
             no deception would be that the  refusal  would  be  withdrawn.
             The applicant in question  would  still  have  an  outstanding
             application for  leave  to  remain  and  the  respondent  will
             provide them with a reasonable opportunity to make any further
             changes to their application which would be considered on  the
             basis of  them  not  having  employed  any  deception  in  the
             obtaining of their TOEIC certificate, and they would be in  no
             way disadvantaged in any  future  application  they  chose  to
             make.


         (iii)    In all cases, the respondent confirms that in  making  any
             future decision he will not hold any  previous  gap  in  leave
             caused by any erroneous decision in relation  to  ETS  against
             the relevant applicant, and will have to take into account all
             the circumstances of each case".

21.  Mr Karim relied on the consent orders in Khan and Islam which had  been
    endorsed by the Court of Appeal where

         "Upon the respondent agreeing that if  the  appellant  succeeds  on
         that appeal, on the basis that he did  not  commit  a  TOEIC  fraud
         then, in the absence of some  new  factor  justifying  a  different
         course, the respondent will rescind her decision and


         (1)  grant the appellant a reasonable opportunity, be not less than
             60 days to submit an application for further leave ...".

22.  Mr Karim submitted that in the  light  of  the  stated  case  law,  the
    appellant's appeal should be allowed.  He has cleared his name.  Had it
    not been for the ETS case,  the  appellant  would  have  enjoyed  legal
    status.

23.  Mr Karim submitted that the appellant's  wife  and  child  have  lawful
    leave.  He submitted that as the appellant's appeal on the ETS case has
    been allowed, it is for the Secretary of State to determine  the  leave
    to be granted to the appellant.

24.  Mr Tarlow accepted the submissions  made  by  Mr  Karim  as  being  the
    appellant's position.  He confirmed that the Secretary of State did not
    challenge the judge's decision that the appellant did not cheat in  the
    ETS test.  He said as a consequence the appellant should be put back in
    the position he was in 2015 without prejudice.

25.  In the light of the submissions made by Mr Karim and the acceptance  of
    those submissions by Mr Tarlow, I find that the judge materially  erred
    in law in considering  this  application  simply  as  an  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR without looking at the case law,  in  particular,
    the decisions made by the Court of Appeal which favoured the  appellant
    as a result of the judge's decision that he did not cheat  in  his  ETS
    test.

26.  I set aside the judge's decision and remake it.

27.  I rely on the decisions made by the Court of Appeal.  I find  that  the
    appellant should not be  disadvantaged  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  He has cleared his name and therefore he should be put  back
    in the position he was in 2015.  I therefore find  that  the  appellant
    had discharged the burden of proving that the respondent's decision was
    not in accordance with the law and that the respondent's  decision  was
    disproportionate.

28.  The appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR is allowed.

29.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 30 September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

