
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/02131/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 24 November 2017                    |On 6 December 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                  AFEEZ [O]
                         (I DO NOT DIRECT ANONYMITY)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Adelakun    (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                                                         DECISION AND
REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal ("the tribunal") which was sent to  the  parties
on 9 January 2017 whereupon it dismissed his appeal  against  the  Secretary
of State's decision of 12 January 2016 refusing  to  grant  him  leave  to
remain on human rights grounds under Article 8 of the  European  Convention
on Human Rights (ECHR).

2.    By way of background, the claimant is a national  of  Nigeria  and  he
was born on 16 October 1989.  He entered the UK on 5 May 2011 with leave to
enter as a student.  That leave had been due to expire on 30 July 2013 but
was, in fact, curtailed on 31 May 2012 due to withdrawal  of  sponsorship.
He was subsequently granted leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  family  and
private life until 29 May 2013.  That was because of  a  claimed  parental
relationship with a British Citizen child who had been born  on  [  ] 2012.
However, it appears that he no longer has any contact with that child.   But
he entered into a relationship with one [JO] (as  she  now  is),  a  British
citizen, and the couple married on 17 November 2015.  It was on the  basis
of that relationship that  the  claimant  made  the  application  which  has
ultimately led to this appeal.  The claimant's  wife  has  a  child  from  a
previous relationship and it is  said  the  father  has  contact  with  that
child. Further, a child was born to the couple on [ ] 2016.

3.    The Secretary of State refused the application because it was  thought
that the relationship the claimant was now relying upon was  not  a  genuine
and subsisting  one.   It  was  considered  that  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration Rules  were  not  met  and  that  there  were  no  exceptional
circumstances which would justify a grant of leave to remain  on  Article 8
grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

4.    The tribunal considered the claimant's appeal at a hearing which  took
place on 14 December 2016.  Both parties were represented and the tribunal
heard oral evidence from the appellant and his wife.

5.    The tribunal noted in its decision that it was not contended that  the
requirements of  the  Immigration Rules  were  met.   It  did  (unlike  the
Secretary of State) accept that the  relationship  was  a  genuine  one  but
thought there was nothing exceptional such as  to  cause  it  to  allow  the
appeal outside the rules.  In particular, it seems  that  the  tribunal  was
persuaded that it was  reasonable  to  expect  the  claimant  to  return  to
Nigeria and seek entry clearance bearing in mind that information before  it
suggested that it would only take some 120 days for such an application  to
be dealt with.  The tribunal ended up concluding that whilst Article 8  was
engaged any interference brought about by the  claimant's  removal,  in  the
circumstances described above, would not have consequences of  such  gravity
as to engage that Article.

6.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought.   Permission
was granted because it was thought that the tribunal might  have  failed  to
conduct an adequate Article 8 assessment and  might  also  have  failed  to
properly consider the interests of the child of  the  marriage.   Permission
having been granted the Secretary of State supplied a  "rule 24  reply"  in
which it was said:

      "The respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's  application  for
      permission to appeal and invites the tribunal to determine the  appeal
      with a fresh oral (continuance) hearing to  consider  the  appellant's
      human rights claim."

7.    Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could be considered  whether  or  not
the  tribunal  had  erred  in  law.   However,  before  me   Mrs Pettersen
acknowledged that the intention in the rule 24 reply must have been to  say
that the respondent did not oppose the setting aside of the  decision.  That
is obviously right since permission had already been granted prior  to  then
rule 24 reply being prepared.  She also said that she  would  stand  by  the
rule 24 reply as it is properly to be understood. Accordingly, and with  the
agreement of the parties, I set aside the tribunal's decision.

8.    The next matter to consider was whether or not I  should  re-make  the
decision in the Upper Tribunal or whether  the  case  should  be  remitted.
Mr Adelakun told me that he  did  not  have  with  him  all  the  paperwork
relating to the appeal.  He did not  explain  why.   He  did  say  that  the
appellant had only expected the hearing to cover the  error  of  law  issue.
He asked me to remit.  Mrs Pettersen took a neutral stance as to that.

9.    It  does  seem  to  me  that  the  tribunal's  decision  contained  an
inadequate analysis.  Very few material findings  of  fact  have  been  made
other than that the relationship is a genuine one. I am  of  the  view  that
whether the appeal is to be kept within the Upper Tribunal or whether it is
to be remitted, there will be a need for  further  evidence  and  for  quite
extensive fact-finding.

10.   In light of the above and bearing in mind  the  First-tier Tribunal's
status  as  an  expert  fact-finding  body,  I  have  concluded   that   the
appropriate course of action is remittal.  So, there  will  be  a  rehearing
before the First-tier Tribunal.  The rehearing will consider the claimant's
arguments under Article 8 of the ECHR.  He has not  offered  any  arguments
based  on  any  other  legal  provisions.   I  have  set  out,  below,  some
directions which will hopefully aid the rehearing process.

Directions

      A.    This case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete
           rehearing.   Nothing  shall  be  preserved  from  the   previous
           decision of the tribunal  which  was  sent  to  the  parties  on
           9 January 2017.


      B.    The rehearing shall take place at Manchester before a  judge  of
           the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge M Davies.


      C.    If either party wishes to rely upon any documentary evidence not
           previously   sent   to   the   First-tier Tribunal   or   the
           Upper Tribunal, such  material  must  be  sent  to  the  First-
           tier Tribunal at Manchester in sufficient time  for  it  to  be
           received at least 10 working days prior to the date which  will
           be fixed for the rehearing.  Copies of any  such  material  must
           simultaneously be sent to the sending party's opponent.


      D.    These directions may be replaced, varied or supplemented at  any
           time by any salaried judge of the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
      law and is set aside.

The case is  remitted  for  rehearing  before  the  First-tier Tribunal  in
accordance with the directions set out above.

I make no anonymity direction.  None was sought before me.


Signed:     Date: 6 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Date: 6 December 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


