
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/03746/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th December 2018                |       On 14th January 2019             |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                       mr Olanrewaju Muhammed Afolabi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaeku, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 4th September 1983.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history having arrived in the UK
    on 12th October 2010 with entry clearance  as  a  student  valid  until
    January 2012.  The Appellant's entry clearance was extended until March
    2014 as a Tier 1  (Post-Study)  Student.   The  day  before  his  leave
    expired the Appellant made an  in  country  application  for  leave  to
    remain under the ten year family/private life route as a partner.  That
    application was granted until 2nd November 2016.  On 1st November  2016
    the Appellant made a further application for leave to  remain  on  that
    basis which was refused.

 2. The reasons for refusal were set out in the  Notice  of  Refusal  dated
    14th February 2017.  The detailed reasons for refusal are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 8 to 12 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 3. I consequently accept that this is an Appellant  who  has  not  at  any
    stage overstayed his application.  All applications he  has  made  have
    been made in time.

 4. The Appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    in the Notice of Refusal and that appeal came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Cameron sitting at Taylor House on 16th April 2018.  In a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated  on  17th  May  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed.

 5. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  30th
    May 2018.  That application led to permission being refused  to  appeal
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J  M  Hollingworth  on  1st  July  2018.
    Renewed grounds were submitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  on  25th
    October 2018 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M Sutherland Williams  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Williams noted that the assertion made  on
    behalf of the Appellant was that in the absence of a full transcript of
    the Appellant's interview the principles set out in Miah (interviewer's
    comments; disclosure; fairness) [2014] UKUT  00515  were  not  complied
    with.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears  by  his  instructing
    solicitor Mr Nwaeku.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Tufan.

Submission/Discussion

 7.  Mr  Nwaeku's  submission  stands  on  the  basis  that  the  interview
    transcript of the Appellant's interview  as  to  the  validity  of  his
    marriage dated 13th January 2017 was not before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and that the judge reached  the  decision  and  made  conclusions
    thereon without having had the benefit of such information.   Mr  Tufan
    indicates that copies of the  interview  were  made  available  to  the
    Appellant so he knew what questions were being posed  to  him,  but  Mr
    Nwaeku submits that it  is  clear  from  paragraph  4  of  the  judge's
    decision as to what he had before him and  that  whilst  there  were  a
    substantial number of documents they did not include the interview.  He
    points out that the onus falls on the Secretary of  State,  bearing  in
    mind that it is the Secretary of State's contention that  the  marriage
    is not valid, and as the evidence was not there it  was  inappropriate,
    and indeed a material error of law, for the judge to make a finding  on
    what was right and wrong without having had that evidence.

 8. Mr Tufan comments that the  judge  has  made  some  positive  findings,
    although he acknowledged that it is, to a certain extent, unclear as to
    how, if the interview record was not before the judge, he was  able  to
    do  so.   He  cannot  comment  further  save  than  to  say  that   his
    understanding is that the case was a float case and that the matter had
    been conducted by previous solicitors and that the interview record was
    not, at that time, part of the Respondent's bundle.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. The issue in  this  matter  is  whether  or  not  there  is  procedural
    unfairness to the Appellant in the making of the findings by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge based on  a  document  that  was  not  before  him.
    Further,  it  is  the  strong  contention  of  the  Appellant's   legal
    representative that had the interview record been available  then  that
    would show clearly that there had been a valid and subsisting marriage.
     I cannot comment about that, that is a  matter  possibly  for  further
    evidence.

12. I accept that this was a float case and I accept what Mr  Tufan  states
    that the interview record was not  part  of  the  Respondent's  bundle.
    There are references to  the  interview  within  the  decision,  but  I
    acknowledge  that  it  goes  to  the  material  finding  of  fact   and
    credibility  and  that  that  is  critical  to  this  case.   In   such
    circumstances I accept that there would be procedural unfairness of the
    judge proceeding to hear  this  matter  without  having  the  interview
    record in his  possession.   In  such  circumstances  the  decision  is
    unsafe.  Of course, had the judge had the record  and  there  had  been
    proof of it, then my finding may well have been different, but that  is
    not a matter that is before me, nor is it an issue  that  is  submitted
    upon.

13. Consequently, I set aside the decision and  remit  the  matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  For the record I  record  that  the
    Secretary of State's representative, Mr Tufan, has passed  to  both  Mr
    Nwaeku and myself further  copies  of  the  interview  record  of  13th
    January 2017 and it is clear that that document  is  now  both  in  the
    possession of the Appellant's legal representatives (in that it is  not
    disputed that that may well have previously been the case), but that it
    is now certainly in the remit of the Tribunal and is on the court file.

Decision and Directions

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law in that it would have been procedurally unfair  for  the  judge  to
    have made his findings of fact and credibility without having reference
    to the interview record of 13th January 2017.  In such circumstances  I
    set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  make  the
    following directions:-

      1) On finding that there is a material error of law in the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge for reasons  set  out  above,  I  set
         aside that decision and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal sitting at Taylor House on the  first  available  date  21
         days hence with an ELH of two hours.

      2) That none of the findings of fact are to stand.

      3) That the appeal is to be heard before any judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Cameron.

      4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         such further objective evidence  and/or  subjective  evidence  upon
         which they seek to rely at least seven days prior to  the  restored
         hearing.

      5) That it is not envisaged that the Appellant  seeks  an  interpreter
         but in the event that he does at the restored hearing, then it is a
         requirement that his instructing solicitors do notify the  Tribunal
         within seven days of receipt of this order.

      6) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 04 January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date: 04 January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

