
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03195/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2020                 |                                     |
|Further submissions 25 May 2021      |On 29 June 2021                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     I G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hone instructed by LS Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 10
    December 2018 to refuse his human rights  claim.   His  appeal  against
    that decision was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  for  the  reasons
    given in a decision promulgated on 13 September 2019.  For the  reasons
    given in my decision of 2 March 2020, that decision was set aside  with
    a direction that it should be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  A copy of
    my decision is attached to this decision.

    Preliminary matters

 2. For reasons which are unclear, my decision my  decision  following  the
    hearing on 23 September 2020 was not promulgated. This only came to  my
    notice on 18 May  2021.  Mindful  of  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances may well  have  changed  in  the  intervening  period,  I
    considered it necessary in the interests of justice, to permit  him  to
    adduce further evidence as to his health and other circumstances and  I
    issued  directions  to  that  effect,  and  that  unless  either  party
    requested it, it would not be necessary for a further hearing.

 3. The appellant has provided additional evidence in the form  of  further
    witness statements and medical evidence but has not requested a further
    hearing. The respondent has not served any evidence  in  response,  nor
    has she served any further submissions although permitted to do so.

 4. Given that much  of  the  reasoning  in  this  decision  turns  on  the
    appellant's health, I am satisfied that  it  is  in  the  interests  of
    justice to anonymise him.

    Introduction & Background

 5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in October 2002 with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  Although his leave expired on
    1 March  2003  he  remained  in  this  country  after  an  unsuccessful
    application to extend his leave which was refused on 14 July 2003.  The
    appellant met his partner, ER, in 2003.  She was at the time  estranged
    from  her  husband  and  eventually  she  divorced  him,  marrying  the
    appellant on 6 February 2016.

 6. ER is a British citizen and has been since  2015.   She  is  originally
    from Georgia but, as a consequence of  acquiring  British  citizenship,
    had to renounce her citizenship of Georgia.  The part of  Georgia  from
    which she comes is now under occupation.

 7. The appellant is financially entirely dependent  on  his  wife  and  he
    looks after the home while she works as  a  full-time  carer  providing
    comprehensive services to one particular lady  who  requires  full-time
    attention, her earnings exceeding �28,000 per annum.

 8. Both the appellant and  his  partner  have  health  difficulties.   The
    appellant has recently had bladder cancer which required  an  operation
    to remove tumours which although non-muscle invasive  were  of  a  high
    grade.  Further cystoscopies followed and he  has  since  received  BCG
    therapy every three months or so.

 9. ER has had surgery for the removal of a fibroid  and  it  appears  will
    need further operations before she is able to  undergo  IVF  treatment.
    This operation has been postponed due to the current COVID pandemic.

10. The appellant's case is that he would not be able to get the  necessary
    BCG treatment in Georgia except by paying money; and, that the vials of
    BCG would need to be obtained from outside Georgia.

11. The appellant's case is that he fulfils the requirements  of  EX.1.  on
    the basis that there would be insurmountable obstacles to him  and  his
    wife,  bearing  in  mind  their  circumstances  and  health  needs,  in
    maintaining their family life in Georgia.  It is also his case that  he
    fulfils the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and, that it  would
    be disproportionate to expect him to  return  to  Georgia  to  make  an
    application to return to the  United  Kingdom.   It  is  in  particular
    argued that the applicant's wife would not be able to  obtain  the  IVF
    treatment in Georgia and that he himself would not be able to  get  the
    correct treatment which is required were he to return to  Georgia  even
    for a short period.  It is also argued that there would be little point
    served  in  requiring  him  to  return  to  Georgia  given   that   the
    requirements of Appendix FM are met.

12. The  respondent's  case  is  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM, EX.1., or paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  on  the
    basis that any obstacles could be overcome; that there is  insufficient
    evidence to show that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to
    reintegration for the appellant given that he  had  lived  the  greater
    part of his life in Georgia; and, that removal would be  proportionate,
    bearing in mind his long period of overstaying and on the basis of  the
    factors set out in section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

The Hearing on 23 September 2020

13. I had the following before me:

      1) Respondent's bundle.

      2) Appellant's bundle.

      3) Appellant's supplementary bundle.

      4) Appellant's second supplementary bundle.

      5) Rule 24 reply.

      6) Home Office's "Family policy: Family life (as a partner or parent),
         family life in exceptional circumstances.

      7) Hayat (nature of Chikwamba principle) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 00444.

      8) Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 129.

      9) Skeleton argument from Mr Hone.

14. In addition to the above material  which  contains  witness  statements
    from the appellant and his wife, I heard oral  evidence  from  both  of
    them.

15. The appellant adopted his witness statements adding that he had surgery
    for bladder cancer last year and will require  BCG  treatment  for  his
    bladder cancer every three to six months for the next three years.

16. In cross-examination the appellant  said  that  he  had  had  a  recent
    meeting with his doctor who said he would need to  return  for  further
    treatment in three weeks.  He did not have a letter  to  confirm  this.
    He said that there had been delays due to COVID and that he is at  high
    risk but that the treatment had been urgent.  It was put to him that if
    that was so he would have written confirmation of that.  He said he was
    still waiting for a letter sent to him following the consultation  last
    week.

17. The appellant said he could not go back to Georgia and  apply  to  come
    back, that he would be risking his life, and that BCG treatment was not
    available in Georgia.  Asked if he had spoken to a  doctor  in  Georgia
    about that, he said that he had obtained a letter from somebody who had
    been in a similar position to him in Georgia who had had  difficulty  n
    obtaining the BCG treatment, it being  quite  expensive,  approximately
    US$300 to US$400 and that he  had  had  to  obtain  that  from  outside
    Georgia and bring it in with him.

18. The appellant said that he thought it would be now more difficult to go
    back to Georgia and apply to return due to COVID-19  and  at  the  same
    time he would be at risk of not getting treatment which would  put  his
    life at risk.  He said that as he had had cancer he was at greater risk
    of COVID-19 but it was put to him that if that was  so  he  would  have
    received a letter from his doctor.

19.  In  re-examination  the  appellant  said  he  had  not  received   any
    chemotherapy.

20. I then heard evidence from the appellant's wife who adopted her witness
    statement adding that her operation had been postponed owing to  COVID,
    that it was important for her to get the  operation  as  otherwise  she
    would not be able to undergo IVF and, at 43, it was urgent.

21. Asked about her husband's treatment she said that he still  needed  BCG
    treatment and would require a further cystoscopy.

22. In cross-examination the appellant's wife said that she would still  be
    able to enter Georgia despite no longer being a citizen  but  that  she
    would not be able to earn anything like what she earns  now  even  were
    she able to get a job.  She said that not being a  citizen  might  mean
    that there were certain things she had to pay for and  that  she  might
    have difficulty in applying for certain jobs.  She said it would not be
    possible for her to support her husband were he to go to Georgia as she
    is self-employed and could not take a holiday even to visit him.

23. Mr Lindsay relied on the refusal letter submitting that  the  appellant
    and his wife could return to Georgia together or that he  could  return
    to make an application for entry clearance.  He submitted further  that
    it had not been shown that the appellant could not access the  relevant
    medical treatment given the lack of  detail  and  the  absence  of  any
    detail of expenses and resources available to him and his partner; and,
    the fact that they  would  have  less  money  in  Georgia  was  not  an
    insurmountable obstacle. It  should  be  noted  that  family  life  had
    developed  in  this  case  when  the  appellant's  presence  here   was
    precarious and unlawful.

24. Mr Lindsay submitted also that there was a lack of  evidence  regarding
    the medical condition and ongoing treatment.

25. Turning to Chikwamba, Mr Lindsay relied on Younas but that it  was  not
    necessarily "very likely" that the application would succeed, not least
    as the applicant had a poor immigration history  having  remained  here
    unlawfully for some seventeen to eighteen years. He submitted  that  as
    was established in Younas at point 2 this should be looked  at  in  the
    real world and the likely situation was that  the  appellant  would  be
    separated from his wife for only a matter of a few months,  a  scenario
    envisaged within the policy document at page 53.

26. Mr Hone relied on his skeleton argument  submitting  that  neither  the
    appellant nor his wife would be  able  to  return  and  obtain  medical
    treatment.  He submitted further  that  in  current  circumstances  the
    delay may well be indefinite and  thus  amounts  to  an  insurmountable
    obstacle  given  both  the  treatment  necessary  and  difficulties  in
    obtaining entry clearance  to  return  in  current  circumstances.   He
    submitted further that in any event the appellant's wife  was  entitled
    to treatment in the United Kingdom as a citizen.

27. Mr Hone submitted it would be not be possible for the appellant's  wife
    to go to Georgia.  He submitted that viewed as a whole removal would in
    this case be disproportionate notwithstanding  Section  117B  and  that
    were the appellant's wife to go to Georgia she would  not  be  able  to
    sponsor him to come back that she would lose  her  job  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

28. Mr Hone submitted that given current circumstances owing to  the  COVID
    pandemic, a different view ought to be  taken  to  the  possibility  of
    return.

The Law

29. Section 117B of the 2002 Act provides, so far as is relevant:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         ...


30. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules provides, so far as is
    relevant:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM;
         and

         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         ...

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

31. Paragraphs EX.1(b) and EX.2 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    provide, so far as is relevant:

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (a)

         ...

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled in the
         UK, or in the UK with refugee leave, or humanitarian protection, in
         the UK with limited leave under Appendix EU in accordance with
         paragraph GEN.1.3.(d), or in the UK with limited leave as a worker
         or business person under Appendix ECAA Extension of Stay in
         accordance with paragraph GEN.1.3.(e), and there are insurmountable
         obstacles to family life with that partner continuing outside the
         UK.

         EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
         life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
         partner.

32. The documentary evidence was, and is,  lacking  financial  evidence  to
    cover the current  resources  of  the  appellant  and  his  wife.   For
    example, I do not have copies of recent bank statements or  a  schedule
    of income and expenditure indicating to what extent there is or is  not
    any spare income or savings that could be used to support the appellant
    in Georgia.  That was the case at the hearing and now.

33. There is, however, significantly more medical evidence. I am  satisfied
    from that,  and  from  the  additional  witness  statements,  that  the
    appellant continues to receive cancer  treatment  every  three  months.
    That is due to a diagnosis of bladder  cancer,  (high-grade  pT1a  Tcc-
    Transitional cell carcinoma)  and  that  there  is  a  high  chance  of
    recurrence. I also accept that since the last hearing the appellant has
    had to undergo a cystoscopy in which another growth was discovered  and
    removed, and that he is to undergo another cystoscopy in June.  That is
    in addition to the regular BCG immunotherapy treatment. All of this  is
    confirmed by letters and other documents from Kingston Hospital.

34. I have no reason to doubt that the appellant believes  he  is  at  high
    risk or that,  owing  to  the  treatment  he  receives,  he  cannot  be
    vaccinated against COVID. He is understandably very anxious and is,  as
    indeed is his wife, anxious as a result and I have no reason  to  doubt
    in the light of the evidence of treatment so  far  that  the  appellant
    will need to undergo BCG treatment on a regular  basis  every  3  to  6
    months. What I do not have is any assessment of the  risks  that  would
    flow from not getting treatment but I note that the tumour removed  was
    "high grade" and I am satisfied by the evidence that on the balance  of
    probabilities that the BCG treatment is necessary  to  prevent  further
    cancer. I take note  of  the  fact  that  his  condition  was  seen  as
    sufficiently serious to require continuing treatment despite COVID.

35. I take judicial note of the fact that those undergoing chemotherapy and
    other therapies for cancer are deemed by the NHS to be at high risk for
    COVID and that this would impact on the appellant returning to Georgia.



36. There is limited information about the availability  of  BCG  treatment
    for bladder cancer in Georgia, the only evidence  being  from  somebody
    who had undergone that treatment indicating it was expensive  ($300  to
    $400 per vial), but there is no  letter  from  any  doctor  in  Georgia
    setting out when and where the treatment  could  be  administered,  the
    cost of a course of treatment or whether the drugs had to  be  imported
    and if there were any difficulties in doing so at present.  It may well
    be that owing to the COVID 19 pandemic that it is more difficult to get
    treatment in Georgia, but there is simply no evidence about this.  That
    said, there is  no  evidence  either  from  the  respondent  that  this
    treatment is available, and I note that  the  appellant  has  contacted
    hospitals in Georgia to the effect that the treatment is not available,
    and that it is now no longer possible to import medical supplies.

37. There are no documents before me relating to any travel restrictions in
    and out of Georgia that are in place. I do not know  what  restrictions
    there would be on the appellant on return, or if his  wife  as  a  non-
    citizen would be permitted to enter. There may be some,  there  may  be
    none. Equally, I have no evidence about current wait  times  to  obtain
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom  or  even  whether  the  relevant
    office is open.

38. That said, I have no reason to doubt the appellant's  account  that  he
    has no resources on which to rely in Georgia and that his  parents  are
    self-isolating meaning that he could not  stay  with  them.   They  are
    elderly and his health has been compromised and I have  no  doubt  that
    his continued relatively good health is dependent on regular diagnostic
    checks undertaken by his treating physicians and regular immunotherapy.



39. I find that, given his health, the appellant would have to self-isolate
    and would not be able to work. I accept he could not be accommodated by
    his family, and that he would have to pay for that, and for  everything
    else through his wife's resources. But it would not be  integration  if
    he were to live isolated, and without family;  and,  his  health  would
    deteriorate. In the circumstances, and  particular  factual  matrix  of
    this case, I am satisfied that he meets the requirements  of  paragraph
    276 ADE(1)(vi).

40. I consider that, given that the appellant's wife is  self-employed  and
    would in effect have to give up her  job  as  well  as  giving  up  the
    opportunity of getting treatment in the United Kingdom for  an  unknown
    period, that it would  be  unreasonable  in  current  circumstances  to
    require her to go to Georgia.  For these reasons, and given the factors
    identified above, I find that  the  appellant's  health  and  need  for
    treatment he cannot realistically obtain in the  United  Kingdom,  that
    there would be insurmountable obstacles to family life being  conducted
    in Georgia and I am  satisfied that the requirements of paragraphs EX.1
    and EX.2. are met.

41. For these reasons, I conclude that the appellant meets the requirements
    of  the  Immigration  Rules.  Following  the  principles  set  out   in
    TZ(Pakistan) and PG (India) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, I am  satisfied  that
    the decision to refuse  leave  is  a  disproportionate  breach  of  the
    appellant's article 8 rights and I allow the appeal on that basis.



Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) I re-make the appeal by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 24 June 2021

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03195/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2020                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     I G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hone of Counsel instructed by LS Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Dineen promulgated on 13  September  2019  allowing  the
    appeal of I G against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
    his human rights claim.  That in turn was a claim made on the basis  of
    his family and private life with his partner who is a  British  citizen
    although she was originally from Georgia.

 2. The respondent's case is that the difficulties  incurred  by  requiring
    him or his wife to go and live in Georgia would meet  the  requirements
    of  paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  in  that  there  would  be  very
    significant difficulties which they either singularly or together would
    face in continuing  their  family  life  together  outside  the  United
    Kingdom in Georgia which could not be overcome  or  would  entail  very
    serious hardship for him and his partner this  being  primarily  first,
    that she works here and would lose that employment, second,  that  they
    are undergoing IVF, third, that the respondent's wife  had  had  health
    difficulties and that taken together this would meet the requirement in
    EX.2.  Further it is argued that he would meet the  high  threshold  of
    very significant obstacles to the  integration  set  out  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  and  in  the  alternative  that  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances such that requiring him to leave the United Kingdom would
    be disproportionate taking into account Section 117B of the  2002  Act.
    Given that, primarily he meets all the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules save for the fact he does not have leave to remain.

 3. The judge heard evidence  from  the  respondent  and  his  partner  and
    concluded  at  paragraph  [34]  that  in  all  the  circumstances   the
    requirements of EX.2 and consequently EX.1(b) of Appendix FM were  met.
    Second,  that  he  did  not  fulfil  the  requirements   of   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and third, were it necessary that having  had  regard  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act in particular strong  public  interest  in
    the maintenance of effective immigration control, that the interference
    of family life occasioned by the decision would not be proportionate to
    the legitimate aims and for these reasons allowed the appeal.

 4. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the decision involved the making of a material misdirection of law with
    regard to the insurmountable obstacles in that the circumstances  found
    by the judge could not amount to insurmountable obstacles in that  they
    were not ones which could not be overcome or would entail very  serious
    hardship.  She submitted that none  of  the  factors  would  amount  to
    severe hardship that could not be overcome second, it  is  argued  that
    the judge failed to explicitly consider  the  requirements  of  Section
    117B  of  the  2002  Act  in   finding   that   a   return   would   be
    disproportionate.

 5. I accept that there are a number of findings of fact made by the  judge
    with regard  to  IVF  treatment  and  regarding  the  position  of  the
    respondent's partner.  There is a recitation of the health difficulties
    also but I conclude that what there is not in this case is  any  proper
    focusing on why the specific circumstances which would occur here would
    amount to insurmountable obstacles or  the  test  or  very  significant
    difficulties. That is a high  threshold  and  there  is  merit  in  the
    submission that the sole  reason  that  appears  to  have  engaged  the
    judge's consideration is at  [19]  which  is  to  do  with  the  health
    difficulties.  Whilst it is clear that he does note that she would  not
    be able to work, there is no consideration  why  either  singularly  or
    cumulatively these would meet the high threshold  established  by  EX.1
    and EX2.  Further it is difficult to see how in assessing why  EX.1  is
    met there has been any attempt to engage whether the  respondent  could
    go back to Georgia and apply to return.  Accordingly,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge's findings  with  respect  to  EX.1  and  EX.2  are  not
    sustainable in that they are not  sufficiently  reasoned.   I  consider
    also that the judge's analysis  of  Article  8  outside  the  Rules  is
    unsustainable.

 6. Whilst Mr Hone has sought to persuade me that this is a case  in  which
    the case law following on from Chikwamba would be applicable in that in
    this case there would be no real or appropriate  reason  for  requiring
    the appellant to go back to Georgia to make an  application  to  return
    because all the requirements of the Immigration Rules were met, I  bear
    in mind two points.  First, there has  been  a  substantial  period  of
    remaining in the United Kingdom without leave  there  are  no  findings
    about that and equally as was clearly pointed out  in  her  submissions
    there are no findings with regard  to  Section  117B  as  a  whole,  in
    particular the nature of the family life engaged in this case which was
    precarious.  That is not to say that an appeal on this basis could  not
    succeed but there is simply insufficient findings  made  by  the  judge
    which could permit a decision that removal is  disproportionate  to  be
    sustained and accordingly for these reasons I set the decision aside.

 7. The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal, it will be made on a
    date to be fixed because there will be as I  understand  it  additional
    evidence to be put forward.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 2 March 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
