
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03395/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 September 2019                  |On 31 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Nt
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, instructed by Peter G Farrell
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I make an order for the anonymity of the parties in this appeal by  the
    Secretary of State pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 as children are  involved.   Any  breach  of  this
    order may lead to contempt proceedings.

 2. In my earlier decision dated 31 May 2019 (a copy of which is annexed) I
    set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Handley  who  had
    allowed the appeal by NT against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision
    dated 25 January 2018 refusing her human rights claim  which  had  been
    made in anticipation of a deportation order made  on  24  January  2018
    pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act  2007.   This  was  the
    consequence of her conviction on 30 January 2017 in Bristol Crown Court
    of conspiring to produce a Class B controlled drug cannabis, for  which
    she was sentenced to four years' imprisonment.

 3. NT is a national of Vietnam where  she  was  born  in  1978.   She  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  in  January
    2014 based on her marriage to a British national NM in  November  2008.
    She had arrived as a fianc�e under the Immigration Rules in August 2008
    with a daughter (MT) from a previous relationship in Vietnam,  who  was
    born in June 1999.  The couple have a child CM  who  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom in January 2009.  NT was  released  from  prison  on  24
    March 2008 on licence and after, a period of immigration detention, was
    released on bail.  She lives with  her  family  in  Glasgow  where  her
    husband is employed by a bank.  At the time of the offence  the  family
    were living in Bristol, where the family had moved to from Scotland  in
    the light of NM's work commitments.

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  materially  erred  based  on  a
    misunderstanding  of  the  length   of   sentence   imposed   and   the
    misapplication of the law when assessing the claim on Article 8 grounds
    in his decision dated 5 December 2018, in particular  section  117C  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to which he  had  made
    no reference in his reasons  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.

The Law

 5. As I reminded the parties at the outset of the hearing,  the  Court  of
    Appeal have recently  given  guidance  on  the  approach  to  be  taken
    following the decision of the Supreme Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2018] UKSC 53 in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213  (where  the
    sentence was less than four years) and in SSHD v  PF  (Nigeria)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 1139 where, as in this appeal, the sentence was for more  than
    four years.  As explained by Hickinbottom LJ  at  [23]  in  the  latter
    decision, the starting point for consideration of an Article 8 claim is
    section 32 of the 2007 Act which:

         "Introduced the statutory presumption that the  deportation  of  an
         offender  who  has  been  sentenced  to  at  least  twelve  months'
         imprisonment for any crime is conducive to the public good for  the
         purposes of section 3(5)(a) of  the  1971  Act.   That  presumption
         could only be rebutted and automatic deportation constrained, where
         one of the statutory exceptions applies including where deportation
         would be a breach of human rights."

 6. After a survey of the relevant Immigration Rules, Hickinbottom  LJ  set
    out the provisions at Part 5A of the 2002 Act as follows:


         "30. In considering the public interest question,  section  117A(2)
             requires  the  court  or  tribunal  to  have  regard  to   the
             considerations set out in section 117B; and,  importantly  for
             this appeal, in cases concerning the deportation of a  foreign
             criminal, also to those set out in section 117C, namely:

             "(1) The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
                  interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has not  been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of  four  years  or
                  more, the public interest requires C's deportation  unless
                  Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                      for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                      Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                      integration into the country to which C  is  proposed
                      to be deported.

             (5)  Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and  subsisting
                  relationship with a qualifying partner, or a  genuine  and
                  subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child,
                  and the effect of C's deportation on the partner or  child
                  would be unduly harsh.

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
                  to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years,  the
                  public interest requires deportation unless there are very
                  compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
                  in Exceptions 1 and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
                  taken  into  account  where  a  court   or   tribunal   is
                  considering a decision to deport a foreign  criminal  only
                  to the extent that the reason for  the  decision  was  the
                  offence or  offences  for  which  the  criminal  has  been
                  convicted."

 7. Hickinbottom LJ continued with an explanation  of  the  impact  of  the
    length of sentence at [31] as follows:

         "31. Given that section 117C(2) provides that  there  is  a  direct
             correlation between the seriousness of offences and the public
             interest in the deportation of a criminal  who  commits  them,
             and there is a general correlation between the seriousness  of
             offence and the sentence imposed upon those who  commit  them,
             it is unsurprising that the statutory provisions  continue  to
             provide for an approach to article 8 claims which is dependent
             upon the length of sentence that has  been  imposed  upon  the
             potential deportee, with criteria applying to  those  who  are
             sentenced to at least four years' imprisonment different  from
             those applying to  foreign  offenders  who  are  sentenced  to
             less."

 8. As to offenders who were sentenced for at least four years, he  further
    explained at [33]:

         "33. Turning to section 117C(6), for offenders who are sentenced to
             at least four years, or who fall outside the  exceptions,  the
             new statutory provisions reflect MF (Nigeria), by adopting the
             wording  "very  compelling  circumstances"  instead   of   the
             previous "exceptional circumstances".  That is clearly a  more
             stringent  test  than  the  "unduly  harsh"  test  of  section
             117C(5).  At [22] in KO, Lord  Carnwath  referred  to  section
             117C(6)  requiring,  "in  addition"  to  the  section  117C(5)
             criteria, "very compelling  circumstances".  In  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department v JG (Jamaica) [2019]  EWCA  Civ
             982  at  [16],  having  reviewed  the  relevant   authorities,
             Underhill LJ referred to the need to show that the  effect  on
             the relevant child or partner would be  "extra  unduly  harsh"
             (emphasis in the original).  However, as Mr Dunlop  submitted,
             that  formulation  risks  masking  a  difference  in  approach
             required by section 117C(5) and (6)  respectively:  whilst  KO
             held that the  former  requires  an  exclusive  focus  on  the
             effects of deportation  on  the  relevant  child  or  partner,
             section 117C(6) requires those effects to be balanced  against
             the section  117C(1)  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
             nationals. Under section 117C(6), the public interest is  back
             in play."

 9. But explained further at [34]:


         "34. That does not mean that consideration of "undue harshness" may
             not be helpful even where section 117C(6) applies. As  to  the
             approach to section 117C(6), in NA (Pakistan) at [37], Jackson
             LJ said this:

                  "... [I]t will often be sensible first to see whether  his
                  case involves  circumstances  of  the  kind  described  in
                  Exceptions 1 and 2,  both  because  the  circumstances  so
                  described set out particularly significant factors bearing
                  upon respect for private life (Exception  1)  and  respect
                  for family life (Exception 2) and because that may provide
                  a helpful basis on which an assessment can be made whether
                  there are 'very compelling circumstances, over  and  above
                  those described in Exceptions 1  and  2'  as  is  required
                  under section 117C(6).  It will then be necessary to  look
                  to see whether any  of  the  factors  falling  within  the
                  Exceptions  1  and  2  are  of  such  force,  whether   by
                  themselves or taken in conjunction with any other relevant
                  factors not covered  by  the  circumstances  described  in
                  Exceptions 1 and 2, as to  satisfy  the  test  in  section
                  117C(6)."

10. Relevant to the issues in this appeal, there is no material  difference
    between the provisions in the Immigration Rules and  those  in  section
    117C(6). These were explained by Hickinbottom LJ at [36]:

         "36. The statutory provisions in sections 117A-117D are, unlike the
             Immigration Rules (see Ali at  [17]),  law  rather  than  mere
             policy.   However,  both  section  117C   and   the   relevant
             Immigration Rules set out  policy,  in  the  sense  that  they
             provide a general assessment of the  proportionality  exercise
             that has to be performed under article 8(2) where there  is  a
             public  interest  in  deporting   a   foreign   criminal   but
             countervailing article 8 factors.  The force of the assessment
             in section 117C is, of course, the greater because it directly
             reflects the will of  Parliament.   The  statutory  provisions
             thus  provide  a  "particularly  strong  statement  of  public
             policy" (NA (Pakistan) at  [22]),  such  that  "great  weight"
             should generally be given to it and cases in which that public
             interest will be outweighed, other than those specified in the
             statutory provisions and Rules themselves, "are likely to be a
             very small minority (particular in non-settled cases)" (Ali at
             [38]), i.e. will be rare (NA (Pakistan) at [33])."

11. Hickinbottom LJ continued between [37] and [39] to give guidance on the
    approach that should be taken:


         "37.  But  the  required,  heavily  structured  analysis  does  not
             eradicate all judgment on the part of the decision-maker  and,
             in its turn, the court or tribunal on any  challenge  to  that
             decision-maker's decision.  It is self-evident  that  relative
             human rights (such as the right  to  respect  for  family  and
             private  life  under  article  8)  can  only   ultimately   be
             considered  on  the  facts  of  the  particular   case.    The
             structured approach towards the article  8(2)  proportionality
             balancing  exercise  required  by  the  2002   Act   and   the
             Immigration Rules does not in itself determine the outcome  of
             the assessment required to be made in an individual case.

         38.  Therefore, whether an  exception  in  paragraph  399  or  399A
             applies is dependent upon questions that require case-specific
             evaluation, such as whether in all  of  the  circumstances  it
             would not be reasonable  for  a  child  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom or whether in  all  of  the  circumstances  there  are
             insurmountable obstacles to family  life  outside  the  United
             Kingdom.

         39.  More importantly for the purposes of  this  appeal,  where  an
             offender  has  been  sentenced  to  at   least   four   years'
             imprisonment, or otherwise falls outside the paragraph 399 and
             399A exceptions, by section 117C(6) and paragraph 398  of  the
             Rules, the decision-maker, court or  tribunal  entrusted  with
             the task must still consider and make an assessment of whether
             there are  "very  compelling  circumstances"  that  justify  a
             departure from the general rule that such offenders should  be
             deported in the public interest.  That requires the  decision-
             maker to take into account, not only that  general  assessment
             (and give it the weight appropriate to such an assessment made
             by Parliament), but also the facts and  circumstances  of  the
             particular case which are not - indeed, cannot - be taken into
             account in any general assessment."

12. Although Mr Winter argued (with respect to the court) that the approach
    by the Court of Appeal was too "generalist", it is  clear  to  me  that
    paragraph  [37]  of  the  judgment  emphasises  that  a  case  specific
    evaluation  is  also  needed  as  well  as   a   structured   approach.
    Furthermore, Hickinbottom LJ highlighted in [39] cited above  not  only
    the need for a  general  assessment  (being  Mr  Winter's  "generalist"
    point) but also an assessment of the facts  and  circumstances  of  the
    particular case "which are not - indeed, cannot - be taken into account
    in any general assessment".

13. In summary, Mr Clarke contended that NT did not come with  Exception  1
    in section 117C on the basis that her criminal  behaviour  demonstrated
    that she had not become  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the
    United Kingdom and furthermore he contended that  there  would  not  be
    very significant obstacles to her reintegration into Vietnam.  He  also
    argued that Exception 2 was not met and that the effect of  deportation
    on MT and CM would not be unduly harsh.

14. Those submissions were based on the approach in NA (Pakistan) where the
    Court of Appeal considered it sensible to conduct an analysis as if  an
    appellant were a 'medium offender'  before  considering  whether  there
    were 'very compelling circumstances' over and above those described  in
    the Exceptions.

15. In KO (Nigeria) Lord Carnwath explained at [23] as to the assessment of
    "unduly harsh":


         "32. However, in KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court  took  a  different
             view as to the interpretation in this context  of  the  phrase
             "unduly harsh".  At paragraph 22, Lord Carnwath (with whom the
             other Justices agreed) said that on its face, Exception  2  in
             section 117C of the 2002 Act raises a factual issue seen  from
             the point of view of the partner or child. At paragraph 23  he
             went on to say:

                  "On the other hand the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
                  clearly intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of
                  "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account  of
                  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation   of   foreign
                  criminals.  Further the word "unduly" implies  an  element
                  of comparison.  It assumes that there is a "due" level  of
                  "harshness", that is a level which may  be  acceptable  or
                  justifiable in the  relevant  context.   "Unduly"  implies
                  something going beyond that level.  he relevant context is
                  that set by section 117C(1), that is the  public  interest
                  in the deportation of foreign criminals.  One  is  looking
                  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what   would
                  necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
                  deportation of a parent. What it does not  require  in  my
                  view (and subject to the discussion of the  cases  in  the
                  next  section)  is  a  balancing  of  relative  levels  of
                  severity of the parent's offence, other than  is  inherent
                  in  the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section  itself   by
                  reference to length of sentence.   Nor  (contrary  to  the
                  view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of
                  State for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 240,  paras  55
                  and 64) can it be equated with a requirement to show "very
                  compelling reasons".  That would be in effect to replicate
                  the  additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with
                  respect to sentences of four years or more"."

16. In PG (Jamaica), Holroyde LJ carried out an  analysis  of  the  way  in
    which parental separation can impact on children.  PG was the father of
    six children who had been born in the United Kingdom and  were  British
    citizens.  By his partner at the time of the appeal he had  three  sons
    aged between 3 and 15 as well as two sons by  his  former  wife  and  a
    daughter by another woman, with all three being aged between 10 and 13.
     He lived with his partner and their three sons and maintained  contact
    with the other children.  In his analysis of the impact of  deportation
    on the children affected, Holroyde LJ recognised the human realities of
    the situation and explained that he was in no doubt that  PG's  partner
    and the three children would "... suffer  great  distress  if  PG  were
    deported".  He was in no doubt that their lives would in  a  number  of
    ways be made more difficult but nevertheless accepted the submission on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that the effect would  not  go  beyond
    the degree of harshness.  Those were his conclusions on the  particular
    facts of that case.  I must make my own assessment but nevertheless the
    observations made are instructive on the scope of whether circumstances
    are  unduly  harsh  or  not  and  those  features  which  reflect   the
    commonplace nature of the impact of deportation.

17. Before leaving PG (Jamaica) it is helpful also to refer  to  the  short
    judgment of Hickinbottom LJ who observed at [46]:

         "46. When a parent is deported, one can only  have  great  sympathy
             for  the  entirely  innocent  children  involved.    Even   in
             circumstances in which they can remain in the  United  Kingdom
             with their other parent, they will inevitably  be  distressed.
             However, in section 117C(5) of the 2002  Act,  Parliament  has
             made clear its  will  that,  for  foreign  offenders  who  are
             sentenced to one to four years, only  where  the  consequences
             for the  children  are  "unduly  harsh"  will  deportation  be
             constrained. That is entirely consistent with article 8 of the
             ECHR.  It is important that decision-makers  and,  when  their
             decisions are challenged, tribunals  and  courts  honour  that
             expression of Parliamentary will.  In this case, in  agreement
             with Holroyde LJ, I consider the evidence  only  admitted  one
             conclusion: that, unfortunate as PG's deportation will be  for
             his children, for  none  of  them  will  it  result  in  undue
             harshness."

Submissions

18. I have already referred in part  to  the  submissions  of  the  parties
    above.  As to the Secretary of State's case, Mr Clarke  explained  that
    it remained unchanged from the refusal decision.  In rejecting the case
    that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  integration,   the
    Secretary of State contended that whilst it was accepted  NT  may  face
    some practical difficulties in re-starting her life and  that  she  may
    have genuine concerns about the uncertainties involved, even if it were
    accepted she had no ties to Vietnam, there was no evidence  to  suggest
    that she was estranged from life there, having regard to the network of
    family support available and in the alternative the ability  of  NT  to
    support herself.

19. The Secretary of State did not consider family life with MT as she  was
    now an adult. With regard to CM's best interests, no evidence had  been
    submitted to demonstrate that her developmental needs or care would  be
    hindered by NT's absence.  Specifically:

         "It is considered that she is primarily dependent upon her  father,
         for her accommodation, financial and subsistence needs, as well  as
         her day-to-day care and wellbeing.  In light of the fact  that  her
         father is settled in the UK, it  is  considered  unlikely  that  he
         would seek to relocate himself and the child  to  Vietnam.   It  is
         considered to be in the best interests of your daughter  to  remain
         in the care of her father.  Alternatively, it would be open to  you
         to decide to take [CM] with you on your return to Vietnam."

20. It was considered by the Secretary of State that with time CM would  be
    able to overcome any negative emotions as she would  be  supported  (in
    the United Kingdom) by her immediate and extended family members.

21. As to NT's partner  it  was  accepted  the  couple  have  a  subsisting
    relationship but it was not accepted it would be unduly harsh  for  him
    to live in Vietnam should  he  choose  to  do  so.   It  had  not  been
    demonstrated it would be unduly harsh for him to join  NT  in  Vietnam.
    In addition, it was accepted that  her  deportation  may  result  in  a
    permanent separation  but  contact  could  be  maintained  via  "modern
    methods of communication".

22. The Secretary of State observed that although NM had explained  in  his
    letter submitted prior to the decision that removal of NT would have  a
    devastating on the children's lives, whilst in prison, he had been able
    to support himself and the children.  This demonstrated that he did not
    rely on NT for his day-to-day welfare and well-being.

23. Mr Clarke supplemented these reasons with reference to  NT's  remaining
    connections with Vietnam where she had been for the first 30  years  of
    her life, the subsequent visits where she stayed with her  parents  and
    her resourcefulness in helping her elder daughter in  her  business  in
    the UK.  He remained of the view that the devastation identified by  NM
    would not amount to undue harshness in the  light  of  the  high  test.
    Furthermore, it had not been demonstrated that there was something of a
    compelling kind over and above the Exceptions.

24. Mr Winter was content for Mr Clarke to make his submissions  first  and
    it had not been his intention to call  NT  or  NM,  however  they  gave
    evidence in the light of aspects on which I considered a  clarification
    desirable.  CM  was  present  but  not  called,  Mr  Clarke  having  no
    questions for her.  I encouraged her to remain outside with her  father
    in the course of the hearing although her parents  had  not  considered
    her presence objectionable.  NT gave her evidence in English  after  Mr
    Winter and his instructing solicitor indicated they were satisfied  she
    would be able to competently do so.  I am satisfied from her  responses
    that she fully understood the questions put to her  and  she  gave  her
    evidence in an articulate way, indicating a complete  comprehension  of
    what she was being asked.

25. Mr Winter's skeleton argument focuses on Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  in
    which he identifies the positive aspects of section 117B that NT meets.
     It is contended that there would be very significant obstacles to  her
    integration in Vietnam and that the effect of her deportation would  be
    unduly harsh on her partner and child.  A number of factors are  relied
    on as very compelling circumstances  over  and  above  the  Exceptions,
    being in summary:-

    (i)  A child with a dual ethnic background.

    (ii) NT's guilty plea.

    (iii)    Assessment at a low risk of re-offending  and  her  move  away
         from where the offence took place as well as no longer  associating
         with the persons involved.

    (iv) The first OASys was written whilst NT was  in  detention  and  the
         second was not supported by evidence from Dr Stark based on various
         misunderstandings and misapprehension.

    (v)   NM's  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  family   having
         accommodation and CM being in education here.

    (vi) NT being a settled migrant and not having re-offended  nor  having
         had a bad immigration history.

    (vii)    Family ties would effectively be raptured as  in  reality  the
         family are not going to go to Vietnam where NM and CM have no  ties
         with their family in Scotland as well as it would  be  unreasonable
         for them to make that move together with the  psychological  issues
         they would face were they to do so.

26. Mr Winter supplemented this skeleton argument with the points including
    his observations on the reach of PG (Jamaica).  Having  regard  to  the
    range of evidence and the reports before the tribunal he considered the
    material combined got over the threshold.

The evidence

27. This comprises statements by NT  and  NM  which  they  adopted  at  the
    hearing and by MT and CM, neither of whom was called.  At this point  I
    observe that no submissions were made on behalf of MT who moved out  of
    the family unit following NT's conviction but has moved in again.

28. Key points from NT's statement are that:-

    (i)  She had run her own business in Vietnam which she had sold  before
         coming to the United Kingdom.  She had started another business  in
         Edinburgh which was unsuccessful.  By the time the family moved  to
         Bristol, NM was between jobs.  NT helped run a restaurant there but
         that too was unsuccessful and the family  moved  back  to  Scotland
         where the focus of NM's work and it was after MT had finished  High
         School.

    (ii) It was whilst in Bristol NT explains that she became  involved  in
         the criminal network.

29. Under cross-examination NT confirmed that she  had  discussed  with  NM
    whether he would go with her to Vietnam and  she  did  not  believe  he
    would do so.  Her child CM would  not  go  with  her  were  she  to  be
    deported although she did not know whether she would remain in the care
    of her father were that so.  NT has two sisters  and  two  brothers  in
    Vietnam.  Both sisters are married, one of whom lives in the south  and
    one in the middle of the country.  One of her brothers live some  seven
    miles from her parents' house which  is  also  in  the  middle  of  the
    country; as with his sisters, he has two children.  The second son  has
    mental health difficulties and stays with his parents who care for him.
     Her father was born in 1952 and her mother in 1950.   Her  father  had
    visited her in the United Kingdom.  He is in  poor  health  with  heart
    difficulties.

30. NM's written evidence comprises a handwritten statement dated  23  July
    2018 and a letter addressed to NT's  solicitors  dated  2  August  2017
    which is the letter referred to  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    decision letter.

31. NM's more recent statement explains that NT has been the main carer for
    the children and describes the difficulties that CM encountered  whilst
    her mother was in prison.  He considered that her physical  health  had
    also been impacted since he was not much of a cook and they survived on
    supermarket packaged food.  His parents who are nearing 70 are  retired
    teachers.  He felt it an imposition to ask them for help whilst NT  was
    in prison but they were okay for a "limited amount of time".

32.  In  cross-examination  NM  explained  that  he  worked  as  a   senior
    applications developer for a clearing bank.  He had obtained a business
    degree from university but  did  not  have  any  qualifications  as  an
    English teacher.  He has been with the bank on and off for twenty years
    with breaks  as  an  independent  consultant  to  two  other  financial
    institutions.  His parents live 100 miles away from Glasgow  in  south-
    west Scotland and he explained how he would take CM there for a week at
    a time, the arrangement being  that  he  and  his  parents  would  meet
    halfway for the handover.  He can work at home in his current post  for
    two days a week.  With the support of a childminder, he had  cared  for
    CM who had stayed with his parents during the school holidays.  He  did
    not know what to do were NT to be deported, referring to  his  daughter
    being settled here and his work.

33. CM's written statement refers to her happiness now that her mother  has
    returned.

34. The OASys report dated 9 April 2018 predicts the probability of  proven
    re-offending as  low  and  likewise  the  risk  in  the  community  for
    children, known adults and prisoners, but medium for the public.

35. As to responsibility for the offence the report explains:

         "[NT] has stated that she was recommended by the solicitor to plead
         guilty as she would otherwise receive a lengthy prison sentence and
         be returned to Vietnam.  [NT] is adamant that she  was  unaware  of
         any drug activity.  [NT] maintains that she used to  be  a  regular
         user of a Vietnamese coffee shop and was asked to  translate  phone
         calls.  She maintains that the  phone  calls  that  she  translated
         involved arranging for the persons  to  meet  at  specific  places,
         coffee shops or shopping centres.  There was no suggestion of  drug
         activity during the phone calls.  The police investigation  reports
         that [NT] was the leader of the group.   She  was  controlling  the
         movement of the trafficked males via telephone and had a network of
         associates whom she was instructing to co-ordinate  the  rental  of
         properties used for the cultivations.   The  police  operation  has
         also witnessed [NT's] involvement with the loading of bags  in  and
         out of vehicles and analysis of  her  telephone  calls  has  proved
         extremely significant."

36. The sentencing remarks by HHJ Picton explained in respect of NT:

         "[NT], you are 39 years of age, married  to  a  UK  citizen  and  a
         mother of young children.  You pleaded guilty on the day of  trial.
         It is suggested that you[r] plea  was  prompted  by  sight  of  the
         surveillance footage  that  shows  you  behaving  in  what,  in  my
         assessment, was a confident, professional and practiced way.   Your
         property at 9 Admiral Close was effectively the control centre  for
         the cannabis production this count concerns.  You set up a  tenancy
         at 1  Whittingham  Drive,  but  the  activities  at  Admiral  Close
         encompassed other properties as well.  You had a coordinating role,
         and in the context of this count have to be assessed  as  being  at
         the top of the range of relative criminal culpability.  You  accept
         that your position in the  Vietnamese  community  was  one  of  the
         factors that made you valuable to this conspiracy, along with  your
         capacity to speak  English,  something  you  co-accused,  Khai  Ta,
         lacked.  Your position certainly encompasses  all  of  the  factors
         identified under the heading 'significant role'.   Arguably,  there
         are some features that fall within 'leading role', but it seems  to
         me the better course is to asses those factors as having an  impact
         by moving the  sentence  up  the  category  range,  as  opposed  to
         regarding them as triggering a starting point  based  upon  leading
         role culpability.

         As to the timing of your plea of guilty, there was no  good  reason
         why you should have left it to the day  of  trial  to  accept  your
         guilt; you knew  all  along  what  you  had  done  and  the  police
         surveillance footage did not show you anything of  which  you  were
         unaware, all it did was demonstrate to you that your  prospects  of
         lying your way out of your predicament were nonexistent.   You  are
         not entitled to any more than 10 percent credit.

         In terms of identifying the sentence merited at the end of a trial,
         I have to balance the aggravating and mitigating  features  in  the
         context of a starting point of 4 years and a category  range  of  2
         years 6 months to 5 years.  As I  have  already  identified,  those
         features that might have justified a conclusion that you  performed
         a leading role have to impact where in  the  category  range,  your
         case falls prior to factoring in such mitigation for which you  can
         contend.  There is mitigation in your circumstances; in your letter
         to me you expressed the pain of being parted from your children and
         the loss of your marriage.  All  of  that  has  stemmed  from  your
         choice of getting involved in serious and organised crime, a choice
         you made for financial gain.  There was evidence that gain you did;
         hence for example, the trip to the diamond merchant in  London,  by
         which  route  you  were  no  doubt  spiriting  money  out  of   the
         jurisdiction.

         I do take account of  your  previous  good  character,  and  having
         balanced the aggravating and  mitigating  features,  I  identify  4
         years 6 months as being the sentence I would have imposed, but  for
         your plea of guilty.  Application of the 10 percent credit for plea
         that I have already identified produces, giving you the benefit  of
         some rounding down, a sentence of 4 years, of which you will  serve
         up to half in  custody,  before  then  being  on  licence  for  the
         balance."

37. A social worker Ruth Stark has provided two reports.  The  first  dated
    24 September 2018 explains that she had been instructed to  comment  on
    the risk of re-offending.  Her conclusion  is  that  the  risk  of  re-
    offending by NT was "...  extremely  low  given  her  attitude  to  her
    offence, the remorse for the victims of her offending,  the  impact  on
    her family and the determination she has to make amends to her family".

38. The second  report  dated  18  November  2018  comments  on  the  OASys
    assessment which she describes as have  "...  some  variance  from  the
    information  available  in  the  conviction  and   sentencing   remarks
    previously available".

39. Ms Stark refers to the OASys assessment that were NT released into  the
    community there would be a high risk of her absconding and she would be
    at risk of  linking  again  with  her  former  co-defendants.   Neither
    prediction had occurred.  She concludes:

         "In all other respects the conclusions reached in  the  substantive
         report in assessing the risk of re-offending, that  [NT]  is  at  a
         very low risk of re-offending, remain."

40. Ms Angeline Seymour who is  also  a  social  worker  has  provided  two
    reports dated 21 March and 18 November 2018.  The earlier report refers
    to the regularity with which the two children of the family  see  their
    grandparents, with CM explaining that she had stayed  there  with  them
    during the school holidays and enjoyed outings  and  cooking  with  her
    grandparents.  She referred to NM's account of CM's  bedwetting  as  an
    indication that this had been an issue from a young age  but  that  had
    increased during NT's incarceration.  The report in part is based on  a
    meeting in March 2018 whilst NT was still in prison and it refers to MT
    having "... moved out of the family home to fend for herself"; as  well
    as reference by NT to her concern that she was staying out  late  which
    had worried her given her age.

41. Ms Seymour  refers  to  the  apprehended  difficulties  of  the  family
    relocating to Vietnam and in the summary of her report explains:

         "With regards to [CM] relocating to Vietnam with her mother, [CM  ]
         made it very clear that she did not want to go to  Vietnam  as  she
         would not fit in there.  With regards to CM  being  separated  from
         her mother in the long-term,  we  have  heard  how  the  short-term
         separation is impacting on the current  family  life  of  [CM]  and
         [NM's] inability to manage the new family dynamic.  I have  advised
         NM to seek professional  help  for  [CM's]  bed-wetting  as  in  my
         experience should a physical cause be ruled out, [CM's] bed-wetting
         may well be related to a traumatic event, in this  case  separation
         from her mother.  In addition, [CM] has become isolative and upset.
          She is struggling at school and not able to mix  freely  with  her
         peers.  All events that have occurred since [NT's] absence."

42. In her second report dated 20  July  2018,  Ms  Seymour  refers  to  an
    interview with the family the same month for one  hour  on  face  time.
    She refers to CM's happiness that she no longer needs to rise so  early
    and the positive aspects of spending more time  with  her  mother.   NM
    explained CM's confidence having improved.  As to the effect and impact
    of NT's removal, Ms Seymour makes the following points:

    (i)  This will severely impact on CM's  physical  and  emotional  well-
         being.

    (ii) It may well fall on CM to support her father, a process  known  as
         "parentification".

    (iii)    If the family situation is not resolved in the long term  this
         may well have a significant impact on the later life of CM and MT.

    (iv) CM's opinion on not wanting to go to Vietnam had not changed.

43. Dr Natalie Bordon, a Chartered Clinical Psychologist has also  provided
    a report dated 31 August 2018  following  interviews  with  the  family
    members over a two hour period.  The following key points emerged:

    (i)  There appeared to be a strong secure attachment between CM and her
         mother and while she appeared to have a positive attachment to  her
         father she was able to differentiate between the roles each  parent
         provided.

    (ii) MT was heavily reliant on her mother's practical input in order to
         attend to the various matters involved in owning her business.

    (iii)    The prospect of the family as a whole moving from Scotland  to
         Vietnam did not appear to be a viable option.  Neither  NM  nor  CM
         can converse in Vietnamese which would undoubtedly make integration
         into the  culture  very  difficult.   CM's  ability  to  speak  the
         language have been significantly reduced due to NT not being within
         the family home for some time.

    (iv) CM very much identifies  herself  as  Scottish  and  was  somewhat
         resistant to her mother's  attempts  to  reinforce  her  Vietnamese
         heritage.

44. By way of summary, Dr Bordon explains that any  separation  between  NT
    and her daughters was likely to have a negative impact on their  mental
    health and well-being.  Specifically in respect of CM, given  her  age,
    this " ... in all probability  may  result  in  significant  long  term
    emotional and behavioural distress".

45. Dr Tran who holds a PhD in International Law  from  the  University  of
    Leeds and had worked as a senior official to the Vietnamese  government
    between 1997 and 2013 has provided a report  analysing  the  risks  and
    obstacles that NT and her family would face if required  to  settle  in
    Vietnam.  In his skeleton argument Mr  Winter  specifically  relied  on
    passages relating to employment issues that NM would face,  educational
    issues that CM would encounter  and  the  difficulties  over  Vietnam's
    internal registration system (Ho Khau) which is necessary in  order  to
    participate in daily life.  Reliance was also placed on the  impact  on
    NT obtaining employment in Vietnam  due  to  her  UK  criminal  record,
    accommodation difficulties and the psychological impact of NT returning
    alone.

Analysis

46. My starting point is a consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  CM.
    These are undoubtedly for her to continue to develop and grow with both
    parents present.  This is reinforced by the impact of  the  absence  of
    her mother for two years and whilst she  was  able  to  cope  with  the
    support of her father and grandparents, the negative  effects  indicate
    that this was not ideal.  Of less force, CM's  best  interests  lie  in
    remaining in Scotland which is implicit in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  This is understandable because she identifies as a Scot, she
    has limited competence in Vietnamese and Scotland is the  only  country
    she has known all her life, apart from a visit  to  Vietnam  some  time
    ago.  She is unambiguous in her statement that she does not wish to  go
    there.

47. The evidence points to it being unlikely that NM and CM will  accompany
    NT were she to be deported.  That being so deportation would result  in
    a prolonged separation although  the  opportunity  exists  for  regular
    visits  and  continuing  communication  by  social  media.    Dr   Tran
    considered that such visits could only be made once every three  years.
    In the absence of evidence that NM would be unable to afford  the  cost
    of a trip or that he did not have time to do  so,  this  prediction  is
    misplaced.  I consider that it will be open to the parties to visit  at
    least twice a year and to for CM to stay for an extended period  should
    a trip be made in the school holidays.

48. Following the approach considered sensible in NA (Pakistan), I consider
    NT's case first in the context of the three limbs to Exception 1.   She
    has been here lawfully but it cannot be said for most of her  life.  Mr
    Clarke argued that by virtue  of  her  criminal  activity  NT  had  not
    demonstrated that she was socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On balance  I  consider  that  she  has  despite  that
    criminal activity in the light of her  marriage,  family  and  business
    activities here, despite having broken the law.

49. The third requirement  is  whether  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration.  Dr Tran explained the complexities  of
    the domestic registration system in Vietnam which NT would need to cope
    with.  Permanent registration is  the  standard  needed  to  enjoy  all
    benefits of living in Vietnamese society.  There is no suggestion  that
    NT did not have such registration in the past  and  Dr  Tran  does  not
    explain other than a reference to the law on residence of  Vietnam  how
    it is her previous registration had been removed or deleted due to  her
    settlement in the UK.  I accept that NT is likely to have to go through
    the process of re-establishing permanent residence which  will  involve
    temporary residence for at least twelve months.  This will  undoubtedly
    be a difficulty but nevertheless Dr Tran does not state that  permanent
    residence after time would not be achievable.   During  the  regime  of
    temporary residence, there will be restrictions on the ability of NT to
    function and obtain employment.  She has family in Vietnam whom she can
    turn to, there being no suggestion of estrangement.  Whilst she may  be
    unable to obtain permanent employment in the short term, as urged by Mr
    Clarke in his submissions,  NT  is  resourceful,  demonstrated  by  her
    business activities in the United Kingdom and the current  support  she
    provides for her elder daughter.  Whilst NT's own UK ventures have  not
    been successful, there is no  indication  that  the  previous  business
    venture by NT in Vietnam itself was not successful.  Whilst there  will
    be obstacles to NT's reintegration, in time and  with  application,  it
    would be reasonably open to NT  to  overcome  them.   The  difficulties
    identified by Dr Tran related also to the financial implications on  NT
    of having only temporary registration for a period,  but  there  is  no
    evidence that her husband would be unable to provide financial  support
    during  any  interregnum.   Exception  1  is  not  made  out   on   the
    hypothetical basis of NT having been sentenced to less than 4 years.

50. I turn now  to  Exception  2.   NT  is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with her British National husband (a  qualifying  partner)
    and she is such a relationship  with  CM  (a  qualifying  child).   The
    question is whether the effect of NT's deportation on her  husband  and
    child would be unduly harsh.  Para 399 of the rules breaks the  enquiry
    down for those who have been sentenced to less  than  four  years  into
    whether, for a child, it would be unduly harsh to live in  the  country
    to which there will be deportation or  to  remain  without  the  parent
    being deported.  As to the partner, the enquiry is whether it would  be
    unduly  harsh  to  live  in  the  country  of  deportation  because  of
    compelling circumstances over and above those  described  in  paragraph
    EX.2. (very significant difficulties which could  not  be  overcome  or
    would entail very serious hardship for either party)  or  unduly  harsh
    for that partner to remain without the deportee.

51. In the light of the evidence and submissions the  reality  is  that  NT
    would  return  to  Vietnam  alone.   Nevertheless,  for  the  sake   of
    completeness, I do not consider  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  her
    husband and CM to accompany her.  The family will face  challenges  but
    these are to be found with any  family  migrating  to  another  country
    where a different language is spoken and where the culture differs  but
    NT's familiarity with the country and her connections there will smooth
    the  path.  Language  can  be  learned.   People  can  adapt  to  local
    conditions. NM has a university  degree  and  long  experience  in  the
    banking sector.  Dr  Tran  explains  that  NM  would  face  significant
    obstacles in finding a job due to the work permit system  and  language
    barrier.  She acknowledges that some foreign banks operate  in  Vietnam
    but that he would nevertheless need to apply for a work permit  despite
    having a spouse visa.  Dr Tran does not explain why it was  very  clear
    to her that NM would only have a very limited  chance  to  be  able  to
    obtain a job.  She speculates that he would be unlikely to get a job as
    a teacher in Vietnam due to the absence of  a  teaching  qualification.
    She nevertheless  acknowledges  that  such  a  qualification  could  be
    obtained in the United Kingdom.   Again,  although  Dr  Tran  paints  a
    negative picture, the difficulties identified are  those  that  can  be
    overcome.

52. Turning to CM, clearly there would be difficulties  with  her  lack  of
    competence in Vietnamese but as acknowledged by Dr Tran  Hanoi  and  Ho
    Chi Min City have international high schools as well as a  few  primary
    schools that use English  as  an  official  language.   The  identified
    barrier of expense and limited spaces does not in my judgment  indicate
    that these could not be overcome.  I am not persuaded that the evidence
    establishes that it would be unduly harsh for the family to relocate to
    Vietnam in order to preserve  family  unity.   Such  an  outcome  would
    largely serve CM's best interests if not all.

53. The next enquiry is therefore whether it would be unduly  harsh  on  CM
    and NM to remain without NT, there being  no  case  advanced  with  any
    conviction in respect of MT.  The  absence  of  NT  in  prison  clearly
    caused difficulties and distress to CM and her father.  But the fact is
    they were able to cope.  NM kept his job and arrangements were  put  in
    place for CM's care supplemented by support by her grandparents.  There
    is no evidence that such a regime could not  continue.   Again,  taking
    account of the best interests, while such arrangements  may  fall  well
    short of the ideal, nevertheless it cannot  be  said  on  the  evidence
    before me that it would be unduly harsh.  The long-term effect on CM is
    addressed in the expert evidence and I readily accept  that  CM's  life
    will not be as rich and that her education  may  not  develop  as  well
    without her mother.  These though are the  inevitable  consequences  of
    the split up of this family.  CM has a devoted father and  his  parents
    are able to help.  The absence of immediate maternal influence will  be
    distressing for CM but regular contact by social media will be possible
    together with visits which I  considered  above.   She  will  have  the
    company of her older adult stepsister and  will  be  able  to  see  her
    grandmother on a regular basis.  Dr Borden indicates the possibility of
    significant long term emotional and behavioural distress for CM however
    her apprehension is based on the inevitable effect of separation  on  a
    child who is close to her mother apart from  the  issue  of  bedwetting
    which she acknowledges can be managed with the help of services.  I  am
    not satisfied that Exception 2 is made out on the evidence.

54. The next  step  is  to  consider  whether  there  are  very  compelling
    circumstances over and above those captured in Exceptions 1 and 2 which
    requires consideration of all factors including those analysed  in  the
    Exceptions assessment.

55. I am satisfied the OASys report accurately reflects  the  risk  of  re-
    offending by NT in the light of the way that  she  sought  to  distance
    herself  from  the  criminal  activity  which  did  not  persuade   the
    sentencing judge.  An aspect of Ms Stark's second report which was  not
    discussed at the hearing relates to the  observation  that  by  October
    2015 the difficult family situation had reached a point where NT and NM
    were potentially heading for a divorce.   This  appears  to  have  been
    brought about by his work pattern which took him away  from  home.   Ms
    Stark is correct that the OASys assessment refers to NT having lived in
    Germany for a short time which appears to have been  an  error.  Having
    regard to the OASys report as a whole I do not consider this  material;
    it only emerges at 6.10 where NT's immigration history is summarised.

56. Ms Stark refers to NT in her first report as  being  at  extremely  low
    risk of re-offending and in her second report as at a very low risk  of
    re-offending.  I have had careful regard to her reasoning for this  but
    remain of the view that the OASys assessment identifies without a  good
    reasoning why the risk is low.  This means that whilst there is a  risk
    it is of low probability.  There is nothing in NT's offending  and  her
    subsequent behaviour that points to a very compelling  reason  why  the
    public interest in her deportation should not prevail.

57. As to the other factors relied on to resist deportation, I do  not  see
    in the circumstances disclosed by the evidence taken as  a  whole  that
    there are very compelling reasons why NT should  not  be  deported.   I
    have considered again all the factors relied on in relation the 'medium
    offending' criteria and assessed these against the offending.  The case
    does not meet the demanding criteria  to  overcome  the  strong  public
    interest in deportation.  Such deportation will cause further upset and
    distress in the lives of those innocently affected by  NT's  offending.
    They may feel that with NT having served  her  sentence  and  expressed
    remorse, the conviction should be  put  behind  them  and  family  life
    continue.  This is not however an approach that  is  available  in  the
    light of the legislative framework I  am  required  to  apply.   In  my
    judgment the public interest in NT's deportation outweighs the  factors
    relied on by the family members.

58. By way of summary the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Handley  is  set
    aside.  I re-make the decision and dismiss NT's appeal.

Signed
                                             Date   15 October 2019
UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
