

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/03688/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 28 March 2018                      |            On 13 April 2018         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                WADLEY THOMAS
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Lowis, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Jamaica against a decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal to dismiss his appeal against a decision of  the
       Respondent on 17 July 2015 to refuse his application  for  leave  to
       remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

    2. The Appellant was born on 6 August 1954. He has lived in the  United
       Kingdom since 2002 when he entered with permission to care  for  his
       sister who suffered from adult polycystic kidney disease. This is  a
       serious congenital condition from which the Appellant  and  each  of
       his adult siblings suffer or have suffered. His sister has died.  He
       has a brother in the United States of  America  who  needs  dialysis
       treatment.

    3. The Appellant is diabetic and has other health problems.

    4. The Appellant's leave to be in the United Kingdom lapsed in 2003. He
       has remained without permission. He was arrested  in  2010  and  was
       sent to prison  for  6  months  for  using  or  possessing  a  false
       instrument. He was detained under immigration powers with a view  to
       removal but he was unfit to fly  and  he  was  released  subject  to
       reporting conditions. He was then suffering from renal  failure.  He
       commenced dialysis in 2011.

    5. The Appellant failed to report in March 2014.

    6. The Appellant has benefitted from a kidney transplant whilst in  the
       United Kingdom. It is not entirely  clear  who  has  paid  for  this
       treatment in the United Kingdom but it seems that he is a patient of
       the National Health Service.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  in  the  event  of  the
       Appellant's return to Jamaica the absence of immunosuppressant drugs
       could be expected to lead to his transplanted kidney being  rejected
       and his treatment having to be continued by a less than ideal regime
       of dialysis if he could access the charitable support  necessary  to
       meet its cost.

    8. However at paragraph 29 of her decision the First-tier Tribunal  was
       unsure if immunosuppressant drugs are available in  Jamaica.  For  a
       long time they clearly were not but the background evidence revealed
       plans to establish a new centre for kidney transplant  patients  and
       the Judge did not know if the plans had yet been  given  effect.  If
       they had and if the  Appellant  could  access  treatment  there  his
       prognosis would be very different.

    9. At paragraph 33 of her decision the First-tier Tribunal said:

  "Applying my findings to this test, I do not find the appellant  to  meet
  this high threshold. He is not dying, in fact his prognosis is  currently
  good and his is fit to enough to travel. His life expectancy is likely to
  be reduced if returned to Jamaica as the medication he requires  may  not
  be available and the dialysis he then requires is not available to such a
  level as it would be here or otherwise that is (sic) ideal.  However,  as
  is made clear above, that is not sufficient on its own to invoke  Article
  3 protection. The illness from which the appellant suffers did not  arise
  at the hands of the State,  it  is  a  genetic  medical  condition  which
  unfortunately for the appellant has life shortening consequences."

   10. She then dismissed the appeal.

   11. Permission to appeal was given by the Upper Tribunal "in  the  light
       of Paposhvili (no.41738/10)." Clearly this is  a  reference  to  the
       decision of the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human  Rights
       in Paposhvili v Belgium on 13 December 2016 reported at  [2017]  Imm
       AR 867.

   12. Before me Ms Lowis referred me to  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
       Appeal in AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 64. She accepted that
       I was required to dismiss the appeal  following  that  decision.  Ms
       Everett agreed.

   13. The short point is that in AM the Court of Appeal drew attention  to
       the binding decision of the House of Lords in N v SSHD  [2005]  UKHL
       31.

   14. It was never Ms Lowis's case  that  matters  should  end  with  this
       appeal being dismissed. Although I am bound by N it  was  her  case,
       supported by AM(Zimbabwe), that N was no longer a complete statement
       of the relevant law and needed to be looked at again by the  Supreme
       Court. Ms Lowis asked me to grant a certificate under section 14A of
       the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 so  that  rather  than
       seeking permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  the  Appellant
       could seek permission to appeal directly to the Supreme Court.

   15. In AM(Zimbabwe) at paragraph 38 the Court of Appeal said:

  "So far as the ECtHR and the Convention are concerned, the protection  of
  Article 3 against removal  in  medical  cases  is  now  not  confined  to
  deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the applicant  is  in
  the removing country. It extends to cases where "substantial grounds have
  been shown for believing that [the applicant], although not  at  imminent
  risk of dying, would face a real risk,  on  account  of  the  absence  of
  appropriate treatment in the receiving country or lack of access to  such
  treatment, of being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible  decline
  in his or her state of health resulting in  intense  suffering  or  to  a
  significant reduction in life expectancy" (para. [183]). This means cases
  where the applicant faces a real risk  of  rapidly  experiencing  intense
  suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in the receiving state because
  of their illness and the non-availability there  of  treatment  which  is
  available to them in the removing state or faces a  real  risk  of  death
  within a short time in the receiving state for the same reason. In  other
  words, the boundary of Article 3 protection has been shifted  from  being
  defined by imminence of death  in  the  removing  state  (even  with  the
  treatment available there) to being defined by the imminence (i.e. likely
  "rapid" experience) of intense suffering or death in the receiving state,
  which may only occur because of the non-availability in that state of the
  treatment which had previously been available in the removing state."

   16. I have considered carefully section  14A  and  particularly  section
       14A(4)(b).

   17. However the difficultly in this case is that the First-tier Tribunal
       was not able to decide if immunosuppressant drugs are  available  in
       Jamaica. Ms  Lowis  contended  that  there  are  still  "substantial
       grounds for believing" that the Appellant faces a serious decline in
       his health. I do  not  agree.  There  are  substantial  grounds  for
       believing the he might face such a decline but that does not satisfy
       the test in Paposhvili. The Judge's uncertainty was consistent  with
       the evidence before her and is not criticised in the grounds.

   18. It follows that I dismiss the Appellants appeal and I do not grant a
       certificate  under  section  14A  of  the   Tribunal,   Courts   and
       Enforcement Act 2007.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 11 April 2018                  |







