
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03981/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2018                   |On 12 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                              Muhammad Attique
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  7  May  1981.    On  23
    January 2005 he entered with leave as a student.  He made a  series  of
    successful applications for further leave as a student and  then  under
    the Points-Based System.  His last leave was cancelled by a  notice  of
    27 August 2014 against which he appealed.  The appeal was dismissed and
    his appeal rights exhausted on 29 June 2016. More than 28  days  later,
    on 15 August 2016, he lodged an application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

The Respondent's decision

 2. On 26  January  2018,  the  Respondent  refused  the  indefinite  leave
    application.  There were discrepancies between  the  income  which  the
    Appellant had declared to HM Revenue & Customs and to the Respondent in
    his applications for further leave of 25 October 2010  and  12  January
    2013.  Enquiry of HMRC in March 2015 had disclosed a lack of any Pay As
    You Earn records for the years ending 5 April 2010-2013  and  no  self-
    assessment returns for the years ending 5 April 2010-2014.

 3. The Respondent's refusal was based  on  the  provisions  of  paragraphs
    322(5) and 276B of the Immigration Rules by way  of  reference  to  the
    Appellant's character, conduct employment record.

 4. The Respondent was aware that Appellant's leave had been  cancelled  at
    port on 27 August 2014 on the grounds of the unsatisfactory  nature  of
    the Appellant's employment record which appeared not to be  as  he  had
    represented to the Respondent and because of concerns about what he had
    earned and declared to HMRC.

 5. The Appellant had appealed that decision and by a decision  promulgated
    on 1 October  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  NMK  Lawrence
    dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   His  appeal  rights  became
    exhausted on 29 June 2016.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 6. On 2 February 2018 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds comprise the expression  "Article  8"  without  any  additional
    wording or explanation.  References are made to  a  record  from  HMRC,
    accounts and an accountant's letter, without any particularisation.

 7. At the hearing of the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant
    was represented by Counsel and by a decision promulgated on 19  October
    2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davey dismissed the appeal on all
    grounds.

 8. The Appellant in person sought permission to appeal.   The  grounds  of
    appeal assert the Judge had not taken into account that  the  Appellant
    on 12 June 2017 had submitted a self-assessment tax return for the year
    ending 5 April 2011 which had been accepted by HMRC and the  Judge  had
    not  taken  into  account  a  letter  from  the   Appellant's   current
    accountants, at Appellant's Bundle page E1,  confirming  this  together
    with a letter of 30 May 2018 from HMRC at page 1 which it was suggested
    effectively exonerated him.  The grounds further and baldly assert that
    the refusal of  further  leave  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the Appellant.  No details of the Appellant's  private
    and family life in the United  Kingdom  were  disclosed  to  the  Judge
    before whom no submissions on it were made or are referred  to  in  the
    grounds for appeal.

 9. The Judge noted at paragraph 32 of his decision  the  Appellant  had  a
    wife and family in Pakistan.

10.  On 7 July 2017 Designated Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Garratt
    granted permission on the basis that the Judge arguably  had  erred  in
    failing to take account of evidence about the  Appellant's  tax  return
    and letters of 16 and 30 May 2018 from HMRC  confirming  the  Appellant
    had filed a tax return for the year ending 5 April 2011.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

  11.  The Respondent did not file a response pursuant to Procedure Rule 24.
       The Appellant attended the hearing at which he was unrepresented.   I
      explained the purpose of the hearing and he confirmed his address  and
      also that he had received legal advice when preparing the grounds  for
      appeal.

12.  I explained to him the basis upon which he had been granted  permission
      to appeal and that the  issue  before  me  was  whether  there  was  a
      material error of law in Judge Davey's decision.  The Appellant  being
      unrepresented, I  proposed  that  the  Respondent  should  first  make
      submissions and then he would have the opportunity to comment on them.

Submissions for the Respondent

13.  Ms Cunha submitted that the acknowledgments from  HMRC  of  receipt  of
    the Appellant's 2011 tax return were not relevant.  The issue  was  the
    Appellant's lack of explanation why this and other returns had not been
    made in time or corrected earlier or made at all.  At paragraphs  11-12
    Judge Davey had dealt with the failure by the Appellant to file returns
    and his lack of explanation for such omission.  The only evidence  that
    the omission had been rectified was  confirmation  that  the  2011  tax
    return filed some six years after the end of the tax year in  question.



14.  She referred to the judgment  in  R  (Khan)  v  SSHD  (Dishonesty,  tax
    return, para.322(5)) [2018] UKUT 384 (IAC) and submitted the Judge  had
    made a holistic assessment and given reasons why the Appellant had  not
    discharged the burden on him to show he had not falsely represented his
    position.  Judge Davey  had  extensively  reviewed  the  correspondence
    provided by the Appellant and explained at paragraph 18 of his decision
    why  the  correspondence  added  little,  if  anything.   The  decision
    contained no material error of law and the appeal should be dismissed.

Submissions by the Appellant

15.  I summarised the submissions made for the  Respondent.   The  Appellant
    confirmed he had the relevant papers with him.

16.  The Appellant asserted that the error or failure to lodge  tax  returns
    and had not come to light until 2017 and  he  had  in  the  intervening
    period relied on his previous accountant. He had  tried  to  trace  the
    accountant so that he might obtain a letter from them  to  confirm  his
    position but could not trace him.  He was still  waiting  for  HMRC  to
    process his 2011 return.

17.  He had been in PAYE employment between 2009 and 2013.  He had sent  his
    bank  statements  to  prove  the  income  he  had  represented  to  the
    Respondent in his applications for further  leave.   He  produced  bank
    statements for some of the period 2009-2010 and HMRC form SA302. I told
    the Appellant there were no bank statements in the  Tribunal  file  and
    none had been included in the bundles  filed  by  each  of  his  former
    representatives and the Respondent for the hearing before Judge  Davey.
    He did not have any other bank statements with  him.   He  had  nothing
    else to put to me.

Error of Law Consideration

18.  At the end of the hearing I stated that I found there was no  error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for reasons which  would
    follow in this written decision and which I now give.

19.  The Judge took into  account  that  the  Appellant  had  submitted  tax
    returns as mentioned at paragraphs 12 and 13.  He  noted  the  lack  of
    explanation for the apparent  inconsistencies  in  the  Income  of  the
    Appellant declared whether to HMRC or the Respondent and that the  HMRC
    correspondence referred to in the grounds for appeal added nothing: see
    paragraphs 14-18 of the decision.

20.  The Judge took into account that the Appellant was aware  of  the  need
    to file accurate tax returns from the cancellation of his leave  on  27
    August 2014 and the dismissal of his appeal against that decision:  see
    paragraphs 24 and 25.

21.  Notwithstanding the  absence  of  evidence  or  indeed  submissions  to
    support the Appellant's claim based on his private life in  the  United
    Kingdom, the Judge addressed this at paragraphs 32 and 33.

22.  I have taken account of the fact that the  Appellant  is  unrepresented
    and have considered not just the grounds for appeal but the entirety of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision and find the Judge reached sustainable
    conclusions for which he gave sufficient and adequate reasons and  that
    his decision contains  no  material  error  of  law.   This  appeal  is
    therefore dismissed and the First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand.

Anonymity

23.  There was no request for an anonymity  direction  and  I  do  not  find
    there is any need for one.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  any  error  of
    law and shall stand.

    The appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date  15.  i.
2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
