
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03552/2016
                                                               IA/25351/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on          |
|On 10 June 2019                      |On 11 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               S A A (nigeria)
                           [ANONYMITY order MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Erum Waheed instructed by Herbert Lewis
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing on human rights grounds the claimant's
    appeal against a decision to deport him to Nigeria, of which  he  is  a
    citizen (appeal no HU/03552/2016).

 2. Both the claimant and his wife are foreign criminals:  they married  in
    Nigeria in 1998 but the wife overstayed her visa, the husband committed
    bigamy, and both sought  to  deceive  the  United  Kingdom  immigration
    authorities about their marital status.   They were prosecuted and  the
    claimant  received  a  12-month  custodial  sentence,  while  the  wife
    received an 18-month suspended sentence.

 3. The couple have five minor children, all of whom are British  citizens.
    There has never been a deportation order against the wife or  the  five
    sons.

 4. In July 2018, the Secretary of State gave  the  claimant's  wife  ('the
    wife') 30 months' discretionary leave to remain on Zambrano grounds.

 5. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  wife's  behalf,
    following the withdrawal of the Secretary of State's case  against  her
    at a hearing in October 2018.  The wife's appeal  under  appeal  number
    HU/23912/2016 is now abandoned by operation of law pursuant to  section
    104(4A) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) and the Upper Tribunal has served Notice to that effect. These
    appeals are no longer linked for hearing.

 6. In this, the claimant's appeal, the First-tier Judge made his  decision
    based on a fact-set which no longer exists, that both parties might  be
    removed to Nigeria.  The Upper Tribunal gave leave  under  rule  15(2A)
    for the claimant to adduce further evidence for this hearing.  Some new
    material was adduced, and that material  will  be  considered  in  this
    decision.

 7. The claimant does not pursue a challenge to the revocation of  his  EEA
    residence card, although that file (IA/25351/2015) has been  linked  to
    the human rights appeal throughout.  For the avoidance of  any  further
    doubt, this decision disposes of both appeals.

Background

 8. The core facts in this appeal are as follows.  The claimant came to the
    United Kingdom, on his account, in June 2001.  He had been  married  to
    the wife since a ceremony in Nigeria in 1998.

 9. In January 2004, the claimant purported to marry a French  citizen  and
    in March 2004 he applied for an EEA residence document as  her  spouse.
    That application was unsuccessful.  In August 2004, the  first  son  of
    the claimant and his Nigerian wife was  born  to  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. The claimant did not embark for Nigeria, his country of origin.  He had
    two further sons with his Nigerian wife, in  March  2006  and  November
    2008.  On 28 August 2009 the claimant sought indefinite leave to remain
    on compassionate grounds, which was refused with no  right  of  appeal.
    He still had not disclosed that he was married to his Nigerian wife.

11. Further attempts to obtain leave to remain on EEA grounds were refused.
     In June 2010, the couple had their fourth son together. On 21  January
    2011 the claimant appealed against refusal of leave to  remain  on  EEA
    grounds, with reference to his bigamous  marriage  to  the  French  EEA
    citizen, withdrawing his appeal on 14 March 2011.

12. On 8 June  2011,  the  claimant  sought  naturalisation  as  a  British
    citizen,  which  was  refused  on  character  grounds.   The   claimant
    continued to pursue his claim to EEA residence as  the  spouse  of  his
    claimed French citizen wife, and was successful on  that  basis  on  25
    April 2012.  He was issued an EEA permanent residence card.

13. However, in February 2013 the claimant and his Nigerian wife had  their
    fifth son together and on 26 March  2013  his  Nigerian  wife  came  to
    adverse notice and it came to light that they had been legally  married
    since long before the purported marriage to a French citizen.

14. On 30 March 2015, the claimant was convicted at  the  Central  Criminal
    Court of bigamy, use of a false instrument with intent it  be  accepted
    as  genuine,  and  obtaining  or  seeking  to  obtain  the   avoidance,
    postponement or revocation of enforcement action, and sentenced  to  12
    months'  imprisonment.   His  wife  received  an   18-month   suspended
    sentence.

15. On 7 July 2015, the Secretary of State revoked the claimant's permanent
    right of residence card  which  had  been  erroneously  issued  to  the
    claimant on the basis of his French purported spouse.  The Secretary of
    State considered that the bigamous marriage to his French spouse was  a
    marriage of convenience.  The claimant appealed against  that  decision
    to the First-tier Tribunal (appeal number IA/23531/2015).

16. He also appealed against the deportation order signed by the  Secretary
    of State on 16 January 2016 and  served  on  him  on  29  January  2016
    (appeal number HU/05352/2016).

Sentencing Judge's remarks

17. I have regard, as I must, to the  sentencing  judge's  remarks  in  the
    criminal proceedings.  On 24 April 2015, Mr Recorder Day QC  said  this
    in relation to the present claimant:

         "You, [claimant], entered this country unlawfully in 2000 and  have
         remained here in breach of immigration  and  border  control  since
         then, until being given a permanent resident card  in  2012,  which
         was only given to you as a result of the sham marriage referred  to
         in the indictment, which has now been revoked as a result  of  your
         conviction. ...

         I have no doubt that you decided  to  attempt  to  regularise  your
         immigration status at the time your wife  was  pregnant  with  your
         first child, who was born in August 2004, some seven or  so  months
         after the sham marriage. ...

         The sham bigamous marriage was  well  planned  and  sophisticatedly
         executed, and would have given  you  the  right  to  stay  in  this
         country indefinitely as the spouse of an European  Union  national,
         as result of which you have enhanced your employment  opportunities
         in order to be able to look after your now burgeoning family.

         Well, these are serious offences, which not  only  demonstrate  the
         fact that each of you is deeply dishonest, but also strike  at  the
         heart of the immigration and border controls of this  country.   It
         has been said that deterrent sentences are appropriate. ...

         There is no specific  guideline  in  respect  of  the  immigration,
         bigamy and sham marriage offences, but the authorities to  which  I
         have been referred suggest a custodial sentence of between  12  and
         18 months.  Accordingly, on any view it is agreed, and it could not
         otherwise be said, that each of these offences for which  you  have
         to be sentenced passes the custody threshold.  ... "

18.  The  sentencing  judge  expressly  took  account  of  the  effect   of
    imprisonment of one or both of their parents on the  couple's  5  young
    children, who had written letters to the Court, and he  mitigated  that
    effect in relation the sentence for their mother, the Nigerian wife, by
    suspending her sentence for 2 years.

19. Turning to the appropriate sentence for the claimant, he took a sterner
    view:

         "So far as [the claimant is] concerned, I am afraid I  cannot  take
         such a merciful or lenient course.  On count  3,  you  will  go  to
         prison for 12 months, on count 4 for 6 months, and on count  5,  12
         months.  These sentences will run concurrently, making a  total  of
         12 months' imprisonment in all."

20. The Secretary of State took the  sentencing  remarks  into  account  in
    deciding to deport the claimant.

Procedural history

21. On 5 December 2016, First-tier Judge Metzer  dismissed  the  claimant's
    appeal against both the revocation of his EEA residence certificate and
    the Secretary of State's decision to make and  maintain  a  deportation
    order.

22. The claimant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Properly understood,  his
    appeal was confined to the human rights aspect of the proposed removal.



23. The decision was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal by  Lady  Rae  and
    Upper Tribunal Judge Blum for a full rehearing.

24. On 11  June  2018,  First-tier  Judge  Andonian  remade  the  decision,
    allowing the appeal against deportation on human rights  grounds,  with
    reference to the effect of removal on the children of the marriage.

25. On 21 June 2018, the Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal,
    arguing that insufficient weight had been given to the public  interest
    in deportation and the seriousness of the offences committed.

26. On 19 July 2018, the Secretary of State granted discretionary leave for
    30 months to the claimant's wife, with reference to paragraphs  GEN1.10
    and GEN1.11 of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended).    The
    claimant's wife is not entitled to have recourse to  public  funds  but
    will not need to leave the United Kingdom until, at  the  earliest,  19
    January 2021.  The Upper Tribunal is no longer seised of any appeal  in
    respect of the wife.

27. On 8 November 2018, the Upper  Tribunal  (Mrs  Justice  May  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Gleeson)  found  a  material  error  of  law  and  gave
    directions.  We granted the Secretary of State's  request  to  withdraw
    his case before the Upper Tribunal in relation to the wife.

28. We gave further directions in this appeal on 22 March  2019,  narrowing
    the basis of challenge, with the concurrence of  the  parties,  to  the
    proper approach to the  unduly  harsh  test  in  section  117D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) as it affects
    foreign criminals sentenced to a period of imprisonment longer  than  4
    years, with reference to KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53. We emphasised that:

         "9.      This appeal will be retained in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
         remaking and it is very important that any relevant evidence  about
         whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in  the
         United Kingdom with their mother,  but  without  their  father,  is
         produced in good time for the hearing remaking this decision.   The
         sort  of  evidence  that  we  would  expect  to  see   is   updated
         correspondence from the general medical  practitioner,  accompanied
         by  GP  notes  (original  documents),  the  original  documents  in
         relation to the eldest  boy's  football  contract,  and  any  other
         relevant documents, original documents from the schools  about  the
         children, and if possible a report from social  services.   All  of
         these will take some time to obtain, so the commissioning  of  them
         should begin straight away."

29. On 30 May 2019, the Upper Tribunal received a bundle of documents  from
    Dylan Conrad Kreolle,  the  claimant's  then  solicitors,  and  at  the
    hearing today we received a small number of  additional  documents,  to
    which no objection was taken on the Secretary of State's behalf.

30. By an email dated 3 June 2019 at 13:27, Dylan Conrad Kreolle applied to
    be removed from the record as they were no  longer  instructed  by  the
    claimant.  Mr  Waheed  has  been  Counsel  throughout  and  prepared  a
    skeleton argument in which he indicated that Herbert Lewis (Solicitors)
    now represent the claimant.  No notice of acting from that firm has yet
    reached the file but Mr Waheed assured the Tribunal that one  had  been
    sent.

31. That is the basis on which the remaking came before the Upper  Tribunal
    today.

First-tier Tribunal decision

32. The First-tier Judge noted that  the  immigration  appeal  against  the
    revocation of the residence card (IA/23531/2015) was no longer live but
    had been linked to  HU/03522/2016,  the  deportation  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.  He recorded that the couple, both  Nigerian  citizens,
    had 5 British citizen sons, all United Kingdom-born.   The  eldest  was
    born in August 2004 (age 15), March 2006 (age 13), November  2008  (age
    10), June 2010 (age 9) and February 2013 (age 6).   None  of  them  has
    ever lived in Nigeria.

33. The claimant and his Nigerian wife had a traditional  wedding  ceremony
    in Nigeria on 27 June 1998, when the claimant was  about  20,  and  his
    wife a year or so younger.  The Judge found that ceremony be a  genuine
    marriage, not just an engagement ceremony as they claimed.    The  wife
    had  undergone  nurse's  training  in  the  United  Kingdom,   obtained
    qualifications,  and  worked  in  the  NHS,  albeit  illegally,  before
    beginning a law degree at the University of Buckingham.

34. The claimant had not worked in Nigeria, where he was studying  business
    management.  In the United Kingdom he worked as a support  worker,  and
    helped to run a restaurant, charcoal grilling chicken.   He  has  since
    said that this was his business and that he was a prosperous successful
    business with his own named sauce brand.

35. The two elder boys gave evidence in the First-tier Tribunal, saying how
    fond they are of their father and that they would miss him if  he  went
    to Nigeria, in particular in relation  to  their  sporting  activities.
    The second eldest said that the wife had found it difficult coping with
    5 boys without her husband.

36. The Judge found that it was not  reasonable  to  expect  these  British
    children to go and live in Nigeria and that it would be unduly harsh to
    expect them to do so.  He found that the children regarded their father
    as a role model and that he was a hands-on  father  who  took  a  great
    interest in them and in their well-being.  He found that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the claimant's wife  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom without him.  He had regard to social services reports  on  the
    children and the family, and noted that as the boys grew up,  the  wife
    would  'require  the   input   and   assistance   of   the   [claimant]
    increasingly...as they are growing up their needs will  increase'.   He
    found the claimant and his wife to be totally unreliable witnesses  but
    loving parents, to whom the children were attached.

37. While the claimant was incarcerated, the wife fell  into  arrears  with
    the  mortgage  and  with  her  council  tax  payments;  she  relied  on
    charitable donations from the  Red  Cross  and  on  food  banks.    Her
    inability to work legally now or to rely on public funds put  her,  and
    the children, at risk of destitution.

38. That was the basis on which the First-tier Judge allowed the appeal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

39. At the hearing today,  I  received  Mr  Waheed's  submissions  for  the
    claimant in writing.  He did not wish to add to them orally  and  there
    were no oral or written submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State. Mr Waheed relied on the bundle of  documentary  evidence  before
    me. None of the witnesses gave oral evidence  and  Mr  Tufan  indicated
    that he did not wish to cross-examine the claimant  or  his  wife,  who
    were present.

40. The evidence therefore stands unchallenged, to the extent  that  it  is
    consistent with the evidence in the claimant's bundle, and  with  other
    evidence before me.  In his witness statement, the claimant  says  that
    he is very sorry for his mistakes; before going to  prison,  he  was  a
    successful restaurateur, working 16 hours a day,  paying  the  mortgage
    and providing for his family.  He had his own branded sauce.

41. The family home is now threatened with repossession  and  the  mortgage
    arrears are huge.   The Council and children's services will  not  help
    them.  The claimant and his wife have had to sell their  valuables  and
    rely on charity and food banks to keep going.  The Red Cross  had  been
    providing �40 a week on a temporary basis, but that had now ended.

42. The claimant said that his  wife  was  now  unable  to  work  following
    surgery (he does not say for what);  she  had  constant  pain  and  the
    claimant did all the ironing, cooking, washing and taking the  children
    to and from school, as well as taking the eldest to  football  training
    and matches (home and away).

43. The wife in her witness statement said that while the claimant  was  in
    prison, she had not been able to keep up with the football schedule  or
    other activities, which the boys did with him.  His  absence  had  been
    emotionally and financially devastating.  The eldest boy was now  under
    contract to a football team, MK Dons; the next child was preparing  for
    his GCSE examinations, with his father's help.

44. The wife described the serious pain she has  following  her  operation,
    which makes her blood pressure spiral out of control.  She has  vitamin
    D insufficiency and is in constant pain, which dominates her  life  and
    increases her anxiety and depression. Medication does not help the pain
    and she is no longer able to work.  There is  nobody  else  to  replace
    what the claimant does for the family; as well  as  all  the  household
    tasks, he helps her perform her recommended physiotherapy, which she is
    too weak to undertake alone.

45. The bundle includes a social work report, but it is not updated,  as  I
    directed: this is the social worker report considered by the First-tier
    Tribunal and dates back to 8 February 2018. There is also  a  document,
    undated, from the claimant's general  medical  practitioner  about  the
    vitamin D deficiency issue the wife has; a  letter  of  2  August  2018
    suggesting that she is skipping her blood tests  which  are  needed  to
    monitor her medication;  some 2016 correspondence about the breast mass
    for which she had an operation; a letter dated 20 March 2019  regarding
    a physiotherapy referral; copy prescriptions; and some GP notes.

46. There are two letters dated 11 January 2019 from the surgery,  from  Dr
    Thomas Gillham, saying only that the wife is unable to begin working at
    some (unspecified) employer because she is 'experiencing a  poor  state
    of  health...receiving  medical  attention  under  our   care'.      No
    particulars are given.

47. There is a quantity of evidence  about  the  children's  schooling  and
    sports activity.  Original documents were not  provided  but  Mr  Tufan
    took no issue with that.  It is clear  that  both  at  the  John  Henry
    Newman Catholic School and in their sporting activities, the boys  work
    hard and are doing well.

48. From page 138, there is a manuscript schedule  of  how  the  children's
    activities are managed.  I note that, contrary to the evidence in  both
    parents' statements, on Monday the wife does half of  the  school  runs
    and one of the football training  runs;  on  Tuesday  she  takes  three
    children to school and  does  one  pickup,  as  well  as  one  football
    training run; on Wednesday she does one of the  morning  and  afternoon
    school runs, and one of the football training  runs;  on  Thursday  she
    does the afternoon school run for three boys and a morning drop off for
    the other two, as well as supervising the  homework  of  three  of  the
    children;  while on Friday she does school drop  off  for  three  boys,
    collects the other two, and takes one of the children to  tennis  while
    the claimant supervises homework for the other four boys. On Saturdays,
    the claimant deals with the son with an MK  Dons  contract,  while  the
    wife takes the other three boys to various  sporting  activities.    On
    Sunday, she takes two of the boys to the Sunday League game.

49. There are letters from the New Zion Christian Fellowship,  the  British
    Red Cross, the parish priest of Our Lady, Queen  of  Apostles  Catholic
    Church,  and  Watford   Elim,   confirming   the   family's   financial
    difficulties and their strength as a team.

50. A letter from a teacher who  is  also  a  Norwich  City  Football  Club
    Academy Scout explains how well the eldest plays and that the  claimant
    has been supportive  of  his  children's  training.  He  describes  the
    claimant's 'incredible dedication' to the family. Two personal  friends
    write to say that they have lent the family  money  but  cannot  do  so
    anymore as they have not been repaid and they have their own expenses.

51. The remaining documents are the 2015 OASys assessment, and  information
    about the claimant's former business venture, Mr Bob's Street  Kitchen.
     There  is  evidence  about  the  mortgage  arrears,  loans  from  Cash
    Converters, and of a Hertfordshire County Councils'  Child  and  Family
    assessment (CFA) from 2016.

52. The CFA report speaks warmly of  the  family  bonds,  noting  that  the
    claimant has 'significant extended family members from  both  sides  of
    the maternal and paternal divides' in Nigeria.  The  arrangements  made
    to lighten the burden of the mortgage are also recorded.    The  family
    circumstances remain precarious in the United  Kingdom  even  with  Red
    Cross support, and regular use of food banks.

53. The claimant and his wife were unwilling to share the  outcome  of  the
    CFA with other agencies, did not disclose their  bank  statements,  and
    '[failed] to maintain a fully transparent assessment' which the  author
    of the report ascribed to immigration concerns.

54. The writer of the report concludes  that  it  is  inevitable  that  the
    family would struggle  and  potentially  become  destitute  in  Nigeria
    despite the loose family links there and that 'Nigeria  being  a  third
    world country does not have any credible social security services which
    supports the most vulnerable in society' and  that  return  to  Nigeria
    would amount to inhuman and degrading treatment. It is not  clear  from
    the report what was the source or foundation for those observations  or
    conclusions.

55. No safeguarding concerns were identified and Hertfordshire CC ended its
    involvement with the family following the CFA report.

56. There are copies of the birth certificates of the children and  letters
    from the children themselves, both recent and  when  the  claimant  was
    detained.  Those letters express concern about the loss  of  his  input
    into their training in football and tennis, as well as a strong, loving
    relationship with their father whom one of the  boys  described  as  'a
    father in a million'.

Claimant's skeleton argument

57. Mr Waheed's skeleton argument is admirably concise.  He notes the dates
    of birth of the children and the subject of this  appeal.   He  reminds
    the Tribunal that the issue is whether the maintenance of the Secretary
    of State's decision will have unduly harsh consequences for his British
    citizen children.  He invites the Tribunal to agree that  the  evidence
    'reliably demonstrates that [the claimant's] role within the family  as
    being one of active involvement, particularly as regards the children's
    sporting aspirations'.

58. Mr Waheed argues that the deportation raises four issues: the effect on
    the wife; her ability to replicate his role as regards  the  boys;  and
    whether there would be unduly harsh consequences for the  children,  if
    the claimant were deported.

59. The evidence, says Mr Waheed, demonstrates that the wife, for financial
    and logistical reasons,  will  be  unable  to  cope  with  raising  the
    children alone, in circumstances of destitution, and that  there  is  a
    real risk that she will choose, instead, to accompany  him  to  Nigeria
    with the children.   At  present,  the  children  enjoy  not  just  the
    ordinary benefits of British citizenship but also, as far as the eldest
    is concerned,  the  real  prospect  of  football  success  due  to  his
    acceptance into the MK Dons Football Club Academy Programme.  Mr Waheed
    also relies on the effect on the children of their mother's ill  health
    and their father's absence, if he were to be removed.

60. There being no other evidence or submissions, I reserved my decision.






Legal framework: 'unduly harsh' after KO (Nigeria)

61. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended) was inserted by the Immigration Act 2014.  So far as  relevant
    to this appeal, it is as follows:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals


         (1)      The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.


         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.


         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies. ...


         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.


         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.


         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted."


62. In KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2018] UKSC 53,  the  Supreme  Court  resolved  the  apparent  conflict
    between two decisions of the Upper Tribunal,  one  of  which  had  been
    approved by the Court of Appeal, holding that the situation of children
    should be considered in the  'real  world'  context  that  the  foreign
    criminal parent would have to return to their country of  origin;  that
    there was a degree of 'due harshness' in  any  such  removal;  and,  in
    effect, that much more needs to be shown for  removal  of  the  foreign
    criminal parent to be 'unduly harsh'.  Lord  Carnwath,  with  whom  the
    other members of the Court agreed, said this at [23]:

         "23.     ... [T]he expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly intended
         to introduce a higher hurdle  than  that  of  reasonableness  under
         section 117B (6), taking account of  the  public  interest  in  the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word 'unduly' implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a 'due' level of
         'harshness', that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. 'Unduly' implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set by section  117C  (1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length  of  sentence.  Nor  ...  can  it  be
         equated with a requirement to show 'very compelling reasons'.  That
         would be in effect to replicate  the  additional  test  applied  by
         section 117C (6) with respect to sentences of four years or more."

63. Further guidance was given by the Upper Tribunal in RA (s.117C: "unduly
    harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 (IAC), stating  that
    the Tribunal is still required to approach section 117C as set  out  by
    Lord Justice Jackson in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662;  that  section  117C(6)  is  applicable
    whether or not the sentence exceeds  4  years;  that  'determining  the
    seriousness of the particular offence will normally be by  reference to
    the length of sentence imposed and what the sentencing Judge had to say
    about seriousness and mitigation' but that the ultimate decision is for
    the Tribunal deciding the case, on the  facts  before  it.   The  Upper
    Tribunal held that ordinarily, rehabilitation will  not  bear  material
    weight in favour of a foreign criminal.

64. In MS (s.117C(6): "very compelling circumstances")  Philippines  [2019]
    UKUT 122 (IAC) the  Upper  Tribunal  examined  the  effect  of  section
    117C(6), which requires 'very compelling circumstances, over and  above
    those described in exceptions 1 and 2...such as to outweigh the  public
    interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal', the  Tribunal  must
    have regard to the seriousness of the particular offence of  which  the
    foreign criminal was  convicted,  and  that  nothing  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    demands a contrary conclusion.  The  Upper  Tribunal  also  found  that
    there was nothing in Hesham Ali v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKSC 60 which required  the  Tribunal  when  applying
    section 117C(6) to eschew the principle of  public  deterrence,  as  an
    element of the public interest.

65. In NI (Bangladesh) & Ors v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 713, Lord Justice Floyd considered the situation  where
    both parents were required to return to their country of origin.   That
    is no longer the situation in this appeal, and I derive  no  assistance
    from the reasoning in that brief judgment.

66. In Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  JG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 982, the Court of Appeal considered its own  judgments  in  NA
    (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ
    662, [2017] 1 WLR 207, Rhuppiah v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803, [2016] 1 WLR 4203  and NE-A (Nigeria) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239  in  the
    light of the Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  KO  (Nigeria),  concluding
    (contrary to the view of the Upper Tribunal in MS) that section 117C(6)
    applies only where a foreign criminal has been sentenced to at least  4
    years' imprisonment.

67. Lord Justice Underhill, with whom Lady Justice King  and  Lord  Justice
    Moylan agreed, summarised the Court's approach at [16]:

         "16.     The upshot of those decisions,  so  far  as  concerns  the
         present case, is that in so far as the Respondent sought to rely on
         the effect of his deportation on his  son  (who,  being  a  British
         citizen, was a qualifying child) it would not  be  enough  to  show
         that that effect would be "unduly harsh", in the sense explained in
         KO.  That would satisfy Exception 1,  but  because  his  case  fell
         within section 117C (6) he needed to show something over and  above
         that, which meant showing that the circumstances in his case  were,
         in Jackson LJ's phrase in NA, "especially compelling". In short, at
         the risk of sounding flippant, he needed to show that the impact on
         his son was "extra unduly harsh"."

68.  That being the state of the jurisprudence,  the  question  is  how  it
    applies to the circumstances of this family.

Analysis

69. There is no question of the children, or their mother,  being  required
    to leave the United Kingdom.  The boys are British citizens  and  their
    mother has leave to remain. Nor is there any question that the claimant
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship both with  his  partner,  and
    his five sons, as acknowledged in the sentencing remarks,  to  which  I
    have had regard.

70. The question is whether it would be unduly harsh for the wife,  or  the
    boys, to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the  claimant.   The
    family's  circumstances  are  very  precarious  financially,   as   the
    discretionary leave granted to the wife does not permit her to work and
    the claimant also is not  allowed  to  work.   They  are  surviving  on
    charity and food banks, as they have no access to public funds.  It  is
    not suggested that if the claimant is not deported, he would  be  given
    the right to work and revive his business interests.

71. The claimant and his Nigerian  wife  as  parents  currently  share  the
    school runs and sporting fixtures and  training  journeys  equally.   I
    give weight to that evidence.  I place very  limited  weight  on  their
    assertion to the  contrary  in  their  witness  statements:  the  daily
    schedule was advanced in their bundle of evidence and it gives the  lie
    to their assertion that the wife is too unwell to participate.  I  have
    regard to the long-term untruth  which  this  couple  told  the  United
    Kingdom immigration authorities about their marriage circumstances  and
    the claimant's persistent attempts to seek leave to remain on the basis
    of his bigamous marriage to a French woman, while (given the  dates  of
    birth of the boys) it  is  clear  that  the  relationship  between  the
    claimant and his Nigerian wife continued.

72. So far as  the  wife  is  concerned,  the  evidence  about  her  health
    difficulties is sparse and not particularly up to  date.   She  managed
    without the claimant while he was in prison, but she fell behind on the
    mortgage and the family are facing repossession of their  home.   There
    is very little detail of this in the bundle before me.

73. So far as the boys are concerned,  they  are  healthy  and  hardworking
    children who do well at school and in their sporting achievements.  One
    of them has been signed to MK Dons  and  two  others  also  have  given
    consent on 4 June 2019 (less than a  week  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing)  to  be  considered  as  triallists  for  Peterborough  United
    Football Club Academy.  There is, of course, no certainty  that  taking
    part in a  trial  would  result  in  their  achieving  junior  football
    contracts like their brother, but it may do so.  The youngest is a good
    tennis player.  Their embryonic sporting careers would suffer if  their
    father were removed, because of the logistical difficulties of  getting
    them to the right training places and times, and to matches,  plus  the
    training which he provides at home.

74. The question is whether the difficulties which the boys will experience
    in their sporting careers is enough to  oust  the  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals.  I am quite  satisfied  that  it  is  not.
    While it will certainly be 'duly harsh' for the wife and  the  boys  to
    have to do without the claimant, if that is what they decide to do, the
    circumstances outlined in the skeleton argument and in  the  bundle  to
    not reach the heightened element of severity or bleakness which section
    117C requires.

75. Nor do I consider (if section 117C(6) is applicable) that the  sporting
    difficulties amount to 'very exceptional circumstances' over and  above
    Exception 2.
    It follows that the Secretary of State's challenge  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision is successful and this appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

76. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The previous decision involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of
    law.   I set aside the previous  decision  and  substitute  a  decision
    dismissing the claimant's appeal.

Signed      Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:       17
June 2019
            Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



