
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/03352/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 August 2017                         | On 29 August 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                               mr Serkan kara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Winter, instructed by Maguire Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mathews, Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kempton promulgated on 5 April 2016, dismissing his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 15 July  2015  to
    refuse extensive leave and to refuse a human rights claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey.   He  is  married  to  a  British
    national and their relationship has been subsisting  for  nearly  seven
    years.  They met in 2010 when his wife was on  holiday  and  they  were
    subsequently married.  Their first child was born on 31 January 2014 in
    the United Kingdom, Mrs  Kara  having  travelled  back  to  the  United
    Kingdom as her  mother  was  unwell.   The  family  have  tried  living
    together in Turkey but this did not prove possible and eventually,  the
    appellant entered the United Kingdom on 8 December 2014  with  a  visit
    visa valid until 11 May 2015.  He then applied for leave to  remain  on
    the basis of his family life.

 3. The respondent refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  as  the
    appellant had entered the United Kingdom he  was  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.2.1. of Appendix FM and there were  no
    exceptional circumstances, having had regard to Article 8 of the  Human
    Rights Convention and Section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2009, such  that
    she should be entitled to leave the United Kingdom.

 4. The judge noted [24] that it was agreed that the  appellant  could  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   Whilst  misdirecting
    herself [25] as EX.1. was not met as the child was not at least 7 years
    old, that error was not material given that EX.1. could not  have  been
    met in any event because of the failure to meet E-LTRP.3.1.

 5. Similarly, the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE.

Procedural History

 6. The appellant sought, but was refused permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal both by the First-tier Tribunal and upon renewal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  He then pursued an application by way of judicial review  to
    the Court of Session.  Subsequent to the  grant  of  permission  by  an
    interlocutor dated 16 March 2007, the matter was resolved  by  consent,
    the decision of the refusal of permission by the Upper  Tribunal  being
    reduced for a fresh consideration of whether  to  grant  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   It  was  also  noted  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal must have regard to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 7. Following that, on 6 June 2017 the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal
    granted permission.

 8. There is no indication in the decision that the judge took into account
    Section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act.  On  the  contrary,  the  indications
    are, given her misreading of EX.1. as requiring a British citizen child
    to have lived in the United Kingdom for at least seven years proceeding
    the date of application to qualify, that she had assumed that a British
    Citizen child who had not lived her seven  years was not  a  "qualified
    child" as defined in section 117D of the 2002 Act.  The  definition  of
    qualified child in Section 117D being to all intents and  purposes  the
    same as that applied in  EX.1.   Though,  to  have  spent  seven  years
    applies only to those who are  not  in  the  United  Kingdom,  only  it
    applies to those who are not British citizens.

 9. As was noted in MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [49]:

    the fact that the child has been in the UK  for seven years would  need
    to be given significant weight in the proportionality exercise for  two
    related reasons: first, because of its  relevance  to  determining  the
    nature and strength of the child's best interests; and second,  because
    it establishes as a starting point that leave should be granted  unless
    there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

10. This applies equally to the situation where there is a British  Citizen
    child. Accordingly, it was incumbent on the judge to  consider  Section
    117B(6) and to indicate what weight she attached to the best  interests
    of the child and also what weight is  to  be  attached  on  the  public
    interest bearing in mind what was said in MA (Pakistan)

11. It would appear from what the  judge  records  at  [29]  that  she  did
    consider that there was a significant weight to be attached  to  proper
    immigration control but no indication  as  to  how  this  was  balanced
    against the best interests.

12. Whilst I note Mr Mathews'  submission  that  the  child  would  not  be
    expected to leave the United Kingdom, it is not clear  that  the  judge
    properly addressed this issue.  Further there is no indication at  [33]
    the judge had considered what weight to attach to the interference with
    family life.  The issue is not whether family life exists  or  not,  or
    whether it could be conducted  with  the  family  living  in  different
    countries, but whether the interference with family  life  which  would
    necessarily flow from this is proportionate.  Certainly,  at  paragraph
    [36] the judge appears to having considered that it would be reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom; the case relied  upon,
    Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197  is  not  on  point.   Again  the  judge
    appears not to have taken into account  the  fact  that  the  child  in
    question is a British citizen.

13. Accordingly, for these reasons, I am  satisfied  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of  law.   Given
    the length of time that has elapsed since the findings and the  absence
    of proper findings of fact I am satisfied that in all the circumstances
    of this case it is appropriate to remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision on all issues.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2) I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all issues.

Signed                                  Date:  25 August 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


