
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03521/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 February 2020                  |On 5 March 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                              MR LAWRENCE SIAME
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mackenzie, counsel instructed by Legal Rights
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Young-Harry, following an appeal heard on 10 May 2019  and  promulgated
    on 13 September 2019. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Neville on 3 January 2020.




Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.



Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 22 March  2002  with  entry
    clearance as a student, valid until  11  March  2003.  He  was  granted
    several further periods of leave in the  same  capacity,  the  last  of
    which  expired  on  30  April  2008.  The  appellant  made  an  in-time
    application for further leave to remain as a student which was  refused
    on 30 June 2008. He requested a reconsideration  however  the  original
    decision was maintained on  11  August  2008.  The  appellant's  appeal
    against that decision was rejected as being out of time. An application
    made for leave to remain outside the Rules was refused without a  right
    of appeal on 28  February  2011.  An  application  to  reconsider  that
    decision was refused on 28 April 2015 and the claim  was  certified  as
    clearly unfounded. The appellant made  a  human  rights'  claim  on  30
    August 2016 and it is the refusal of this claim, on  8  February  2019,
    which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The appellant's human  rights  claim  is  based  on  there  being  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in Zambia, where it  was  said
    he had no social or family ties because he had left there 21 years ago.
    The respondent noted that the appellant spoke English,  that  his  wife
    and child returned to Zambia and there was no evidence that his  family
    would not be able to assist and accommodate him.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge concluded that the appellant could reintegrate in Zambia  and
    that his removal was a proportionate step.



The grounds of appeal

 6. There were two grounds of appeal.  Firstly,  the  judge  erred  in  her
    understanding of the length of the respondent's delay in reviewing  the
    earlier decision, failed to have regard to the principles set out in EB
    (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41 and found it an aggravating  feature  that  the
    appellant had essential NHS treatment for a condition which arose after
    the   respondent's   delay.   Secondly,   the   judge's   approach   to
    proportionality of removal was simplistic and  not  the  fact-sensitive
    individual assessment required.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.



The hearing

 8. Mr Mackenzie relied on the grounds. He contended that  the  appellant's
    history was not in dispute, in that he was born in Zambia in 1983,  his
    parents died when young and he was raised by  grandparents  until  both
    were deceased. The appellant was homeless from the age of about 8 or  9
    until Christian missionaries took responsibility for him. He  moved  to
    Botswana at around the age of 14  where  he  was  cared  for  by  other
    missionaries.  The appellant was sponsored to come to the UK in 2002 to
    study accountancy and had resided here since.  He had leave  to  remain
    until June 2008, when he received a  refusal  of  his  application  for
    further leave. The appellant left it too long to appeal and remained in
    the United Kingdom.

 9. A further application made led to a refusal decision in 2011, regarding
    which the appellant requested a  right  of  appeal.  That  request  was
    chased for around 4 years and  involved  the  support  of  an  MP.  The
    respondent informed the MP that the appellant was  a  legacy  claimant.
    Ultimately a decision was made in 2015, certifying the claim as clearly
    unfounded. The  appellant's  further  application  of  April  2016  was
    rejected under paragraph 353 of the Rules after a further delay of  two
    and  a  half  years;  a  decision  which   the   appellant   challenged
    successfully in order to obtain a right of appeal.

10. Mr Mackenzie emphasised that the appellant had no family of friends  in
    Zambia. His relationship with a former partner,  to  whom  he  was  not
    married, broke down and he does not know her whereabouts. The judge had
    not challenged the contents of the appellant's witness statement and it
    was unclear what was made of the family contact  issue.  The  appellant
    left Zambia 21 years ago when a child, he had not been there since  and
    his entire private life was in the United Kingdom. There was an absence
    of ties in Zambia, in the form of relatives, property  and  employment.
    The judge did not comment on that lack or say what importance  attached
    to that. While the judge had said at [12] that  they  were  adopting  a
    balance sheet approach, this was not adopted  in  practice.  The  judge
    mentioned factors on the side of the respondent, however, there was  no
    reference to any factors on the appellant's side of the  balance  sheet
    as described above.

11. Mr Tufan argued that it was wrong to say the appellant was a minor when
    he arrived in the United Kingdom. Furthermore, he made the  application
    for entry clearance from Zambia. He denied  that  there  had  been  any
    delay, stating that the appellant had completed his studies and had  no
    right to be in the UK.  The  appellant  was  not  kept  waiting  for  a
    decision, he had already received it  and  he  just  wanted  it  to  be
    reconsidered. As the previous judge had said, there was no prejudice to
    the appellant because he had finished  his  studies.  Referring  to  EB
    (Kosovo), Mr Tufan submitted that the appellant's case did not  involve
    delay as a result of a dysfunctional system and that the facts  of  his
    case were far from those of the claimant in  that  case.  He  suggested
    that EB (Kosovo) was no  longer  relevant  because  the  case  predated
    section 117B of the 2002 Act. He argued that there were no  factors  in
    the appellant's favour for the judge to consider because the  appellant
    was an adult who came to the UK for a purpose which had been fulfilled.
    Furthermore, with reference to Agyarko,  there  were  no  unjustifiably
    harsh circumstances raised in this case.

12. In response,  Mr  Mackenzie  commented  that  the  respondent  made  no
    argument to the effect that the judge did not err in her approach.   It
    was unsustainable to say the appellant's lengthy  residence  or  almost
    complete lack of ties to Zambia was irrelevant. It was  not  argued  on
    behalf of the respondent that the judge took these factors into account
    and she did not.

13. At the end of the hearing I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal made material errors of law.

14.  I canvassed the possibility of proceeding immediately  to  remake  the
    appeal however owing to the lack of common ground and issues raised  by
    Mr Tufan during the hearing, the appeal could not  proceed  as  further
    factfinding was required.



Decision on error of law

15. In relation to the first ground, the judge  made  a  factual  error  in
    stating that the respondent's delay amounted to  "2  years"  [15].  The
    delays totalled 6 and a half years. In addition, the judge applied  the
    wrong test, in that she was of the view that the delay  was  irrelevant
    because it had not prejudiced the appellant [16]. The correct  test  as
    set out in EB (Kosovo) is that delay could be relevant in  three  ways.
    The first and third of those are relevant here, in that  a  person  may
    develop closer personal and social ties and establish deeper  roots  in
    the community than he could have shown and thus strengthen their  case.
    In addition, delay may be relevant in reducing the  weight  that  would
    otherwise be accorded to fair and firm immigration control if the delay
    is shown to be the  result  of  a  dysfunctional  system  which  yields
    unpredictable and unfair results. The judge further erred in  attaching
    weight to the fact that the appellant had "made use of the NHS" at [23]
    and appears to have taken this  matter  against  him.  The  appellant's
    medical treatment arose from a medical emergency following his collapse
    which cannot reasonably be a factor on the  respondent's  side  of  the
    balance sheet.

16. The judge's treatment of the appellant's private life claim was limited
    to considering that he could replicate it in Zambia by joining  another
    church  [18].  That  was  the  beginning  and  end   of   the   judge's
    consideration of the  appellant's  circumstances.  At  [23]  the  judge
    briefly lists the factors under consideration in the balancing exercise
    prior  to  concluding  at  [24]  that  the  appellant's  removal  is  a
    proportionate outcome. She mentions the public interest, his precarious
    and unlawful leave, that he speaks English and has made use of the NHS.
    There is no reference to the appellant's lack of ties in  Zambia,  that
    his relatives are deceased, that he has no friends, that he last  lived
    there 21 years ago, that he has no property, never worked in Zambia and
    had spent the entirety of his adult life in the  United  Kingdom.  This
    one-sided analysis is manifestly unfair and amounts to a material error
    of law.

17. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his human rights appeal at the
    First-tier Tribunal and it would be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of  such
    consideration. In addition, the respondent was not  represented  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and as became apparent during the error of  law
    hearing, there appeared to be issues in dispute.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Priory Court, with a time estimate of 3 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Young-Harry.


Signed:                                 Date 25 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


