
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03514/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Oral Decision given following hearing     |                                  |
|On 2 June 2017                            |On 13 June 2017                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             miss faustina egyan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present and not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana who was born on 21 May 1982.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 8 March 2013 with a six month multi-entry
    visit  visa  valid  to  11  August  2013.   Thereafter  she   began   a
    relationship with a Mr Yaw, a British citizen whom  she  married  in  a
    proxy marriage ceremony in Accra, Ghana on 12 September  2014.   On  22
    March 2015 she gave birth to a son,  who  was  accepted  as  a  British
    citizen (to the extent that he was  given  a  British  passport).   The
    appellant then made an application for leave to remain on the basis  of
    her relationship with her partner and child on 11 April 2015  but  this
    application was refused in a decision dated 31 July 2015.

 2. The appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  but  her  appeal  was
    dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 25 July  2016  following  a  hearing  some  three  weeks
    earlier, on 4 July.

 3. It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision to  set  out  the
    grounds of appeal or the reasons for dismissal.  At  a  hearing  before
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman, in the Upper Tribunal  (permission
    to appeal having been granted) Judge Chapman found that there had  been
    an error of law in Judge Devittie's decision such that it would have to
    be re-made and the appeal was then listed before a panel comprising  of
    Mrs Justice McGowan and Upper Tribunal Judge  Latter,  following  which
    this panel gave directions and the appeal is now before me.  There  was
    at that time an issue as to whether or not the  child  was  in  fact  a
    British citizen because Judge Devittie had found the child was  not  in
    fact the biological child of Mr Yaw, the British  citizen.   Among  the
    directions given  by  the  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  which  were
    previously seized of this appeal was that the respondent should, if  so
    advised, file further evidence as to the validity  of  the  appellant's
    marriage and the citizenship of her child.

 4. In the event although the respondent does not accept that the child  is
    the biological child of Mr Yaw, nonetheless for today's purposes it  is
    accepted that the child is a British citizen and having considered  her
    own guidance which is that "where a decision to refuse the  application
    would require a parent or primary carer to return to a country  outside
    the EU, the case must also  be  assessed  on  the  basis  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to  leave  the  EU  with
    that parent or primary carer", the respondent accepts that this  appeal
    must succeed, outside the Rules, under  Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. In these circumstances, I agree that it would not be  proportionate  to
    remove the appellant and therefore her  appeal  under  Article  8  must
    succeed.  I accordingly make the following decision:

Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie,   dismissing   the
appellant's appeal, is set aside and the following decision is substituted:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 9 June 2017

