
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03540/2015
     HU/03541/2015
     HU/03545/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30th January 2018                    |On 05th April 2018                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                mr ranjit rai
                               miss sujata rai
                                miss asha rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Rai of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 12th May 1995, 9th October 1992  and  17th  July
    1990 are citizens of Nepal.  They are siblings and the  adult  children
    of Mrs Tara Rai and the late Mr Birbhakta  Rai  who  was  an  ex-Gurkha
    soldier.  The Appellants were represented by Mr Rai  of  Counsel.   The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Kotas a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellants had made application for entry clearance  to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom.  Their applications have been refused by the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on 30th October 2015.  The  Appellants  had  appealed
    that decision and their appeals were heard by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Wylie on 5th  April  2017.   The  judge  had  dismissed  their
    appeals.  Permission to appeal was made on behalf of the Appellants but
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Boyes on 11th October 2017.   Permission
    was renewed and granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 23rd November
    2017.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants

 3. Mr Rai submitted that irrespective of  whether  concessions  have  been
    made the judge should have decided this  case  under  Annex  K  and  he
    further referred me to the lead cases of Gurung and Ghising in  respect
    of the historical injustice to  Gurkhas.   It  was  submitted  that  if
    family life and the historical injustice were  put  together  then  the
    judge's decision was wrong.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was submitted that Annex K was not relevant in this  case.   It  was
    further said that the Gurkha  soldier  had  been  discharged  in  1983,
    remained in Nepal until his death in 2007 and the Sponsor herself  (the
    second wife) only came to the UK in 2015.  It was  submitted  that  the
    historical  injustice  lost  its  impact  and  that  was  part  of  the
    proportionality exercise.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    and evidence.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey on 23rd
    November 2017.  Grounds were brief and stated "it is arguable that  the
    judge erred in failing to consider the Appellant's Article 8 case  with
    reference to the Annex K guidance".

 7. Firstly it is worth  setting  out  the  background  chronology  of  the
    family, as cases involving policy and Article 8 are  necessarily  fact-
    sensitive.  Those facts are derived from paragraphs 1, 6 to 15  of  the
    judge's decision.  The Gurkha  soldier  Birbhakta  Rai  served  in  the
    British army from 1968 until 1983.  That was a period of fifteen years.
     He had married his first wife in 1966.  They had two daughters born in
    1968 and 1973.  Those daughters are now both married with families  and
    living in Nepal.  Following discharge from the army the  former  Gurkha
    soldier Mr Rai also lived in Nepal.  He married his  second  wife  (the
    Sponsor) in 1988.  The Appellants are the  children  of  that  marriage
    born in 1990, 1992 and 1995.  Mr  Rai  died  in  September  2007.   The
    Sponsor and the three Appellants remained in Nepal.  In June  2015  the
    Sponsor and the three Appellants applied for entry to the UK.  Only the
    Sponsor was successful and she came to the UK in August 2015.

 8. The judge had noted at paragraph 18  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules.   It  was
    further accepted that as the Sponsor was the widow of a  former  Gurkha
    soldier the Respondent's guidance on settlement for dependence  of  ex-
    Gurkha soldiers did  not  apply.   That  is  a  reference  to  Annex  K
    settlement for  adult  children  of  former  Gurkha  soldiers,  as  all
    Appellants are adult children.

 9. Firstly it is clear from paragraph 18 that both Counsel  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant and the Presenting Officer accepted that Annex K did  not
    apply.  The judge particularly in an adversarial system is entitled  to
    take that joint concession as being the position of each  party's  case
    and therefore accept that he need not consider Annex K is applicable in
    this case.  If however the judge believed that perhaps  unusually  both
    parties were wrong in law, then he  was  bound  to  have  said  so  and
    invited  evidence  and   submissions   to   deal   with   that   issue.
    Alternatively had he only reached such a conclusion at the end  of  the
    hearing and when preparing his written decision, he was bound to notify
    both parties, and invite at the least written submissions in  the  form
    of skeleton arguments on the point or reconvene the hearing.  The  fact
    the judge did neither indicate that he both accepted  and  agreed  with
    the parties' joint interpretation of the  law  that  Annex  K  did  not
    apply.

10. It is a little surprising that, that concession having been made by the
    Appellant's Counsel before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant's
    solicitor raises the failure of the judge to deal with it as  being  an
    error of law particularly and unfortunately  without  reference  within
    the grounds of appeal  to  the  concession  having  been  made  at  the
    hearing.   Such  may  have  been  overlooked  by  the  judge   granting
    permission.

11. However leaving those matters to one side it does seem clear that Annex
    K could not apply in the case where the  ex-Gurkha  soldier  had  died.
    The wording of Annex K does not  envisage  the  application  for  adult
    children in circumstances where the Gurkha  soldier  is  now  deceased.
    Given the retroactive nature of the policy had it been  thought  to  be
    applicable in cases where the Gurkha parent had died then Annex K would
    have been explicit upon that point.  It seemed clear therefore that the
    Appellants cannot meet the specific requirements of Annex K 1, 5, 7, 8,
    15, 17 and 19.  It is the case therefore that Annex K did not apply  in
    this case.

12. Annex K paragraphs 26 to 27 however notes that there is the requirement
    for an examination under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  on  the  basis  of
    exceptional  circumstances  and  as  part   of   that   proportionality
    consideration account must be taken of the relevant case law:

    Gurung [2013]  EWCA  Civ  8.   The  court  found  that  the  historical
    injustice faced by Gurkhas who were not able to settle in the UK  until
    2009 should be taken into account during the Article 8 consideration of
    the case but was not determinative.  If a Gurkha can show that but  for
    the historical injustice he would have settled in the UK at a time when
    his dependent now adult child would have been able to accompany him  as
    a dependent child under the age of 18  that  is  a  strong  reason  for
    holding that it is proportionate to permit the adult child to join  his
    family now.

    Ghising [2013] UKUT 00567.  Where it is found that Article 8 is engaged
    and but for the historic wrong the Appellant would have been settled in
    the UK long ago this will  ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
    Article 8 proportionality assessment in the Appellant's favour.

13. The judge had at paragraph 18 onwards considered Article 8 of the ECHR.
     He found at paragraph 22 that  the  Appellants  at  the  time  of  the
    application were all unmarried and lived in the family home, albeit the
    second Appellant  was  away  as  a  student.   There  was  a  financial
    dependency upon the mother (Sponsor).   The  judge  found  family  life
    existed between the Sponsor mother and the  adult  Appellants.   Whilst
    every case is fact-sensitive that finding is consistent with the  wider
    interpretation of  family  life  between  parents  and  adult  children
    developed in Patel v Mumbai ECO [2010] EWCA Civ 17, AA v The UK  [2012]
    Imm AR 1, Gurung and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630.  Those cases  were  all
    referred to within the judgment of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ  320  which  was
    handed in on behalf of the Appellant.  The judge was entitled therefore
    to find family life existing between the adult children Appellants  and
    the Sponsor mother.

14. The next issue therefore the judge  needed  to  determine  was  whether
    interference with that  family  life  was  proportionate  and  in  this
    respect he needed to be aware of the approach taken by  the  courts  in
    Gurkha cases found in those referred to above and  indeed  repeated  at
    paragraph 27 of Annex K.  That was an exercise undertaken by the  judge
    at paragraphs 23 to 31.  Each case is fact-sensitive even if there  are
    superficial similarities.  The judge in this case having  in  mind  the
    Gurkha historical injustice cases noted above refer to  the  fact  that
    there was no evidence the Gurkha soldier would have settled in  the  UK
    at an earlier date had he been able to do so.  He  noted  the  deceased
    Gurkha had been discharged from service five years before  marriage  to
    the Sponsor and that the  Appellants  would  not  have  been  dependent
    children of their father at his date of discharge.  He also  considered
    the family life enjoyed by the Appellants in Nepal with each other  and
    the circumstances generally.  The judge conducted  the  proportionality
    exercise under Article 8 as he was bound to so do.  He clearly  had  in
    mind the historical injustice  points  referred  to  in  Ghising.   The
    striking features in this case perhaps unlike many such cases  was  the
    fact that the ex-Gurkha had died some years ago, there was no  evidence
    of his intent to settle in the UK nor did it appear to  be  influential
    within the evidence generally and that at the point of  discharge  from
    the British army  none  of  the  Appellants  were  dependent  children.
    Indeed none of them had even been born.  The judge was  entitled  on  a
    proportionality  test  and  properly  applying  the  Gurkha  historical
    injustice cases to have reached the decision that he did and  it  could
    not be said that that decision was  either  wrong  in  law  or  was  an
    unreasonable decision.

Notice of Decision

There was no error of law made by the judge in  this  case.   I  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

