
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/03297/2018
                                                               HU/03301/2018
                                                               HU/03304/2018
                                                               HU/03306/2018
                                                               HU/03310/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2019                          |On 24th January 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                1) SADIA [K]
                                2) KASHIF [K]
                                  3) [H K]
                                  4) [S K]
                                  5) [A B]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Ell, Counsel instructed by direct access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Caskie, promulgated on the 1st May 2017,  to  allow  the  appeals
    against refusal of the appellants' human rights claim based on  private
    and family life grounds. For convenience, I shall refer to the  parties
    in accordance with their status in the First-tier Tribunal, that is  to
    say, to Sadia [K] as "the first appellant"  and  to  the  Secretary  of
    State as "the respondent". The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction and I therefore do not see that any  purpose  would
    be served by making one now.

Background

 2. The following facts are uncontentious. The first and second  appellants
    are a married couple and are the parents of the other three appellants.
     The second appellant arrived in the UK, alone,  on  the  16th  January
    2004. The first appellant joined him on the 12th May 2011.  The  eldest
    child, [HK], arrived on the 12th November 2012 when he was less than  6
    months' old. [HK] is currently aged 6 years and  suffers  from  autism.
    The other two  children  were  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  are
    currently aged 4 years and 2 years respectively.  Various  applications
    for further leave to remain have been made and refused, including  most
    recently  an  application  based  upon  the  second  appellant's   long
    residence in the United  Kingdom.  That  application  appears  to  have
    failed due to his absence from the UK for a period of in excess  of  12
    months between the 31st October 2011 and the 12th November 2012.

 3. The essence of the appellants' case was that (a) there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to [HK]'s integration in  Pakistan  due  to  what
    were said to be the inadequate facilities existing in that country  for
    children with autism, and (b) it would be accordingly necessary for all
    the appellants to be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom so as to
    preserve their family life together.

 4. It will be thus immediately apparent that the first task of the  judge,
    upon which the fate of all the appellants would likely depend,  was  to
    resolve the question  of  whether  [HK]'s  removal  to  Pakistan  would
    constitute a breach of his private-life right  to  physical  and  moral
    integrity. That question in  turn  depended,  at  least  in  the  first
    instance, upon whether there would be "very significant  obstacles"  to
    [HK]'s integration  in  Pakistan  under  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The judge did not however address that question.  He
    instead made a general observation that the  Secretary  of  State  "had
    reached conclusions on  this  case  inside  the  Immigration  Rules"  -
    conclusions with which he  expressed  his  entire  agreement  -  before
    noting that the three child appellants had not resided in the UK for  a
    period of seven years so as to qualify  them  for  consideration  of  a
    grant of leave to  remain  on  the  ground  of  'reasonableness'  under
    paragraph 276ADE(iv).

 5. The judge thereafter went on to state that he was "satisfied  the  case
    requires to be considered outside the Immigration Rules" (paragraph 9).
    The reasoning behind that conclusion is obscure. The judge referred  to
    letters from friends of the family that showed "a degree of  commitment
    from them". He also  noted  that  the  older  children  were  receiving
    educational and social services in the UK which, he  concluded,  "would
    be significantly interfered with by removal". However, given  that  the
    judge had not addressed the question of whether such matters might give
    rise to "very significant obstacles" to the appellants' integration  on
    return to Pakistan, it remains unclear how they could be  said  to  lie
    beyond the contemplation of the Immigration Rules and thus  to  require
    consideration outside them.

The grounds of appeal

 6. However, none of the above flaws in the judge's analysis form the basis
    of the grounds upon which Judge Gill granted permission  to  appeal  on
    the 6th November 2018. Those grounds instead focus upon what is said to
    be the judge's flawed analysis of the evidence of [HK]'s disability and
    the availability of facilities in Pakistan to assist in overcoming  it,
    as well as a fairly general criticism of the  balance  that  the  judge
    struck between the public interest in applying immigration controls  in
    a consistent manner on the one hand and the obstacles posed  by  [HK]'s
    disability to his integration in Pakistan on  the  other.  I  therefore
    turn to consider those grounds

 7. Having concluded that it was necessary to conduct an  analysis  of  the
    appellants' private and family-life claim outside the Rules, the  judge
    stated that "in reality  this  case  is  a  balance  between  the  best
    interests of [HK] and the flagrant breach  of  immigration  control  by
    their parents" (paragraph 10).

 8. In dealing with the  latter,  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellants'
    immigration status had always  been  "temporary  and  precarious"  (the
    suggestion by Judge Gill that the judge "may have erred in  failing  to
    take into account section 117B(3)" of the 2002 Act is  to  this  extent
    not borne out) but considered that the parents'  decision  to  overstay
    their leave to remain was to some degree offset  by  an  understandable
    desire to protect what they perceived to be in  [HK]'s  best  interests
    [paragraphs 10 and 12]. The judge also noted that it  was  accepted  by
    the appellants that the second appellant had used a proxy to obtain  an
    English  language  certificate;  something  which  he  described  as  a
    "serious matter  that  undermines  the  integrity  of  the  immigration
    system" [paragraph 10]. He also found that each of the appellants spoke
    English, noting that this was essentially a neutral factor that did not
    strengthen the appellants'  human  rights  claim  but  neither  did  it
    detract from it. Finally in relation to those factors that  weighed  in
    favour of the public interest in removal, he noted  that,  "the  family
    are  not  financially  independent  and  that   counts   against   them
    particularly as [HK] will cost the state substantially" [paragraph 14].

 9. In dealing with [HK]'s disability, the judge said that he was,  "in  no
    doubt that [HK]'s development will be impaired by requiring him to move
    to Pakistan where the facilities for autistic children  are  much  less
    developed that in his now home area of Leeds" [paragraph 11]. Following
    a review of the evidence, the judge said that, "in relation to  private
    life and in particular, [HK]'s, I consider this  an  exceptional  case"
    [paragraph 14]. The judge went on to state that the impact  of  removal
    on [HK] "would be harmful to this child" [paragraph 15].  He  concluded
    by saying that he was "not satisfied that he [HK] would in  reality  be
    able to access suitable facilities  in  Pakistan  and  ...  the  public
    interest issues in the present case are outweighed by the needs of this
    child, notwithstanding the serious misconduct by the parents".

The rival submissions

10. Mrs Pettersen submitted that neither  the  evidence  nor  much  of  the
    judge's own reasoning supported this  conclusion.  Firstly,  the  judge
    failed to explain why he had not  accepted  the  respondent's  evidence
    that there were various specialist schools in Pakistan, including 'Amin
    Maktab School' and 'Oasis  School'  in  Lahore,  the  National  Special
    Education Centre for Intellectually Challenged Children  in  Islamabad,
    along  with  various  government-provided  special  education  centres.
    Secondly, as the judge himself noted at paragraph 12 of  his  decision,
    the only evidence that the appellants had produced to counter this were
    newspaper reports which, absent oral testimony from the appellants, the
    judge was not satisfied provided a truly representative of the  picture
    in Pakistan [paragraph 12]. In reply, Mr Ell pointed to paragraph 6  of
    the decision in which the judge referred to a witness statement by  the
    first appellant in which she stated that "there were extremely  limited
    facilities for children with autism in Pakistan". The judge had also at
    that stage referred to  what  he  described  as  "supporting  newspaper
    articles" which, by way of example, he said showed that less than fifty
    per cent of doctors in Pakistan  had  heard  of  autism  and  that  the
    limited facilities available were massively  overstretched.    Finally,
    Mr Ell pointed out that  whilst  the  facilities  referred  to  by  the
    Secretary of State were said to provide for children with disabilities,
    they were not said to cater specifically for children with autism.

Conclusion

11. It seems to me that throughout his decision the judge was reversing the
    correct burden of proof and that, had he applied it correctly, he would
    have been bound to conclude that the appellants had failed to discharge
    the onus of proving that there was a lack  of  adequate  facilities  in
    Pakistan  for  children  with  autism  amounting  to  very  significant
    obstacles to [HK]'s integration on return. Whilst at paragraph  12  the
    judge  acknowledged  the  considerable  difficulties   faced   by   the
    appellants in establishing "the paucity of facilities  for  caring  for
    autistic children in Pakistan", he nevertheless went on  to  state  (at
    paragraph 15) that he "not satisfied that [HK] would in reality be able
    to access suitable facilities in Pakistan". However, the  question  for
    the judge was not whether he was satisfied that [HK] would be  able  to
    access suitable facilities in Pakistan, for this implies  that  it  was
    for the Secretary of State to prove this, and the mere  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State had chosen to adduce evidence of  the  existence  of
    such facilities in Pakistan did not mean that he  thereby  assumed  the
    legal (as opposed to an evidential)  burden  of  proof.    Rather,  the
    correct question for the judge was whether he was satisfied  that  [HK]
    would be unable to access suitable facilities in  Pakistan.  The  judge
    had acknowledged the very considerable difficulties that were faced  by
    the appellants in proving this  upon  the  limited  evidence  they  had
    placed  before  him.  In  my   judgement,   those   difficulties   were
    insurmountable. Indeed, it was clear from the appellants' evidence that
    specialist facilities are available for autistic children (such as  the
    'Autism Resource Centre' in Rawalpindi) albeit  that  those  facilities
    are overstretched and come at a price [see page 87 of  the  appellant's
    bundle of documents]. It therefore seems  to  me  to  follow  that  the
    appellants  had  failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proving   that
    facilities for autistic children in Pakistan would be insufficient  for
    [HK]'s needs and that, accordingly, he  would  face  'very  significant
    obstacles' to his integration on return to that country.

12. I therefore hold that the judge made an error of law which, had he  not
    made it, would have led to the dismissal of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal of the Secretary of State from the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is allowed.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow  the  appeals  against
    refusal of the appellants' application for leave to remain  on  private
    and family life grounds is set aside and substituted by a  decision  to
    dismiss those appeals.



Judge Kelly                             Date: 14th January 2019

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
