
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
HU/03357/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 September 2018              |On 7 December 2018                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                          Miss GANESH KUMARI LIMBU
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Khalid, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Davidge on 9 August 2018 against the decision and
           reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria who had dismissed the
           appeal  of  the  Appellant  seeking  settlement  as  the   adult
           dependant relative of an ex Gurkha soldier under the Home Office
           policy.  The decision and reasons was promulgated  on  12  March
           2018.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born on 15 June 1987.  The
           Entry Clearance Officer's decision was dated 3 February 2017 and
           was to the following  effect.   The  Appellant  was  leading  an
           independent adult  life.  She  was  not  wholly  financially  or
           emotionally dependant on her parents.  She had lived apart  from
           them  for  over  two   years.    There   were   no   exceptional
           circumstances.  The  terms  of  Home  Office  Gurkha  Dependants
           policy were not met. There was no disproportionality in  Article
           8 ECHR terms when the balancing  exercise  was  performed.   The
           judge found that the Home Office policy was not met and that  as
           the Appellant was able to work (although not working by  choice)
           and   leading   an   independent   life,   her   exclusion   was
           proportionate.  She dismissed the appeal on that  basis,  having
           found that there was sufficient family life to engage Article  8
           ECHR.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because it  was  held  arguable
           that, having found family life existed so that  Article  8  ECHR
           was engaged, the judge needed to explain the weight to be  given
           to the "historic injustice" as well as to  immigration  control,
           and why the "historic injustice" did  not  outweigh  immigration
           control:  Ghising  and  Others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong:
           weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).




      Submissions


      4.    Mr Khalid for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary, he submitted that the  judge  had
           completely failed to  address  the  central  issue  of  historic
           injustice.  Family  life  had  been  accepted.   The  judge  had
           applied the  earlier  Ghising  (Family  life  -Adults  -  Gurkha
           policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) rather than  the  later  Ghising
           and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong:  weight)  [2013]  UKUT
           00567 (IAC), which was an error of law.  Although the judge  had
           misunderstood the Home Office policy, the main  problem  in  the
           decision and reasons was her Article 8 ECHR analysis.   Once  it
           had been shown that the Appellant's sponsor would  have  settled
           in the United  Kingdom  but  for  the  historic  injustice,  the
           proportionality balance fell in her  favour,  as  Gurung  [2013]
           EWCA Civ 8 showed. The determination should  be  set  aside  and
           remade in the First-tier Tribunal.


      5.    Mr Kandola for  the  Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
           material error of law.  The judge had made appropriate citations
           and made them accurately.  A fact sensitive assessment had  been
           required and the judge's reasons for finding  that  Home  Office
           policy  was  not  met  were  unimpeachable.   Whichever  Ghising
           decision was applied the result was the same on the facts found,
           i.e., the  Appellant  was  leading  an  independent  life.   The
           onwards appeal should be dismissed.


      6.    In reply, Mr Khan reiterated his submissions.  The Appellant had
           been under 30 when her  entry  clearance  application  had  been
           made.  Family life had been  found.   There  would  need  to  be
           rehearing.




      Error of law finding


      7.    The present appeal has not been straightforward to decide.   The
           evidence provided to the First-tier Tribunal fell well short  of
           establishing anything beyond the normal emotional  ties  between
           the Appellant, an adult daughter aged 30  at  the  date  of  the
           hearing (the relevant date for Article 8 ECHR purposes), and her
           parents.  The Appellant's witness  statement  was  in  substance
           barely an A4 page long, and made a series of vague and unfounded
           assertions, such as the claim that she had remained dependant on
           her parents despite having gone to work in Qatar for two  years,
           a claim  admitted  to  be  wrong  by  the  sponsor  during  oral
           evidence.  Both witness statements unhelpfully sought  to  argue
           the case rather than setting  out  the  facts  relied  on.   The
           sponsor's witness statement was just as brief as the Appellant's
           and simply asserted emotional dependency, without  any  examples
           or details.   There  was  no  explanation  of  why  the  claimed
           relationship  with  the  Appellant  was   different   from   the
           relationship with the sponsor's other adult children.  There was
           no evidence from the Appellant's mother.  It was not in  dispute
           that the  Appellant  was  fit  and  well,  of  at  least  normal
           intelligence, readily capable of her  own  care  and  had  lived
           apart from her parents for at least two periods of two years  or
           more.  The judge found that the Appellant was able to work.  She
           has sisters and other relatives in Nepal with  whom  she  is  in
           contact, and from whom the judge found  she  receives  emotional
           support.


      8.    The Appellant was under the age of 30 when she applied for entry
           clearance to join her parents.  The judge made no finding to the
           contrary,  but  found  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
           essential policy requirements because  she  was  neither  wholly
           financially nor emotionally  dependant  on  her  parents.  Ample
           reasons are given for those findings.  Home  Office  policy  was
           thus not met.  Mr Khalid was  wise  not  to  press  any  serious
           challenge to that part of the determination.


      9.    The judge found as  fact  that  the  Appellant  was  leading  an
           independent life in Nepal: see [46] of the decision and reasons.
            It is not at first blush easy to see why, in the face  of  that
           unequivocal and properly reasoned finding, that the  judge  went
           on to find that there was family  life  continuing  between  the
           Appellant and her parents: see [56] of the decision and reasons.
            This finding does not follow Kugathas [2003] EWCA (Civ) 31  (or
           Kopoi [2017] EWCA  Civ  1511)  and  creates  an  impossible  and
           irreconcilable tension in the decision and reasons, which throws
           into doubt all that follows.


      10.   In this tribunal's view, the judge inadvertently fell into error
           when reaching a finding that there was family life sufficient to
           engage Article 8 ECHR protection, which helps  explain  why  the
           determination is not easy to understand and why  the  Article  8
           ECHR reasoning  which  follows  is  unsatisfactory.   Mr  Khalid
           complains with some justification that  Ghising  [2013]  (above)
           was not followed.  Mr Kandola sought to  persuade  the  tribunal
           that there was no difference of substance between Ghising [2012]
           and Ghising [2013], at least on the facts found in this  appeal,
           but in the tribunal's view the judge needed to  show  that  both
           authorities had been properly considered and applied.  There  is
           a difference of emphasis between them  in  the  Article  8  ECHR
           proportionality assessment,  in  the  impact  of  the  "historic
           injustice".  Consideration of that difference might have changed
           the outcome, if the inconsistent findings could be resolved.


      11.   This  area  of  law  has  some  complexity,  as  the  number  of
           authorities  indicate.   The  judge  prepared  a   conscientious
           determination but with reluctance  the  tribunal  has  concluded
           that it cannot stand because of the  inconsistent  findings  and
           the absence of  consideration  of  Ghising  [2013].   Mr  Khalid
           contended that this was not an appeal which could be  remade  in
           the Upper Tribunal if inconsistent  findings  were  established,
           because there was no proper way to resolve them.   The  tribunal
           agrees.  With regret, the decision and reasons must be set aside
           and the appeal reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.




      DECISION


      The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed


      The making of the previous decision involved the  making  of  material
      errors on a point of law.  The decision is  set  aside.   It  will  be
      remade in the First-tier Tribunal by any judge other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Haria

      Signed                                  Dated 27 September 2018




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




