
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/03658/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision given in court              |
|On 4 May 2017                         |On 10 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                           Ademola Ganiyu Oyeniyan
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Catherine Bexson (counsel instructed by ADA)
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath

                            DECISION AND REASONS




    This is an appeal, against a decision by Judge Jessica  Pacey,  sitting
    at Birmingham on 16 November 2016, by a citizen of Nigeria who came  to
    this country on 1 August 2015 on a business visit visa.   On  5  August
    his son [Y] was born to a lady called Bose Babalola, who was a  British
    citizen.  She already had four children before him who were not British
    citizens; but, it was argued, were entitled to be registered  as  such.
    On 29 October he applied for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    private and family life with them, and that was refused on  24  January
    2016 on the basis that he did not have sole parental responsibility for
    the children, and there were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    pursuing his family life upon return.

 2. The appellant explained in  the  witness  statement  that  he  had  not
    returned to Nigeria, as he had planned, because Bose had  had  problems
    giving birth to [Y], and, it seemed, she had also gone back to college.
     There were letters of support from her college and from the school and
    the GP about the children; but neither the appellant nor Bose  Babalola
    gave  evidence.   Since  they  were  represented  by   somebody   whose
    qualifications are unclear, and certainly not by Miss Bexson, it  seems
    that they may well have done that on advice.

 3. If so, then it was extremely bad advice, particularly in a case where a
    family was involved.  It is of the very first importance for a judge to
    be able personally to assess the quality of the family life between the
    appellant and his  children,  and  there  can  really  be  very  little
    criticism of the judge for not doing so in this case.  The right  thing
    to do, if a judge becomes aware that this line is going to be taken, is
    for first to  warn  the  representative;  and  then,  if  it  is  still
    persisted in, the potential witness personally, that  failure  to  give
    oral evidence may be held against them.

 4. That did not happen here; and the result in the end was that,  although
    the judge gave a painstaking and detailed decision on other aspects  of
    the case, including the considerations about the appellant's precarious
    immigration status, dictated by section 117B (5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, she did not deal with  the  important,
    though not necessarily decisive question at (6). This  was  whether  he
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying
    child, which [Y] at least was, and potentially the other children; and,
    if so, whether it would be reasonable to expect the child  or  children
    to leave this country.  In those circumstances both  sides  are  agreed
    that there is no alternative  to  the  appeal  being  allowed,  with  a
    direction for a fresh hearing before another first-tier judge.

Appeal
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Pacey
                               [pic]                       (a judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)
