
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03702/2018
                                                HU/03703/2018, HU/03704/2018
                                                HU/03705/2018, HU/03706/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 9 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                abdul [g] (1)
                                aysha [h] (2)
                                  [S I] (3)
                                  [R I] (4)
                                  [F I] (5)
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Mian, Counsel instructed by Bhavsar Patel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. The appellants appeal (with permission granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Bruce) the decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    JWH Law, that was promulgated on 9 April 2018.  Judge Law  decided  the
    decisions refusing further leave to the  appellants  was  not  unlawful
    under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 2. The appellants are all citizens of Sri Lanka.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are married and the other appellants are their children, all
    of whom are under 18 years of age.  The eldest child was born in the UK
    in April 2010 and it is accepted she has lived in the UK for more  than
    seven years.   The  question  in  this  appeal  is  whether  Judge  Law
    adequately considered her circumstances in the UK and the impact on her
    life should she have to relocate to Sri Lanka.

 3. Although this appeal includes the rights of children, Judge Law was not
    asked and did not make an  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
    request for the Upper Tribunal to make an anonymity order and there  is
    no obvious reason why one should be made.

 4. Mr Mian  argued  that  Judge  Law  failed  to  address  adequately  the
    reasonableness issue in section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and this undermined his decision.  In addition,  or
    in the alternative, Mr Mian  argued  that  Judge  Law  failed  to  make
    adequate findings relating to the private life of the  third  appellant
    (who has lived in the UK for more than seven years) and  therefore  his
    article 8 ECHR proportionality assessment was fundamentally flawed.

 5. Ms Aboni acknowledged these issues, and conceded that the Secretary  of
    State accepted the third appellant is a qualifying child  and  that  if
    her appeal were to succeed then the  other  appellants  would  have  to
    treated in line because it  would  be  disproportionate  to  split  the
    family group.

 6. Mr Mian argues the following evidence was overlooked or not  adequately
    considered by Judge Law.  The witness statement of the first  appellant
    records at paragraph 8 that he believes his three children are  settled
    in the UK and would find it difficult to adjust to life in  Sri  Lanka.
    Specifically referring to his eldest daughter, the third appellant,  he
    describes her having many friends since  starting  primary  school  and
    that if the family left the UK he feared there would be  a  detrimental
    impact on her development because the education offered in Sri Lanka is
    of stark comparison to that which is received in the UK.

 7. A letter and reports from Linden Primary  School  describes  the  third
    appellant's attitude to learning and behaviour in school.  Her positive
    attitude is recorded, as is her good progress.   The  reports  identify
    her working with friends in school and working in teams.

 8. Mr Mian submitted that  the  evidence  shows  the  third  appellant  is
    sociable and at a turning point in the development of her  personality.
    He said a move to Sri Lanka would be a shook  to  her  because  of  the
    major change in schooling  she  would  have  to  experience.   Mr  Mian
    reminded me that Judge Law found  at  [26]  that  it  is  possible  the
    children cannot write Sri Lankan (sic), which would  affect  the  third
    appellant's integration into the Sri Lankan education system.

 9. I pause to point out that there is no "Sri Lankan" language.  There are
    several languages spoken widely  in  Sri  Lanka,  including  Sinhalese,
    Tamil and English.  No issue has been taken by Judge Law's reference to
    the children not being able to write Sri Lankan and  I  presume  he  is
    referring to the ability of the  children  to  write  in  Sinhalese  or
    Tamil.  I add that the two youngest children, who are twins, are not of
    school age and therefore are unlikely  to  be  able  to  write  in  any
    language.

10. Mr Mian also sought to rely on evidence that there was violence in  the
    part of Sri Lanka to which the family group was likely  to  return  and
    that was a further factor that should have been considered.  He  relied
    on two reports.

11. I did not need to hear from Ms Aboni because the arguments presented by
    Mr Mian are insufficient to establish there is an error of law in Judge
    Law's decision.

12. I start with the second issue.  Judge Law dealt specifically  with  the
    risk of violence disturbing the children at  [26(v)].   I  reminded  Mr
    Mian that in relation  to  these  appeals,  which  are  not  protection
    appeals, the standard of proof is a balance of  probabilities  and  not
    the  lower  standard.   As  a  result,  the  reports,  which   describe
    generalised and sporadic violence, would not be sufficient to establish
    a risk to the children's lives  and  freedoms.   In  other  words,  the
    evidence was weak and speculative that the children would  be  affected
    by the violence described.  I  add  that  Judge  Law  as  a  specialist
    Tribunal judge would be  familiar  with  the  country  guideline  cases
    relating to Sri Lanka and that he was  also  familiar  with  the  first
    appellant's previous protection claim, which failed on appeal, which is
    recorded at [2] and [46].

13. Turning to the first issue, having reviewed the evidence  available  to
    Judge Law I find there is no  merit  in  Mr  Mian's  argument  that  he
    overlooked or  failed  to  adequately  consider  that  evidence.    His
    conclusions at [26] and [42] are made by properly applying the relevant
    jurisprudence to the facts found.

14. The evidence of the first appellant was found to lack credibility  (see
    [16]), which  meant  the  assertions  in  his  witness  statement  were
    insufficient to discharge the burden  of  proof.   The  other  evidence
    relates solely to the behaviour of the third appellant at school.  Case
    law indicates that the ECHR does not guarantee a particular standard of
    education, as noted by Judge Law at [22].  Although friends  and  teams
    are mentioned in  the  school  documents,  they  do  not  identify  any
    particular  relationships  and  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  close
    relationship that would be severed by the third appellant moving to Sri
    Lanka.  The school documents are not evidence the third appellant is at
    a  crucial  stage  in  her  development.   The  comments  that  she  is
    developing well are merely evidence that she is developing as  expected
    for a child of her age.  No  independent  evidence  has  been  provided
    regarding the impact relocation to Sri Lanka might have  on  the  third
    appellant.  In this context there was no need for Judge Law to refer to
    the assertions and school documents because they contained no  relevant
    evidence.

15. I find the analysis undertaken by Judge Law at [26] to be adequate  and
    that there  is  no  error  in  his  failure  to  mention  the  father's
    assertions or the school documents.

16. Judge Law  found  the  evidence  provided  established  that  the  best
    interests of all the children were to remain  as  part  of  the  family
    group.  That decision was open to him and I find no legal error in that
    decision because the evidence provided was insufficient to make out the
    claim now pursued.

17. Although not available to Judge Law, Judge Bruce referenced the Supreme
    Court's judgment in KO (Nigeria) and others  v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53.
    Lord Carnwarth at [18] and [19] said:

         "18. On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
         to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:

             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
         considering the "best interests" of  children  in  the  context  of
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  in
         EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

             "58. In my judgment, therefore, the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

         To the extent that Elias LJ may  have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
         (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing
         in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is to be considered
         otherwise than in  the  real  world  in  which  the  children  find
         themselves."

18. On the facts of these appeals, in relation to the third appellant,  the
    evidence points to her best interests being best served by remaining as
    part of the family group.  If her parents leave  the  UK,  then  it  is
    reasonable to expect her to leave with them and her  siblings,  because
    the evidence relating to her own private life is not sufficient to make
    it disproportionate to expect her to leave the UK.

19. Because there is no legal error,  the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    fails.

Decision

There is no legal error in the decision and reasons of Judge JHW Law  and  I
uphold his decision.

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                                       Date         1 May 2019

     Judge McCarthy
     Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


