
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/03292/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 17th December 2018  On 15th January 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer (counsel, instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant's application to remain in the UK on the basis of long
    residence was refused. The Appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ripley in the decision promulgated on the 3rd of
    September 2018. In paragraph 18 of the decision the Judge rejected the
    Appellant's explanation for the errors in his tax returns but went on
    to find that the circumstances did not justify a refusal under
    paragraph 320(5) of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal relying on the case
    of Abassi and Samant that the position of HMRC was not relevant to the
    decision that had to be made as there may be factors that influenced
    the position of HMRC which were not in evidence. The absence of a
    penalty notice was neither here nor there. The contents of a tax return
    were the responsibility of the Appellant. Permission was granted by the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant cross-appealed on the grounds that the Judge had not
    properly directed himself on the burden and standard of proof where
    deception is alleged and in failing to make clear findings in relation
    to the Appellant's dishonesty, permission was granted by the Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. The hearing of the 2 appeals was short as it was accepted that there
    were errors demonstrated on both sets of grounds and that the appeal
    would have to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing
    with no findings preserved.

 5. The Appellant is right to observe that the Judge made no reference to
    the burden and standard of proof in cases where the Secretary of State
    alleges dishonesty/ deception. The burden in those circumstances is on
    the Secretary of State, the standard of proof is the balance of
    probabilities but cogent evidence is required to justify such a finding
    which should not be made lightly having regard to the potential
    consequences for an individual. The failure to acknowledge the shift in
    the burden is significant as it suggests that the Judge had not
    focussed properly on the allegation made and failed to address the
    Appellant's actual level of culpability.

 6. That compounds the errors made in the decision itself in which the
    Judge placed undue emphasis on the role and attitude of HMRC when there
    was no evidence on which any inferences could be drawn. In rejecting
    the Appellant's explanation for the errors that had arisen in his tax
    returns the Judge had not given weight to the Appellant's
    responsibility for the errors made and had not made a clear finding on
    whether the Appellant had been dishonest or not in filing the returns
    actually submitted.

 7. Both parties are entitled to have their respective cases fully analysed
    in line with the relevant principles and for clear sustainable findings
    to be made on the appropriate legal footing. The errors are such that
    it would not be appropriate for the decision to be re-made in the Upper
    Tribunal and accordingly the decision is set aside and remitted to be
    heard by a different Judge.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to re-hearing with no findings preserved, not to be
heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ripley.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
direction.

Fee Award

I make no fee order which remains a matter for the First-tier Tribunal at
the conclusion of the remitted hearing.

Signed:[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)
Dated: 27th December 2018

