
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03062/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th May 2017                      |On 5th June 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Mr Muyiwa Lukman Lawal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Hannan, Counsel, instructed by Corban
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Mr Lawal is a citizen of Nigeria.  His date of  birth  is  recorded  as
    20th February 1987.  He made application for leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds which application was refused on
    7th July 2015.  He appealed.  His appeal was  heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Colvin sitting at Taylor House on 7th October 2016.
     At that time the Appellant's partner was pregnant.  Since then she has
    given birth to a girl.  Having heard the evidence Judge Colvin  allowed
    the appeal.  Having regard to the wider application of  Article  8  the
    principal consideration appears  to  have  been  that  the  Appellant's
    partner was at that time pregnant.

 2. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 14th November 2016, the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis as set out in the grant of permission of Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson which was  that  the  judge  had  misdirected
    herself in basing her decision on future events going beyond  the  date
    of the hearing on the basis that the Appellant's  British  partner  was
    expecting a child in early 2017.

 3. I have to say that that was an extraordinarily generous grant  and,  in
    my view, missed the point.  The judge did  not  base  the  decision  on
    future events at all.  The decision was based on that which existed  at
    the time,  namely  that  the  Appellant's  partner  was  at  that  time
    pregnant.

 4. Mr Duffy has taken a very realistic and reasonable view in  this  case.
    He does not seek to persuade me in any way whatsoever  to  do  anything
    other than to dismiss the appeal which I do.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed. The Decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

