
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03953/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2018                             |On 10 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AMUDALAT [L]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Elliott-Kelly, Counsel


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

    1. In this case,  it  is  the  Secretary  of  State  who  appeals  with
       permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. However,
       it is more convenient to refer to the parties as  they  were  before
       the First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Ms [L]  as  "the
       appellant" and to the Secretary of State as "the respondent".


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who gives her date of birth as
       12 February 1980. She has four children (E, D, J and R) who are  not
       parties to this appeal. Her highly chequered immigration history  is
       set out in the notice of decision and it is unnecessary to repeat it
       here. She has appealed the decision  of  the  respondent,  dated  26
       January 2016, to refuse her human rights claim and to  proceed  with
       her removal in accordance with a deportation order which was  signed
       on 26 January 2016. The appellant was convicted on 22 March 2012  of
       two offences:  (1)  conspiracy  to  do  an  act  to  facilitate  the
       commission of a breach of UK immigration law by a non-EU person  and
       (2)  with   intent   knowingly   to   possess   a   false/improperly
       obtained/another's identity document. She was sentenced on  3  April
       2012 to a total of three years' imprisonment.

    3. The appellant's appeal was first heard by the First-tier Tribunal on
       22 March 2017. In a determination  promulgated  on  11  April  2017,
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal S  J  Clarke  allowed  the  appeal.
       However, her decision  was  subsequently  set  aside  by  the  Upper
       Tribunal which remitted the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
       fresh hearing by a different judge.

    4. The appeal was reheard at Taylor House on 8 March 2018 by  Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal Herbert OBE. In a decision promulgated on 17
       April 2018, he allowed the appeal on  article  8  grounds.  His  key
       findings may be summarised as follows:

          1) there is strong public interest in removing foreign criminals,
             particularly one who has been part of a conspiracy  to  breach
             immigration law. If the appellant had neither  a  partner  nor
             children there would be  no  reason  why  she  should  not  be
             removed;


          2) the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
             'qualifying partner'. This relationship was  formed  when  her
             immigration status was precarious;


          3)  the  appellant's  partner's   health   conditions   presented
             significant  difficulty  to  him  joining  the  appellant   in
             Nigeria;


          4) the appellant's partner has an older  child  from  a  previous
             relationship who lives with his mother whom he sees  three  or
             four times a month;


          5)  the  appellant's  partner  is  an  essential  carer  for  the
             children, J and R, and also E, who is just out of care;


          6) E is a vulnerable adult;


          7) the appellant has subsisting parental relationships  with  all
             four of her children, three of whom are 'qualifying children';


          8) the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  on  the  children
             would be unduly harsh because of their vulnerabilities.  J  is
             severely autistic.  D  remains  in  care.  The  children  have
             relationships with each other;


          9) E would also be adversely  affected  by  the  removal  of  his
             mother;


         10) once D leaves care, it is highly likely that he  would  return
             to the appellant's care and have increasing contact  with  her
             and his siblings. It was in D's best interests to continue  to
             have face-to-face contact with his mother;


         11) the appellant could not relocate  to  Nigeria  with  J  and  R
             without extreme hardship. Both children are  British  citizens
             and entitled to  education  and  health  care  in  the  UK.  J
             requires a specialist school as a result of his autism. He has
             very poor social skills and very limited ability to self-care.
             He has no awareness of danger and his sleep  difficulties  are
             extreme. Despite the  country  of  origin  information  report
             stating that day care for autistic children is available,  the
             judge took judicial notice as a result of his  own  visits  to
             Nigeria and an awareness of human rights and health facilities
             available in that country that there is no specialist care  at
             all;


         12) the appellant's partner would not accompany the appellant.  He
             is  the  only  wage  earner  and  could  not  be  expected  to
             substitute for the appellant and care for J on his own; and


         13) the appellant has been  assessed  of  posing  a  low  risk  of
             reoffending with a low risk of harm to the general public. She
             has engaged with all probation  contacts  whilst  on  licence.
             Nearly 8 years  have  passed  since  her  arrest  without  any
             further  offending.  The   judge   took   into   account   the
             circumstances of her conviction, including the domestic  abuse
             which she and her children were suffering at the hands of  her
             previous partner.

    5. The respondent again sought permission to appeal, which was  granted
       by Judge the First-tier Tribunal Saffer on 30 July 2018. The grounds
       can be summarised as follows:

          1) the judge failed to give clear reasons why it would be  unduly
             harsh on the appellant's four children for the appellant to be
             removed and what weight was attributed to the public  interest
             in the decision. The judge appeared to have glossed  over  the
             appellant's immigration and  criminal  history.  Although  the
             judge had given consideration to the low risk of  reoffending,
             there was no evidence that there had been due consideration of
             deterrence and public revulsion;


          2) the appellant's eldest child, E, was an adult at the  date  of
             decision and was living independently  from  his  mother.  The
             judge speculated that he would choose to live with his  mother
             in the future;


          3) the judge referred in a number of places  to  a  child  called
             Kelvin which appeared to be a mistaken reference to the child,
             D, calling into question the care with  which  the  judge  had
             made his decision. It was possible  he  had  mixed  up  appeal
             hearings;


          4) contact between the appellant and her child, D, was restricted
             to face-to-face meetings on  a  quarterly  basis  and  it  was
             speculative for the judge to consider he might be returned  to
             the care of the appellant;


          5) the judge found it would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant's
             partner and their two  children,  J  and  R,  to  relocate  to
             Nigeria. The main reason given by the judge for  this  finding
             was based on his own knowledge  of  healthcare  facilities  in
             Nigeria  following  his  visits  there.  To   rely   on   this
             information, the judge would need to address  the  country  of
             origin information request provided by the respondent; and


          6) the judge did not provide clear reasons  why  the  appellant's
             partner would be unable to care for J and R  if  the  decision
             were made not to follow the appellant to Nigeria in the  event
             of her deportation. The fact J is autistic  is  not  a  reason
             showing he would not  be  able  to  look  after  the  children
             adequately.

    6. In his decision to grant permission to appeal, Judge  Saffer  stated
       as follows:


         "It is arguable that the Judge has incorporated his  own  knowledge
         of life in Nigeria within the question of how harsh it would be  to
         return without giving the parties the chance to comment on  it  and
         has given inadequate weight to the  public  interest  in  deporting
         foreign nationals who conspire to breach immigration  laws  through
         arranging sham marriages. All grounds may be argued."


    7. I heard oral submissions from the representatives as to whether  the
       decision of Judge  Herbert  is  set  aside  because  it  contains  a
       material error of law.


    8. Mr Tufan, expanding on the written grounds, argued that parts of the
       decision appeared to have been copied and  pasted  from  others.  He
       highlighted the references to the child Kelvin,  pointing  out  that
       the date of birth given was not that of D. He argued that  the  test
       to show that removal was unduly harsh was very high, as explained by
       the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  617.  He
       argued that the judge's consideration of the issue was all "one way"
       and, in other words, did not give sufficient  consideration  to  the
       public interest in deportation. He also highlighted  paragraph  [71]
       of the decision in which the judge had relied on his  own  knowledge
       of circumstances in Nigeria. He argued that this error was  material
       to the outcome of the appeal.

    9. Ms  Elliott-Kelly  relied  on  her  detailed  and  helpful  skeleton
       argument. In her submission, the  decision  of  the  judge  did  not
       contain any material errors of law. The decision should be read as a
       whole. It was clear that the references to Kelvin were  intended  to
       be references to the child D. Kelvin was in fact the  child  of  the
       appellant's partner. She argued that the judge had directed  himself
       correctly in law and that the respondent's arguments amounted to  no
       more than disagreement with the decision, dressed up  as  a  reasons
       challenge. The decision was rational.  There  must  be  cases  where
       deportation would be unduly harsh and, she submitted, this  was  one
       of them.

   10. Ms Elliott-Kelly pointed to the numerous references in the  decision
       to the public interest  in  deportation  and  also  to  the  judge's
       acknowledgement of the seriousness of the  offence.  The  judge  had
       directed himself in terms of the factors  listed  by  Lord  Reed  in
       Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 4799.

   11. I asked  Ms  Elliott-Kelly,  who  had  appeared  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, whether any evidence had been adduced which  entitled  the
       judge to form the view that it was likely that D would return to the
       appellant's care at some point. She told me that the  appellant  had
       been unable to pursue care proceedings while her immigration  status
       was unresolved. She agreed it was always risky, as she put it, for a
       tribunal judge to rely on judicial notice. However, she argued  that
       any error in relation to the judge's reliance on his  own  knowledge
       of children returning  to  their  parents  after  leaving  care  was
       immaterial in this case because the judge had already found that the
       interruption in the current contact  arrangements  would  be  unduly
       harsh.

   12. In any event, argued Ms Elliott-Kelly, the most  compelling  feature
       of the case concerned the child J. I pointed out that the judge  had
       also relied on judicial knowledge with respect  to  his  conclusions
       relating to J. I asked what  evidence  had  been  before  the  judge
       relating to the availability  or  otherwise  of  care  for  autistic
       children in Nigeria. I was  shown  the  responses  to  two  separate
       country of origin information requests obtained by  the  respondent.
       The first of these, dated September 2015, asked whether  there  were
       facilities and treatment available in Nigeria regarding  speech  and
       language therapy. The response stated that there  are  various  NGOs
       and schools in Nigeria which provide education and support  services
       for children who are disabled and also have  learning  difficulties.
       There are speech and language therapy  services  available  although
       most of them are not run  by  professional  speech  therapists.  The
       second document asked whether there is  any  sufficient  support  in
       Nigeria for children with autism regarding  their  health  care  and
       education. The reply stated that treatment  by  child  psychiatrists
       and child psychologists is  available  and  day  care  for  autistic
       children is available.

   13. Although he does not refer to it, it appears that the judge also had
       before him a section of the US State Department  country  report  of
       2016. This states that public schools remain substandard and limited
       facilities preclude access to education for many children.  In  some
       states children accused of witchcraft were killed or suffered abuse.
       Mental health care services were almost non-existent.  Persons  with
       disabilities faced social stigma, exploitation  and  discrimination.
       Many families  viewed  children  with  disabilities  who  could  not
       contribute to family income as liabilities  and  sometimes  severely
       abused or neglected them. People with intellectual disabilities were
       stigmatised, sometimes even within the  community  of  persons  with
       disabilities. Very few children with disabilities were  enrolled  in
       school.


   14. Ms Elliott-Kelly again argued that any error in the judge's approach
       was immaterial. All the judge had to find was that J's removal would
       be unduly harsh and it was sufficient to find  that  this  threshold
       was passed as a result of the interruption to current arrangements.

   15. Ms Elliott-Kelly argued that the judge had given sufficient  reasons
       for finding that the appellant's partner could not  look  after  the
       children alone. The case relied on by the respondent in his grounds,
       BL (Jamaica) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 357 could  be  distinguished  on
       its facts. It was not  concerned  with  a  disabled  child  and  the
       foreign national offender had  been  sentenced  to  more  than  four
       years' imprisonment. In this case, it had been open to the judge  to
       find that J required significant care.

   16. Finally, Ms Elliott-Kelly argued that the judge  had  found  in  the
       alternative that, if  the  rules  were  not  met,  there  were  very
       compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in  the
       exceptions to consider the decision disproportionate. In doing so he
       had applied the balance sheet approach suggested by Lord  Thomas  in
       Hesham Ali.

   17. I have carefully taken account of the submissions made to me  and  I
       have decided that the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  does
       contain a material error of law. I allow the appeal. My reasons  are
       as follows.

   18. It is helpful at this point to set out the relevant parts of the law
       as follows:

         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and


             (a) ...


             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or


             (c) ... ,


         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and


                 i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least
                    the 7 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the
                    immigration decision;


         and in either case (a) it would be unduly harsh for  the  child  to
         live in the country to which the person is to be deported; and  (b)
         it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the UK  without
         the person who is to be deported; or


         (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and


              (i) the relationship was formed at a  time  when  the  person
              (deportee) was in  the  UK  lawfully  and  their  immigration
              status was not precarious; and


              (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in the
              country to which the person is to  be  deported,  because  of
              compelling circumstances over and above  those  described  in
              paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and


              (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain  in
              the UK without the person who is to be deported."


           "117CArticle 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
      foreign criminals


           (1)The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
           interest.
           (2)The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
           the greater  is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
           criminal.
           (3)In the case of a foreign criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception  1  or
           Exception 2 applies.
           (4)Exception 1 applies where-
           (a)C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  most
           of C's life,
           (b)C  is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
           Kingdom, and
           (c)there would be very significant obstacles to C's  integration
           into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
           (5)Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
           relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
           subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying  child,  and
           the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child  would  be
           unduly harsh.
           (6)In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
           period of imprisonment  of  at  least  four  years,  the  public
           interest requires deportation unless there are  very  compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1
           and 2.
           (7)The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken
           into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
           to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the  reason
           for the decision was the  offence  or  offences  for  which  the
           criminal has been convicted."

   19.  Although  not  clearly  expressed  in  the  decision,  the  judge's
       conclusion was that the appellant satisfied paragraph 399(a) of  the
       rules and section 117C(5) of the Act such that her removal would  in
       the circumstances be disproportionate.


   20. I shall take the arguments in turn.

   21. The appellant was a marriage fixer, working with a corrupt vicar, to
       organise sham marriages. I do not accept that the  judge  failed  to
       show that he had taken  full  account  of  the  seriousness  of  the
       appellant's offending. He set out the circumstances of  the  offence
       at [13] and noted the judge's sentencing remarks at [14] to [17]. He
       noted therefore that the appellant had not played a leading role but
       was the equivalent of  "middle  management".  She  had  pleaded  not
       guilty and did not  show  remorse.  However,  she  had  no  previous
       convictions. The judge appears to have accepted what was said  about
       her lifestyle at the time, set out at [20].

   22. The judge summarised the Secretary  of  State's  position  that  the
       appellant's removal was conducive to the public good  and  that  she
       did not meet the exceptions to deportation. The judge then began his
       findings  of  fact  by  reminding  himself  that  there  was   clear
       seriousness and strong public interest in removing foreign  national
       offenders, particularly one who has been part of the  conspiracy  to
       breach  immigration  law.  He  accurately  summarised  the  relevant
       considerations  at  [53].  At  [62]  he  reminded  himself  of   the
       provisions of section 117C(2). Finally, at [77], the  judge  rounded
       off his decision by stating that the combination of circumstances in
       the case were  compelling  and  exceptional  such  that  the  public
       interest in deportation was overridden.

   23. The grounds argue that the judge erred by failing to  give  specific
       consideration to the issues of deterrence and  public  revulsion  at
       offending. However, in my view, it  is  sufficient  that  the  judge
       directed himself in terms of Lord Reed's  judgment  in  Hesham  Ali.
       Moreover, it is clear from the separate judgment of Lord Wilson that
       the consideration to society's revulsion at serious crime should  no
       longer be treated as an aspect of the public interest in deportation
       (see paragraph 70).

   24. I conclude that the challenge to the decision based on a failure  by
       the judge to  recognise  the  strong  public  interest  in  removing
       foreign national offenders is little more than disagreement with the
       decision.

   25. I now turn to the challenges made to the  judge's  consideration  of
       the evidence as it relates to the appellant's children. I note  that
       E and D are the children of previous relationships. E  was  born  in
       Nigeria in 1999. D was born in the UK in December 2006. J and R  are
       children from the appellant's relationship with her current partner.
       Consequently, they are British citizens. J was born  in  the  UK  in
       November 2012. R was born in July 2016, which was after the date  of
       decision.

   26. It is a fair criticism of the decision that there are numerous rogue
       references to a child "Kelvin" at points at which the judge  appears
       to have intended to refer to the child D. There  appears  to  be  no
       other explanation for this than carelessness  on  the  part  of  the
       judge. However, looking at the decision as a whole, it  is  possible
       to say that the errors are not such that they give rise  to  a  real
       concern that the judge had in mind a  different  appeal  altogether.
       The  child  features  in  the  judge's  discussion  of  the   family
       circumstances in a manner which  is  appropriate  to  the  evidence.
       Furthermore,  Kelvin  is  in  fact  a  child  who  features  in  the
       appellant's family, being  the  child  of  the  appellant's  current
       partner. This is not a reason to set aside the decision.

   27. Of greater concern are the judge's findings that E and  D,  both  of
       whom were made the subject of care orders in September  2012,  would
       in the future return to live with the appellant. In the case  of  E,
       this is perhaps less material because,  as  the  judge  was  plainly
       aware, he had reached  adulthood  and  left  care  by  the  date  of
       hearing. On what basis was the judge able to  conclude  that  D  was
       likely to return to the appellant's care as soon as he was able to?

   28. At [31], the judge states that he took judicial notice of  the  fact
       that once a child is over 13 it is more likely that  he  would  have
       increasing levels of contact with his natural  parent  unless  there
       had been a deterioration in their relationship or some likelihood of
       significant harm occurring. The judge appears to have reasoned  that
       there was no evidence of the likelihood of harm and therefore it was
       likely D would have increasing levels of contact with the  appellant
       as he grows older.

   29. Plainly, the judge was required to base his conclusions on  evidence
       and he  was  not  entitled  to  speculate.  As  said,  I  asked  the
       representatives whether they could point to anything in the evidence
       which could have founded the judge's conclusion in  relation  to  D.
       However, they were unable to do so. It seems to  me  therefore  that
       the judge erred in his assessment of this  particular  part  of  the
       evidence as it relates to D. The question arises as to whether  this
       error would have affected the outcome of the decision.

   30. The answer to that question depends on whether  the  respondent  can
       successfully challenge the judge's conclusions in  relation  to  her
       two younger children. If not, then the  appellant  can  successfully
       resist deportation  because  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  those
       children to remove her and therefore any  error  the  assessment  in
       relation to D would become immaterial.

   31. In a  compassionate  decision,  the  judge  took  full  account  the
       particular vulnerabilities of the children. In respect of J he  took
       note of the fact that the child is severely autistic,  with  limited
       speech, insomnia, and difficulty interacting socially and  with  his
       ability to feed himself. He is a very young child  with  significant
       needs. This is a case in which it might have been open to  a  judge,
       properly directed as to the law,  to  find  that  the  unduly  harsh
       threshold has been met. However, any such conclusion must be  firmly
       grounded on evidence.

   32. Insofar as it is argued that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  the
       family to relocate to Nigeria, the particular circumstances of J are
       the main consideration. It is at this point that I  find  the  judge
       made a material error of law which requires the whole decision to be
       set aside. That is because, at [71], he relied on his own  knowledge
       of that country, which he says he has visited. In  the  Presidential
       decision in EG (post-hearing internet research) Nigeria [2008] UKAIT
       00015, Hodge J said as follows:

         "5. It is, however, most unwise for a judge to conduct post-hearing
         research, on the internet or otherwise,  into  the  factual  issues
         which have to be decided in a case.  Decisions  on  factual  issues
         should be made on the basis of the evidence presented on behalf  of
         the parties and such additional evidence as the parties  are  aware
         of as being before the judge.  To conduct post-hearing research  on
         the internet and to  base  conclusions  on  that  research  without
         giving the parties the opportunity to comment on it is  wrong.   If
         such research is conducted, and this determination gives absolutely
         no encouragement to such a  process,  where  an  immigration  judge
         considers the research may  or  will  affect  the  decision  to  be
         reached, then it will be the judge's duty to reconvene the  hearing
         and supply copies to the parties, in order that the parties can  be
         invited to make such submissions as they might have on it."

   33. The evidence submitted by the respondent to the judge to  show  that
       day care for autistic  children  is  available  in  Nigeria  is  not
       impressive. It appears to be no more than the recycling of a  MedCOI
       response from August 2014. Although he did not refer  to  it,  there
       was also some evidence before the judge which, albeit in very  broad
       terms, painted a troubling picture for disabled children in Nigeria.
       At the very least, the judge was required to resolve  the  conflicts
       in this evidence and to give  reasons  for  preferring  one  to  the
       other. What he was plainly not entitled to do was to ignore evidence
       provided by the respondent and to prefer his own knowledge based  on
       his experience of visiting Nigeria. If he were minded to adopt  this
       course, then he should at the very least have given the parties  the
       opportunity to comment on it.


   34. Despite Ms Elliott-Kelly's eloquent submissions to  persuade  me  to
       the contrary, I find the error must be regarded as material  because
       it drives at the heart of the issue of whether it  would  be  unduly
       harsh to expect J to accompany his mother  to  Nigeria.  It  is  not
       simply a matter of the interruption of  the  services  he  currently
       receives but also a consideration of whether he  would  be  able  to
       access some services in Nigeria.

   35. Having decided that the decision must be set  aside,  I  have  asked
       myself whether it is possible to preserve any of the  findings  made
       by the judge. However, given the passage of time and the  inadequacy
       of the evidence  submitted  to  date,  particularly  insofar  as  it
       relates to services in Nigeria, I have decided that it is preferable
       to leave all matters open for the next judge to consider as part  of
       her or his proportionality assessment.

   36. I have not made directions because I am aware that the Taylor  House
       hearing centre has its own thorough  procedures  for  case  managing
       deportation appeals. However,  I  would  take  this  opportunity  to
       remind the appellant that she should assist the tribunal to the best
       of her ability by providing up-to-date  evidence  relating  to  such
       matters as the care arrangements, health and education  of  all  her
       children and her relationship with her partner. I should  also  take
       this opportunity to point out that, for reasons which  are  unclear,
       much of the appellant's evidence is no longer contained  within  the
       file. A properly paginated and indexed consolidated bundle will have
       to be prepared containing all the evidence on  which  the  appellant
       wishes to rely.

   37. If either  party  proposes  to  submit  evidence  relating  to  care
       proceedings, they must not do so unless the consent of the  relevant
       Family Court has been obtained. If deemed necessary, the Protocol on
       communications between judges of the Family  Court  and  Immigration
       and Asylum Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal of
       19 July 2013 can be employed.

   38. The respondent has not considered  J's  diagnosis,  which  was  made
       after the decision, or the position of R, who  was  born  after  the
       decision, and may wish to do so in order to comply  fully  with  his
       duties under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
       Act 2009.

   39. Having considered the Senior President's Practice  Direction  of  15
       September 2012, I make an order under  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
       Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.



NOTICE OF DECISION

     The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The appeal is remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo on all issues.

     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 5 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom



