
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03329/2017
                                                               HU/03340/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 September 2018                          |On 16 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                      Mr REZAUL KARIM (FIRST appellant)
                    Mrs NAHAR SHAMSUN (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Waheed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants have been granted permission to appeal the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J K Swaney dismissing their  appeals  against
    refusal to grant them leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  human
    rights grounds.

2.   The appellants, who are husband and wife, are  citizens  of  Bangladesh
    born on 1 January 1984  and  1  March  1989  respectively.   The  first
    appellant was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  on
    23 November 2009 which was valid until 31 January 2012.  The grounds of
    appeal state that he was then  granted  further  periods  of  leave  to
    remain in the UK, the most recent being valid until 15 September  2015.
    The second appellant entered the UK on 9 April 2015 as the dependant of
    the first appellant.

3.   The grounds of appeal state  that  on  15  September  2015,  the  first
    appellant along with his dependent  spouse,  made  an  application  for
    further  leave  to  remain  outside  the   Immigration   Rules.    That
    application was refused on 16 October 2015 because they had  failed  to
    pay the relevant immigration health surcharge  (IHS).   On  25  October
    2015 they  resubmitted  the  application  for  leave  to  remain.   The
    application was refused on 16 May 2016 with an out of country right  of
    appeal.  The appellants put the respondent on notice that they intended
    to challenge the decision by way of judicial review following which the
    respondent agreed to reconsider the application.  It  is  the  decision
    made following reconsideration that is the subject of this appeal.

4.   The appellants have a daughter who was born on  29  January  2016.   At
    the date  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Judge  the  second
    appellant was pregnant with their second child and  the  estimated  due
    date was 25 July 2018.

5.   The judge stated at paragraph 6  that  the  respondent  considered  the
    application under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules.  Her letter refers to both appellants, however  it
    is unclear that she has  in  fact  considered  the  second  appellant's
    circumstances as the letter was in her view extremely  poorly  drafted.
    The judge repeated at paragraph 73 that she has had regard to the  fact
    that the respondent's decision letter does not appear  to  specifically
    refer to the second appellant because it I so poorly drafted.  She went
    on to find in the same paragraph that she did not consider this to be a
    material factor because she has had the benefit of a  detailed  witness
    statement from the second appellant; of hearing her oral evidence;  and
    of reading the evidence submitted in support of the appeal.

6.   The judge concluded at paragraph 74 that having considered all  of  the
    factors in the round, including the best interests of  the  appellants'
    daughter, the respondent's decision did not give rise to  unjustifiably
    harsh  consequences   for   them.    The   respondent's   decision   is
    proportionate to the legitimate  aim  and  is  therefore  lawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

7.   The judge's decision led  to  an  argument  in  the  appellant's  first
    ground of appeal of procedural unfairness.  It was stated that  as  the
    judge had stated at paragraph 14 that there was no respondent's bundle,
    the judge ought to have adjourned the hearing.  The judge  should  have
    decided whether or not the respondent made any decision in  respect  of
    the second appellant.  Although the notice of decision stated her name,
    no reasons were provided by  the  respondent.   In  the  absence  of  a
    reasons for refusal letter, the judge did not have a valid  appeal  for
    the second appellant.

7.   Mr  Waheed  relied  on  these  grounds.   He  relied  on  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014, Rule 24.

8.   Rule 24 states:

         "(1) Except in appeals to which Rule 23 applies, when a  respondent
             is provided with a copy of a notice of appeal, the  respondent
             must provide the Tribunal with -


             (a)  the notice of the decision to which the notice of  appeal
                  relates and any other document the respondent provided  to
                  the appellant giving reasons for that decision;


             (b)  any statement of evidence or application  form  completed
                  by the appellant;


             (c)  any record of interview with the appellant in relation to
                  the decision being appealed;


             (d)  any other unpublished document which is referred to in  a
                  document mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or relied upon  by
                  the respondent; and


             (e)  the notice of  any  other  appealable  decision  made  in
                  relation to the appellant.


         ..."


9.   Mr Waheed said that Rule 24 requires  the  respondent  to  provide  the
    notice of decision and include any other unpublished document  referred
    to in the decision.  He said that the Secretary of  State  referred  to
    the applications made by the appellants in her letter dated 7  February
    2017.  He said the judge did not have the necessary documents, that  is
    the notice of decision to which the  notice  of  appeal  relates.   The
    first appellant lodged an appeal.  As there  was  no  decision  by  the
    respondent in respect of his wife (second appellant), she should not be
    treated as someone with an adverse decision.  Consequently, she  awaits
    a decision which the second ground relies on.

10.  The second ground, however, states that the judge materially  erred  in
    failing to assess whether it is reasonable for the child to relocate to
    Bangladesh, that being the relevant test  under  Section  117B(6)  NIAA
    2002.  It appears that the judge accepts that this is not a case  where
    the child (or the child's mother) would be expected to or have to leave
    the UK.  Given that acceptance, the  judge  has  erred  in  failing  to
    grapple with Section 117B(6).  I failed to see  the  link  between  the
    first and second grounds of appeal.

11.  Mr Waheed said that the third ground depends on the first ground.   The
    third ground argued that  the  judge  did  not  identify  any  powerful
    reasons justifying the relocation or separation of the child  from  the
    appellant and relied on paragraphs 35 and 46 of MA (Pakistan) and  Ors,
    R (on the application of) v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) and Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

12.  Ms Everett said that all the applications that have been  made  by  the
    first appellant were  made  with  his  spouse.   The  second  appellant
    submitted a witness statement.  Her understanding is that there was one
    application.  The judicial review applications were brought up  as  one
    and the application made to the Secretary of State was also made as one
    application naming both the first and second appellants.  She  said  it
    was clear from the immigration history and the  appellants'  supporting
    documents that the applications  were  made  together  and  the  issues
    relied on were identical.

13.  With regard to the second ground, she said that as the child is  not  a
    qualifying child, the second ground has not been made out.

14.  Consequently, she argued that ground 3 falls away completely.

15.  Ms Everett submitted that the issue raised in the ground in respect  of
    Rule 24 of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules was  not  raised  in
    the First-tier hearing or in the  statements.   There  was  no  dispute
    about this in the  immigration  history  provided  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  She could not see what information was missing that could have
    changed the outcome of the hearing.

16.  Mr Waheed submitted that the situation remains the same  as  the  first
    point.  The Tribunal was not aware because of the  failure  to  provide
    documents which the respondent was obliged to provide  under  Rule  24,
    whether the second appellant was subject  to  an  immigration  decision
    requiring her to leave the UK.  If she was  not,  that  is  a  material
    factor which goes to whether it is proportionate to give effect to  the
    judge's decision with regard to  the  first  appellant.   He  said  the
    Secretary of State cannot demonstrate  that  the  second  appellant  is
    subject to any decision.

17.  I was not persuaded by Mr Waheed's argument.   I  have  had  regard  to
    Rule 24 of the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules.

18.  I find that the  respondent  provided  the  necessary  information  and
    documents that were relevant  to  the  disposal  of  this  appeal.  The
    appellants were represented below by Counsel, Ms Ferguson and  she  did
    not raise this matter as an issue before the judge.

19.  The  letter  dated  7  February  2017  from  the  Home  Office  to  the
    appellants'  solicitor  accompanied  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    ("RFRL").  Annex A of the RFRL named both appellants.  In  the  grounds
    of appeal lodged by the appellants' solicitor, under relevant facts, it
    said that there were two appellants and that reference to the appellant
    was to the lead appellant, Mr Rezaul Karim.  Paragraph 3 of the grounds
    of appeal states that the appellant along with his dependent wife  made
    a further application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside
    the Rules on 15 September 2015 as his spouse was pregnant.   I  do  not
    read into this that the first appellant's spouse made an application in
    her own right and separate from that of her husband.

20.  Indeed, the grounds of appeal lodged against the respondent's  decision
    relied heavily on the first appellant's circumstances in  that  he  had
    been in the UK for seven years and could not return to his  country  of
    origin with his spouse and child.  There was no separate  reference  to
    the circumstances of the second appellant as being different from those
    of the first appellant.

21.  On the evidence I do not find  that  the  second  appellant  is  due  a
    decision or is awaiting a decision from the Secretary of State.  I find
    that the first ground is without merit.

22.  I also find that the second  ground  is  without  merit.   This  ground
    relies on Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002.  In fact, ground 2  recites
    Section 117B.  The requirement in subparagraph (b) is that "the  person
    has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  qualifying  child";
    subparagraph (c) states "and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK."  Qualifying child is  defined  in  s117D(1)  as
    meaning "a person who is under the age of 18 and who (a) is  a  British
    citizen, or (b) has lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of  seven
    years or more."  On the facts, the child, who was born in the UK on  29
    January 2016 and  is  2  years  old,  cannot  be  considered  to  be  a
    qualifying child.  At her age, the child is totally  dependent  on  her
    parents. The child's best interest is  to  be  with  her  parents.  The
    appellants and their child/children  would  be  removed  to  Bangladesh
    together as a family unit.  This ground is also  without  merit.   This
    finding also applies to  the  third  ground.   Therefore,  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 66 were open to her and  disclosed  no  error  of
    law.

23   The judge's decision dismissing the  appellants'  appeal  shall  stand.



24.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 8 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

