
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03387/2016
                                                               hu/03392/2016
                                                               hu/03393/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 February 2018                   |On 26 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                       Mudassra [d] (first appellant)
                          [F d] (second appellant)
                           [K d] (third appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Richardson of Counsel, Nasim & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants in this case are all citizens of  Pakistan.   The  first
    appellant was born on [ ] 1978 and the second and third appellants  are
    her sons, born on [ ] 2006  and  [  ]  2009  respectively.   The  first
    appellant is married to the sponsor, Tariq [D], a British  citizen  and
    the father  of  the  second  and  third  appellants.   The  appellants'
    application for entry clearance was refused  by  the  respondent  in  a
    decision dated 19 January 2016.  The only ground for that  refusal  was
    the failure by the first appellant to disclose in her application  that
    she had been refused a UK visa on 22 September  2006.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 19 June 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Henderson
    dismissed the appellants' appeal on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellants appeal with permission on the basis that the sole  issue
    which caused the judge to dismiss the  appeal  was  her  conclusion  in
    relation to the issue of whether or not the first  appellant  had  made
    false representations.

 3. The appellant's application had been refused by the respondent under S-
    EC.2.2.(b.):

         "S-EC.1.1.    The applicant will  be  refused  entry  clearance  on
         grounds of suitability if any of the  paragraphs  S-EC.1.2  to  1.8
         apply.

         ...

         S-EC.2.2.     Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or

         (b)  there has  been  a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application."

 4. Before the First-tier Tribunal, reliance was  placed  on  AA  (Nigeria)
    [2010] EWCA Civ 773 to support the contention that the  respondent  was
    required to prove dishonesty in such cases; at  paragraph  [6]  of  the
    decision and reasons the Tribunal accepted this was  the  case.   There
    was no challenge to that finding.

 5. The judge found, at [15], that there had been no dishonesty on the part
    of the first appellant in failing to disclose that she had been refused
    a visa in 2006, the judge accepting the evidence,  including  the  oral
    evidence of the sponsor on this point.  However, the Tribunal then went
    on to conclude  that  the  refusal  under  S-EC.2.2.(b)  was  justified
    because no dishonesty was required.

 6. However  Mr  Avery  conceded  that  the  Tribunal  was  wrong  in  that
    conclusion.  He accepted that there were no grounds  for  arguing  that
    there was any difference between  the  wording  under  the  suitability
    grounds in Appendix FM and the general grounds of refusal as considered
    in the applicable case law.

 7. Ahmed (general grounds of refusal - material non  disclosure)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 00351 (IAC) provides as follows:

         "In order to have made false  representations  or  submitted  false
         documents so as to attract a mandatory refusal under Part 9 of  the
         Immigration Rules, an applicant must  have  deliberately  practised
         'Deception', as defined at para 6.  Failing to disclose a  material
         fact is also classed as 'Deception'.  It follows that such  failure
         also requires dishonesty on  the  part  of  the  applicant,  or  by
         someone acting on his behalf."

 8. That being the case, it was evident that if the First-tier Tribunal had
    reached the correct conclusion, that S-EC.2.2(b) did not apply as there
    was no dishonesty, the appeal would have been allowed.   There  was  no
    dispute to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal  findings  that  the
    remaining requirements of the Immigration Rules were met in this  case.
    Those findings are preserved.

 9. I also take into consideration, that in considering Article  8  outside
    of the Immigration Rules and reaching the conclusion that there were no
    compelling circumstances which would require consideration of Article 8
    outside of the Immigration Rules, the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    give any consideration to the fact that the first appellant and sponsor
    have  two  further  children  who  are  British  Citizens.    In   such
    circumstances, taking into consideration the best interests of all  the
    children and where all of the requirements of the Immigration Rules are
    met, it is difficult to see  how  the  respondent's  refusal  could  be
    considered proportionate.  In reaching such a decision regard  must  be
    had to  the  factors  set  out  in  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Maintenance of effective  immigration
    control is in the public interest.  However, it was not suggested  that
    the appellants would be anything other than financially independent and
    the first appellant  had  provided  evidence  of  compliance  with  the
    English language requirements of the Immigration Rules  which  was  not
    disputed.  There is therefore no weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest in respect of these factors.

10. Taking this into account, together with the finding that the appellants
    meet all of the requirements of the Immigration Rules, the appeal under
    Article 8 must succeed.  Mr Avery did not dispute  that  this  was  the
    case.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law  and
    the decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is  set  aside.   I  re-make  the
    decision allowing the appeals.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed   Date: 21 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought or is made.


Signed   Date: 21 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

