
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03899/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2020                     |On 15 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            abdul shakoor qureshi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, instructed by Healys LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1 January 1975. He has
      been given permission to appeal against the decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse his application for leave to remain on the basis of his  family
      life.

   2. The appellant entered the UK on 17 December 2006 with entry  clearance
      as a visitor,  valid  until  17  May  2007.  He  remained  in  the  UK
      unlawfully after the expiry of his visa. On 18 June  2010  he  applied
      for a certificate of approval for  marriage  to  a  Romanian  national
      which was refused on 12 March 2011  on  the  basis  that  it  was  not
      believed that the relationship was a genuine and  subsisting  one.  He
      subsequently  married  a  British   citizen,   Debbie   Jane   Shakoor
      (previously Jane Clift), in an Islamic marriage, on 10 July 2011,  and
      in a civil marriage under UK law on 23 December 2011.

   3. On 8 February 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK
      on the basis of that marriage. The consideration of  that  application
      has since involved a lengthy process and considerable litigation which
      I have set out below in  some  detail,  given  its  relevance  to  the
      challenges raised in the grounds as made  clear  in  my  findings  and
      conclusions.

   4. The  appellant's  application  was  refused  on  19  April  2013.  The
      respondent, in refusing that application, accepted that the  appellant
      had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  British  partner,
      but considered that he could not meet the eligibility requirements  of
      the immigration rules and that he could not benefit from the  criteria
      in EX.1 (b) as there were no insurmountable obstacles  preventing  him
      from  continuing  his  relationship  in   Pakistan.   The   respondent
      considered that the appellant could not meet the criteria in paragraph
      276ADE of the immigration rules on the basis of his private life.  The
      application was refused without a right of appeal as the appellant had
      no leave to remain at the time.

   5. The appellant then  sought  to  challenge  that  decision  by  way  of
      judicial review, on two grounds: that the Secretary of State had acted
      unlawfully by determining his application  under  the  new  rules  and
      Appendix FM which came into  force  on  9  July  2012,  and  that  the
      Secretary of State had  acted  unlawfully  by  failing  to  making  an
      immigration  decision  under  section   82(2)   of   the   Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which would have given rise to a right
      of appeal.

   6. Permission was granted to the appellant by  HHJ  David  Cooke  in  the
      Administrative Court on the first ground, but refused on  the  second.
      The matter was settled, and a consent order sealed on  13  June  2014,
      when the respondent agreed to reconsider the  appellant's  application
      of 8 February 2012.

   7.  The  respondent  then  reconsidered  the  matter  and   refused   the
      appellant's application again in a decision of 16 August 2014. In that
      decision the respondent confirmed that any Article 8 elements  of  the
      applicant's claim to remain in the UK would be considered in line with
      the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE,  albeit  that  the
      application had been made prior to  the  changes  to  the  immigration
      rules on 9 July 2012. The respondent concluded again that there was no
      evidence from the appellant showing that there were any insurmountable
      obstacles  preventing  him  and  his  spouse   from   continuing   his
      relationship in Pakistan, that the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE
      could not be met and that  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
      warranting a grant of leave outside the immigration rules on Article 8
      grounds. In so concluding, the respondent considered  the  appellant's
      claim in relation to his father-in-law's  medical  condition  and  the
      care his wife provided to her father but considered that that did  not
      meet the criteria to justify a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  rules.
      Again, there was no right of  appeal  against  that  decision  as  the
      appellant had no valid leave to remain in the UK.

   8. The appellant once again sought permission to judicially  review  that
      decision on the same two grounds as previously. Permission was refused
      on the papers in the Upper Tribunal on 18 June 2015 by UTJ Perkins and
      then at a hearing on a renewed application on the  same  grounds,  but
      with the  additional  reference  in  the  grounds  to  the  prevailing
      political climate in Pakistan and to the  fact  that  the  appellant's
      wife would not be safe in Pakistan as a western woman and would not be
      able to lead a normal life there. Permission was refused at  the  oral
      hearing by UTJ Rintoul on 24 September 2015  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant had voluntarily left the UK and  that  the  application  was
      therefore academic. The appellant did not appear at  the  hearing  and
      the UTJ noted that he had previously applied for an adjournment on the
      basis that he wanted his wife joined as an interested  party  but  had
      not received a reply and had given no reason for failing to attend.

   9. The appellant then applied for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of
      Appeal against UTJ  Rintoul's  decision  on  the  basis  of  the  same
      challenges as previously and also on the basis that the  Secretary  of
      State had failed to have regard to Article 15(a), (b) and (c)  of  the
      Qualification Directive and had failed to consider his wife's  Article
      2 and 3 rights.  It was also argued that UTJ Rintoul had been wrong to
      find that he had voluntarily left the UK when he was in  fact  present
      in the UK. Further, there was procedural unfairness in  UTJ  Rintoul's
      decision as the judge had failed to consider an adjournment request on
      medical grounds and also failed to consider  an  application  for  his
      wife to be joined as an interested party.

  10. The matter was considered by  Sir  Stephen  Silber  in  the  Court  of
      Appeal, who granted permission on 1 December 2016 on  the  basis  that
      the UTJ had not been aware of, and had  therefore  not  considered,  a
      second adjournment application made by  the  appellant,  supported  by
      medical evidence, on account of health  issues.  The  respondent  then
      sought to settle the matter by consent and to have the matter remitted
      to the Upper Tribunal. The appellant and his wife objected to that  as
      they wanted the  Court  of  Appeal  to  consider  the  merits  of  the
      application. However, despite the appellant's objection, the Court  of
      Appeal did not agree to consider the arguability  of  the  application
      for permission to  apply  for  judicial  review  themselves  and  only
      considered the issue of procedural irregularity. The Court  of  Appeal
      agreed that  there  was  a  serious  procedural  irregularity  in  the
      permission application having been decided by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
      the appellant's absence, when the appellant had made a an  adjournment
      request on medical grounds (albeit not  known  to  the  judge  at  the
      time). In an order of 25 June 2018 the decision  of  UTJ  Rintoul  was
      therefore quashed and the case  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
      reconsider the oral permission application. The Court of  Appeal  also
      ordered that the appellant's wife be joined as a second applicant.

  11. The matter then came before UTJ Frances for a  hearing  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal on 8 October 2018, with both the appellant and his wife named
      as the applicants. Judge Frances refused permission on the appellant's
      grounds but granted permission on the basis that his  wife  had  since
      been joined as a party and the respondent had not considered her claim
      that she could not safely return to Pakistan.

  12. By the time  the  matter  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
      substantive judicial review hearing the  respondent  had  made  a  new
      decision on the appellant's application of 8 February 2012,  dated  21
      December 2018, again refusing the application but giving the appellant
      an in-country  right  of  appeal.  In  that  decision  the  respondent
      concluded again that there was no evidence from the appellant  showing
      that there were any insurmountable obstacles preventing  him  and  his
      spouse from  continuing  their  relationship  in  Pakistan,  that  the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE could not be met and that there  were
      no exceptional circumstances warranting a grant of leave  outside  the
      immigration rules on Article 8 grounds.

  13. At the substantive judicial review hearing the appellant's  wife,  Mrs
      Shakoor, confirmed  that  an  appeal  had  been  lodged  against  that
      decision in the First-tier Tribunal. On that basis it  was  considered
      that the appellant's application for judicial review had been rendered
      academic since he had an alternative remedy to  judicial  review.  The
      application was accordingly refused in an order of Mr Justice  Waksman
      dated 13 February 2019.

  14. The appellant's appeal against the decision of 21  December  2018  was
      heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 16 July 2019 by Judge Thapar.  The
      appellant and his  wife  appeared  at  the  hearing  without  a  legal
      representative and the appellant's wife, Mrs Shakoor,  confirmed  that
      she was representing the appellant. Mrs Shakoor confirmed further that
      the appellant did not intend to give any evidence and that  he  sought
      to rely on the grounds of appeal, and that the appeal would  be  dealt
      with on the basis of submissions only. The judge noted the  bundle  of
      documents before her from the appellant, which included the grounds of
      appeal, the further detailed grounds of appeal dated 13 July 2019, the
      Home Office Country Information and Guidance for Pakistan of  November
      2015 and the FCO travel advice for Pakistan. The judge also considered
      the country guidance in AK  and  SK  (Christians:  risk)  Pakistan  CG
      [2014] UKUT 569. The judge did not accept that  the  appellant's  wife
      would be at risk in Pakistan  and  did  not  accept  that  there  were
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  Pakistan.  She
      considered that the appellant could return to Pakistan with  his  wife
      or make an entry clearance application and concluded that it would not
      be disproportionate to require him to leave  the  UK  either  with  or
      without his wife. The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal.

  15. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
      three grounds: firstly,  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  a  fair
      hearing; secondly, that the  judge,  when  assessing  proportionality,
      failed to consider the 7 year delay by the Home Office in deciding his
      application; and thirdly, that the judge failed to carry out a  proper
      assessment of the question of insurmountable obstacles.

  16.  Permission  was  refused  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal,   but   was
      subsequently granted in the Upper Tribunal on renewed grounds,  on  21
      January 2020. The matter then came before me.

Appeal Hearing

  17. At the hearing both parties made submissions. Mr Bazini,  representing
      the appellant, submitted that there was a question of the fairness  of
      the proceedings before the judge as the appellant's wife ought to have
      been asked if she understood  the  implications  of  not  giving  oral
      evidence. The appellant's wife's father was very ill and  in  fact  he
      died five days after the hearing, so that at the time of  the  hearing
      she was in a bit of a  state.  The  judge  ought  to  have  asked  her
      questions about the care she gave to her father. As for the assessment
      of insurmountable obstacles, the judge's approach was  flawed  as  she
      considered  the  question  of  persecution  rather  than   significant
      obstacles. The appellant's wife would  suffer  discrimination  because
      she was white,  British  and  Christian  and  that  should  have  been
      considered by the judge as amounting to insurmountable obstacles.  The
      judge erred by relying on the FCO report for 2019 without putting  the
      report to the appellant's wife and inviting comments. The report post-
      dated the hearing and therefore should not have been considered by the
      judge. In any event the report explained the risks to  foreigners  and
      showed that there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  moving  to
      Pakistan. With regard to the third ground of appeal, the  judge  erred
      in her proportionality assessment as she failed to give weight to  the
      7 year delay in the respondent making a decision  on  the  appellant's
      application. The judge erred by failing to refer to  section  117B  of
      the 2002 Act.

  18. Ms Cunha responded to the appellant's grounds and submitted  that  the
      judge had properly found there to be no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
      family life continuing in Pakistan. The fact that she  had  regard  to
      the FCO report of 2019 was not material. The delay in consideration of
      the appellant's application added weight to his family  life  and  did
      not prejudice him. The evidence did  not  show  that  there  would  be
      unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant  and  his  wife  in
      returning to Pakistan. With regard to section 117B there  was  nothing
      the appellant could bring in to outweigh the public interest.  As  for
      the unfairness point, the appellant and his wife were  aware  of  what
      they had to do for the hearing and no adjournment  request  was  made.
      The appeal was therefore opposed.

  19. Mr Bazini, in response, reiterated the points previously made.

Discussion and conclusions

  20. Turning to the first ground concerning procedural unfairness, there is
      simply no merit in this challenge. It  is  suggested  that  the  judge
      ought to have done more to ensure that the appellant and his wife gave
      oral evidence and that she therefore failed to afford the appellant  a
      fair hearing. However  the  judge's  record  of  the  proceedings,  as
      summarised at [3] and [4], confirms that the appellant's wife made  it
      clear that there was no intention of there being any oral evidence and
      that she wanted the appeal to be dealt with by way of submissions. The
      judge was therefore acting in accordance with the  appellant's  wife's
      specific request in proceeding on the basis that she did.

  21. The suggestion that the appellant and his wife did not understand  the
      importance of evidence and did not realise that they should have given
      oral evidence before the judge, is, in my view, misconceived. Firstly,
      it is plain that the appellant and his wife were more  than  competent
      to decide how to present the appeal and secondly,  it  is  plain  that
      both were well informed about the nature of the proceedings before the
      First-tier Tribunal and the benefits of providing supporting evidence.

  22. It is plain from the substantial  amount  of  materials  in  the  four
      sections of the appellant's appeal bundle, which  include  records  of
      the previous litigation before the Upper Tribunal and Court of Appeal,
      that much of the litigation was initiated, prepared and even conducted
      by the appellant's wife who appeared in person  before  the  Court  of
      Appeal (see page 197 and 229 of section 4 of the appeal  bundle).  Mrs
      Shakoor also appeared in person before Upper Tribunal Judge Frances at
      the oral renewal hearing (page 1 of  section  2  of  the  bundle)  and
      before Mr Justice Waksman in the Upper  Tribunal  in  the  substantive
      judicial review proceedings, as appears in the respondent's bundle. At
      [7] of his judgment, Mr Justice Waksman recorded that Mrs Shakoor  had
      presented the arguments at different stages  in  the  judicial  review
      proceedings and had prepared detailed skeleton arguments, and at  [25]
      he commented upon how eloquently she had made her  submissions  before
      him. In regard to the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  it  is
      clear from Mr Justice Waksman's judgment that he went to great lengths
      to explain to Mrs Shakoor how  those  proceedings  differed  from  the
      judicial review hearing before him, which matters she had  to  address
      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, what evidence she would need  to
      produce ([10] and [28]) and the fact that she would be  able  to  give
      oral evidence ([26]). It is apparent from  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Thapar's record at [3]  that  Mrs  Shakoor  had  prepared  bundles  of
      evidence for the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, which I  note
      included a short statement that she had prepared in 2012 in support of
      the appellant's application.

  23. In such circumstances, it is disingenuous to suggest that Mrs  Shakoor
      did not know what she was doing at the hearing before Judge Thapar  in
      the First-tier Tribunal and I find the assertion that the judge  acted
      unfairly by proceeding with the appeal on the basis that  Mrs  Shakoor
      had herself requested to be wholly unmeritorious. There is nothing  in
      the authorities relied upon by the appellant, GM  (Sri  Lanka)  v  The
      Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev  1)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
      1630 and CL v The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2019]
      EWCA Civ 1925 which suggests otherwise. The appellant has been put  on
      notice several times in the successive refusal decisions of the nature
      of the evidence required to support his claim and the  fact  that  the
      relevant evidence was not presented  before  Judge  Thapar  cannot  be
      considered in any way to be the responsibility of the judge and cannot
      give rise to any suggestion that the proceedings were not  fair.  They
      clearly were and the judge was fully and properly entitled to  conduct
      the proceedings as she did.

  24. Likewise, I find there to be no merit in the second challenge  pursued
      by  Mr  Bazini,  namely  the  judge's  assessment  of   insurmountable
      obstacles to family life continuing in Pakistan. It is  asserted  that
      the judge erred by equating insurmountable obstacles with  a  risk  of
      persecution, but it clear that that is not what  she  did.  The  judge
      considered the risk to the  appellant's  wife  as  a  white,  British,
      Christian female, because she was responding to  those  issues  having
      specifically been raised by the appellant and his  wife.  Indeed,  the
      reason why the respondent re-considered  the  appellant's  application
      and made a third decision, following the grant of  permission  by  UTJ
      Frances, was due to such concerns being raised when  Mrs  Shakoor  was
      joined as a party to the proceedings.  It  is  plain  that  the  judge
      considered the  question  of  risk  of  persecution  as  part  of  the
      assessment of insurmountable obstacles, but not as the sole  basis  of
      the assessment. Having found there to be no risk  of  persecution  for
      the reasons cogently given at [11] to  [15],  the  judge  gave  proper
      reasons at [16] and [18], in line  with  the  relevant  principles  in
      Agyarko and Ikuga, R (on the applications of) v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2017] UKSC 1, as to  why  the  evidence  did  not
      demonstrate insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
      Pakistan. It is apparent from Mr Justice Waksman's  judgment  that  he
      sought to explain to Mrs Shakoor that it  was  for  the  appellant  to
      demonstrate insurmountable obstacles, and not  for  the  Secretary  of
      State to prove that there were no insurmountable obstacles, and in  so
      far as the grounds appear  to  suggest  otherwise,  they  are  plainly
      mistaken. There is nothing in  the  authorities  relied  upon  by  the
      appellant to support such a view.

  25. With regard to the criticism of the judge's consideration, at [13], of
      the FCO report without giving the appellant an opportunity to respond,
      Mr Bazini's submission ignored  the  fact  that  the  FCO  report  was
      actually produced by the appellant in his  own  bundle.  Although  the
      judge considered the later report, post-dating the  hearing,  that  in
      itself cannot be considered to be a material error when the FCO's  own
      guidance was relied upon by the appellant and when the  report  before
      the judge at page 26  of  the  first  section  of  the  appeal  bundle
      differed so marginally from the report for September 2019. In  so  far
      as the appellant suggested that  the  reports  of  crime,  threats  of
      attack and kidnapping in relation to foreigners in the FCO report were
      sufficient to  amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles,  the  judge  was
      entitled to consider that they were not. As the judge noted  at  [16],
      Mrs Shakoor would not be living alone in Pakistan but  would  be  with
      the appellant who was familiar with life in that country, and further,
      at  [13],  that  the  security  situation  in  Pakistan  had  improved
      considerably. The  appellant  and  his  wife  may  disagree  with  the
      respondent's and the judge's view of insurmountable obstacles, but the
      judge's view, that the evidence produced did not reach  the  threshold
      set in Agyarko, was one which was fully  and  properly  open  to  her.
      Indeed, in  the  absence  of  anything  other  than  such  generalised
      background evidence, the  judge  could  not  have  reached  any  other
      conclusion. Accordingly, the  ground  of  appeal  in  that  regard  is
      without any merit.

  26. With regard to the third challenge pursued by Mr  Bazini,  namely  the
      delay in deciding the appellant's application for leave to remain,  it
      seems to me that,  like  the  first  ground,  the  grounds  present  a
      distorted view  of  the  circumstances  relating  to  the  appellant's
      application.  The  assertion  in  the  grounds  is  simply  that   the
      respondent delayed in making a decision on the appellant's application
      for seven years. However, that completely ignores the  fact  that  the
      respondent made two previous decisions on the appellant's application,
      on 19 April 2013 and 16 August 2014. Mr Bazini submitted that that  is
      immaterial when the previous decisions were  unlawful  ones.  However,
      the previous decisions were never found to be unlawful and were  never
      quashed. A consideration of the procedural history of  this  case,  as
      set out above and below, puts the passage of  time  into  context  and
      clearly shows that the delay cannot be attributed  to  the  respondent
      and, to a large extent, is attributable to the appellant,  as  can  be
      seen as follows.

  27. The challenge to the first decision of 19 April 2013 was based on  two
      grounds, the first of which was rejected by the  Administrative  Court
      (page 157 of section 3 of the appeal bundle) and the second  of  which
      (a claim that the old rules ought to have applied), albeit allowed  to
      proceed with a grant of  permission,  was  subsequently  confirmed  as
      wrong. The  respondent's  agreement  to  reconsider  the  application,
      leading to a consent order, was  not  an  indication  of  the  initial
      decision being unlawful. The challenge to the second decision did  not
      succeed on its merits and indeed ultimately did not  succeed  at  all,
      and the fact that the Upper Tribunal's refusal to grant permission was
      quashed by the Court of Appeal,  was  solely  on  a  procedural  basis
      because of the Upper Tribunal  Judge  proceeding  in  the  appellant's
      absence believing that he had left the UK  and  was  in  Ireland.  The
      proceedings before the Court of Appeal were prolonged by the appellant
      by 18 months owing to his and his  wife's  refusal  to  agree  to  the
      respondent's offer to settle and for the matter to be remitted to  the
      Upper  Tribunal  to  be  reconsidered,  with  the  outcome  of   those
      proceedings being identical to that offered by the respondent  in  the
      first place (see pages 203 and 204 of section 4 of  the  bundle).  The
      grant of permission by  UTJ  Frances  was  not  as  a  result  of  any
      unlawfulness in the respondent's decision, but was  due  to  the  fact
      that the appellant's wife had requested  to  be  joined  as  a  second
      applicant and had raised further matters which were to  be  considered
      by the respondent and  which  had  not  been  raised  in  the  initial
      application.

  28. Mr Justice Waksman, quite properly, described the  procedural  history
      of the case as "torturous" at [8] and it is clear  from  his  detailed
      analysis of that  history  that  he  was  of  the  view  that  it  was
      unnecessarily  protracted.  The  appellant  has  in  reality  achieved
      nothing other than the passage of time in his litigation and  none  of
      the challenges made to the decision as  originally  made,  or  in  the
      decisions  made  thereafter,  have  been  made  out.  Whilst  he   has
      eventually succeeded in being granted a right of appeal, that  is  not
      as a result of successful litigation, but as a result of the change in
      legislation, as Justice Waksman explained at [6] of his judgment of 10
      July 2018.

  29. Accordingly, any suggestion that Judge Thapar failed to  consider  the
      delay can be explained by the fact that there had undoubtedly not been
      a delay by the respondent. As for the matter of the  passage  of  time
      itself, irrespective of the reasons and responsibility for  the delay,
      I cannot find any merit in the suggestion that  the  judge  materially
      erred in law by failing to consider the matter and it seems to me that
      the passage of time could not have materially assisted  the  appellant
      in accordance with the principles in EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of  State
      for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41. It was Mr Bazini's  submission
      that the appellant had been prejudiced by the delay,  contrary  to  Ms
      Cunha's submission, considering the stress of having existed  with  so
      many years of uncertainty. However, that could have  been  avoided  by
      the appellant by making a proper entry clearance application under the
      immigration rules. It has always been open to the appellant to  return
      to Pakistan and make an clearance application to join his wife and  no
      explanation has ever been given as to why he has not done that, rather
      than extending the period of uncertainty by unnecessary  and,  clearly
      unsuccessful, litigation over the last eight years.

  30. Mr Bazini also raised, as a further  error,  the  judge's  failure  to
      consider the relevant  factors  in  section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.
      However, whilst the judge did not specifically cite section 117B,  her
      consideration  of  the  weight  to  be  given   to   the   appellant's
      relationship was  properly  considered  at  [19]  in  accordance  with
      section 117B(4) on the basis of it having commenced when he was in the
      UK unlawfully and there were otherwise  no  factors  which  materially
      benefitted the appellant.

  31. In the circumstances there is no merit in the assertion that the judge
      failed  to  give  weight   to   a   material   matter   in   assessing
      proportionality and that her proportionality assessment was flawed. On
      the contrary, the judge considered all relevant and  material  matters
      in her proportionality assessment  and  had  regard  to  the  relevant
      factors in section 117B in determining  the  strength  of  the  public
      interest.  It  is  apparent,  from  the  repeated  challenges  to  the
      respondent's decision to refuse leave to the appellant  and  from  the
      observations made by Mr Justice Waksman  in  his  judgment,  that  Mrs
      Shakoor strongly disagrees with  the  respondent's  decision  and,  as
      observed at [11] of the judgment, has no  confidence  in  any  of  the
      decision makers. However, as  Mr  Justice  Waksman  was  at  pains  to
      explain to her, albeit in the context of a judicial review case, there
      is a legislative and procedural framework which has to be applied.  It
      is not the case that she is being required by the Secretary  of  State
      to leave the UK in order to continue her family life with her husband;
      but rather the Secretary of State is requiring the appellant to make a
      proper application in accordance with the UK legislative framework. As
      the judge properly found, the appellant quite simply  failed  to  meet
      the relevant legal  requirements  and  the  respondent  was  therefore
      entitled to decide as she did.  There  was  nothing  unlawful  in  the
      judge's decision to dismiss the appeal on the basis that she did.

  32. For all of these reasons I find no merit in the appellant's grounds of
      challenge. There are no errors of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.  I
      uphold her decision.

DECISION

  33. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 20 March 2020
