

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03044/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Skype)              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2021                          |On 03 March 2021              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              JACK JACOB GOMES
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Paramjorthy instructed by ABN Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Melvin Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Hendry ('the Judge') promulgated  on  the  23  March
        2020 in which the Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against
        the Secretary of State's refusal of his application  for  leave  to
        remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on a renewed
        application the operative part of the grant being in the  following
        terms:


          1. At paragraph 97 of the decision the judge  observed  that  the
             ETS SELT  source  data  document  adduced  by  the  respondent
             identified the appellant as having taken a test on two  dates:
             23 January 2013 and 6 February 2013. At paragraph 98 the judge
             recorded that the Presenting Officer  could  not  explain  the
             apparent existence of a second test and the  judge  stated  he
             would proceed by considering only the test  dated  6  February
             2013 (which is the date the appellant said he took the test).


          2. It is arguable that the Judge erred  by  failing  to  consider
             whether ETS identifying the  appellant  as  having  taken  two
             tests when it was common ground that he would only have  taken
             one (and there was no need for a second test to be  taken)  is
             indicative of a mistake  in  the  ETS  data  provided  to  the
             respondent. Arguably, a mistake in the data  provided  by  ETS
             fundamentally  undermines  the  respondent's  claim  that  the
             appellant engaged a proxy test taker.


3. Secretary of States Rule 24 reply dated 17 February 2021 reads:

                  Respondent submissions

         Firstly, the Respondent apologises for the lack of response to  the
         Tribunal directions in this matter. There appear to  be  been  some
         serious administrative difficulties over the summer/ autumn  months
         with directions issued by the Tribunal.

         Secondly,  it  will  be  respectfully  submitted  that  First  tier
         Tribunal (FtT) judge Hendry in a lengthy detailed determination has
         considered all aspects of this appellant's appeal.

         The Respondent's position is that there is no material error in law
         in the decision of Judge Hendry.


         Judge Hendry has found, giving  lengthy  sustainable  reasons  that
         this appellant did not take his TOEIC test on 6 February 2013.


         In this case the allegation to be considered by the FtT is  whether
         Mr G took the TOEIC test on 6 February  2013  and  the  certificate
         issued was fraudulently obtained.


         It is clear that from the decision that the judge  had  considered,
         p98, the ETS evidence of a second test some days earlier. Given the
         extensive fraud that took place at Queensway College the Respondent
         cannot be expected to provide an explanation for the ETS  data  and
         any submission made on that evidence would be at  best  speculative
         given the fraud that was taking place at Queensway College.


         The Respondent fails to see how ETS evidence of another test  taken
         by this appellant, some days earlier, has any bearing on the  issue
         in this appeal where there is no issue taken with that evidence.


         The answer to the core question, did the appellant take the test on
         6 February 2013, has been considered and emphatically  answered  in
         the negative by the FtT having considered all of the  evidence  and
         in considering the previous 2017  finding  by  the  FtT  that  this
         appellant was not a credible witness which  was  qualified  by  the
         judge. The previous Judge (FtT  Judge  Roger)  has  considered  the
         documents submitted by this appellant or his  then  representatives
         and found them be false/ unreliable and the appellant  himself  not
         credible on the evidence.


         What is clear from the findings made by the judge was that she  did
         not believe that Mr G actually took his English language  test.  No
         test certificate was produced by this appellant.

         The evidence and findings relating to  Queensway  college  are  set
         down by the Judge between p93-98 of the decision.

         Although the Presenting officer could not  comment  on  the  source
         data provided by ETS relating to the test of 23 January  2013  that
         evidence was not relied upon by the Respondent  and  in  any  event
         denied by the appellant.

         The FtT found that that Mr G's  appeal  fails  on  suitability  ref
         Appendix FM/276 ADE, and not 322(1A) as alleged in the  Grounds  of
         Appeal,  and  that  the  appellant  showed  an  intention  to   use
         deception.

         It is submitted that the challenges to the findings  at  113,  114,
         115, 117, 121 & 143 have no merit and are no more than  an  attempt
         to re-argue the case.

         It will be argued that the findings of the FtT were open to her  to
         make on the evidence before her having  heard  the  appellant  give
         evidence.


Error of law


     4. The appellant sought to challenge the conclusion of the Judge  that
        he had used the  services  of  a  proxy  to  undertake  an  English
        language test. The submission at [5] of the grounds that the  Judge
        had erred in assessing whether the appellant's application fell  to
        be refused pursuant to paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration  Rules
        is noted, but the appellant was  not  refused  on  that  basis  but
        rather pursuant to suitability requirements of Appendix FM.
     5. Whilst Mr Paramjorthy is critical of the decision maker that is not
        the issue under appeal which  is  that  of  the  Judge.  The  Judge
        clearly took all the available evidence into  account  noting  that
        the material relied upon by the Secretary of State provided by  ETS
        included two test results. The Judge deals with this issue at [97 -
        98] in the following terms:


        97.  The ETS Test analysis showed that the appellant had taken  the
             test on 6 February 2013 at Queensway College, which was not in
             dispute.  The  ETS  SELT  source  data  confirmed   that   the
             appellant's test was deemed invalid. His scores were  200  for
             speaking and 190 for writing. The certificate number given was
             0044202939005005. The appellant did not produce a copy of  his
             certificate which would have confirmed that number, but he did
             not deny that he had taken the test on that day, and that  the
             test data produced did relate to him.  The  Source  Data  also
             referred to a test taken by  a  person  with  the  same  name,
             nationality and date of birth as the appellant, on 23  January
             2013. That test was determined by ETS to be 'questionable'.


        98.  The appellant was insistent that he had only taken  one  test,
             namely that on 6  February  2013.  Mr  Walter  was  unable  to
             clarify the apparent  existence  of  a  second  test,  and,  I
             conclude that I could  draw  no  meaningful  conclusions  from
             this, and my findings have been made on  the  basis  that  the
             appellant took only the test on 6 February.


     6. The Judge was  aware  of  applicable  case  law  and  assessed  the
        material provided by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  discharge  the
        initial evidential burden, concluding having done so at [107]  that
        the evidence was sufficient to discharge that burden.
     7. The burden then moved to the  appellant  to  provide  a  reasonable
        explanation for  the  discrepancy.  The  Judge  identified  in  the
        evidence the extent of the systematic abuse by those  at  Queensway
        College in producing fraudulent results. The Judge  also  noted  an
        earlier  determination  by  a  differently  constituted  First-tier
        Tribunal together with the  appellant's  evidence  and  submissions
        made on his behalf. Between [119 - 121] the Judge wrote:


        119.      The appellant has produced a number of arguments  against
             reliance on the Home Office evidence, but has  not  given  any
             real explanation which would support him in his claim to  have
             taken the test honestly. On the other hand, the SSHD seemed to
             have  clear  evidence  that  the  appellant's  test  had  been
             determined as invalid, together with many others taken at that
             Centre on that day.


        120.      I noted that Judge Roger had not found the  appellant  to
             be a credible witness, albeit  that  she  had  heard  no  oral
             evidence from him. I did have the benefit  of  such  evidence,
             but found the appellant, overall, to be a poor historian,  and
             I did not find his evidence persuasive or credible.


        121.      On balance, and taking account of the shifting burden  of
             proof in such an appeal, I consider that the SSHD has made out
             his case that the appellant did obtain the test certificate by
             deception, and that he then used fraud to seek leave to remain
             in 2013. The SSHD had by the  time  of  the  hearing  produced
             evidence which went well beyond the original generic evidence,
             with information specific to this appellant, and  appeared  to
             meet the criteria required  in  SM  &  Qadir  to  satisfy  the
             relatively low evidential burden required of the SSHD.


     8. In addition to considering the evidence with the required degree of
        anxious scrutiny the Judge gives adequate reasons in support of not
        only the findings set out above but also the overall  finding  that
        the appellant was unable to succeed under the Immigration Rules and
        that the respondent's decision is proportionate. The weight  to  be
        given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge. It  is  not  made
        out the Judge erred in law in a manner material to the decisions by
        arriving at conclusions that are either irrational or  outside  the
        range of those reasonably available to the Judge on  the  evidence.
        Whilst the appellant may not like the  outcome  and  seeks  a  more
        favourable resolution to enable him to stay in United Kingdom, that
        does not establish material legal error sufficient to  warrant  the
        Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this matter.

Decision

     9. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 22 February 2020












