

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/03939/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 July 2019                            |On 10 September 2019             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             Cynthia ACHEAMPONG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by D Duheric & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of FtT
    Judge J C Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 7 April 2017.

 2. The appellant's case turned on whether it was reasonable to expect  her
    child, A, to leave the UK.

 3. At paragraph 47, the judge said, "A [is] not a qualifying  child";  but
    by the date of the hearing, A had become a qualifying child in terms of
    part 5A of the 2002 Act, and the question arose  in  terms  of  section
    117B(6) whether it would be reasonable to expect her to leave  the  UK.
    The error requires the decision to be set aside and remade.

 4. The grounds on which permission was granted are based on MA  (Pakistan)
    v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 5093, although binding  in  England  &  Wales,  not
    being so  in  Scotland,  regarding  the  correct  approach  to  section
    117B(6).

 5. We think that  only  very  exceptionally,  if  ever,  might  the  Upper
    Tribunal decline to follow a decision of the Court of Appeal or of  the
    Inner House of the Court of Session, irrespective of where  in  the  UK
    the Upper Tribunal sits.  There would be a problem if those Courts  had
    made conflicting decisions, but that is not so.

 6. We need not  examine  that  issue  any  further,  because  the  correct
    approach to section 117B(6) has been settled by KO (Nigeria) and others
    v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53.

 7. At paragraph 18, KO confirms that the question whether it is reasonable
    to expect a child to leave the UK is to be assessed in the  context  of
    parents having no right to remain, and  being  expected  to  leave   as
    expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v SSHD [2017] SLT  1245.   At
    paragraph  19  it  confirms  also  that  as  Lewison  LJ  said  in   EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA civ  874,  the  ultimate  question  is
    whether it is "reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with
    no right to remain to the country of origin".

 8. KO does not deal expressly with the situation where one  parent  has  a
    right to remain in the UK and the other does not, but we do  not  doubt
    that such cases depend on their circumstances.

 9. The appellant raised no criticism of the FtT's  factual  findings.   On
    those findings, and on the underlying evidence, there  was  nothing  to
    show, leaving aside the position of the  appellant's  father,  that  it
    would be anything but reasonable to expect the child  to  go  with  her
    mother to Ghana.

10. The appellant's father is also a citizen of Ghana.   There  was  before
    the FtT a copy of his residence permit as the family member of  an  EEA
    national, valid until 26 October 2021.   Mr  Bryce  accepted  that  the
    status of the appellant's father depended on  the  ongoing  reality  of
    such a relationship, to be proved  by  evidence,  and  that  there  was
    before the  FtT  no  evidence  of  that  family  (or  extended  family)
    relationship.  There was no application to provide such evidence to the
    Upper Tribunal in connection with remaking the decision,  and  no  such
    evidence had been obtained by the appellant's  representatives.   There
    had been no application to amend the grounds of appeal, although KO was
    published on 24 October 2018, when it must have  become  apparent  that
    the line of argument in the grounds had no prospects of success.

11. The FtT found the relationship between the child and her father "a long
    distance one at best" (paragraph 39); even if he did see her, that  was
    "at best ... only for a short  period  of  time"  (paragraph  40);  the
    appellant had sought to embellish his role, there was no reason not  to
    keep in touch if the child moved to Ghana, his role could continue, and
    quality time might even be more (paragraph 42).

12. There is nothing in the unimpeached findings of  the  FtT,  or  in  the
    underlying evidence, by  which  it  might  be  held  that  the  child's
    vestigial relationship with her  father  rendered  it  unreasonable  to
    expect her to leave the UK.

13. The appellant's appeal, as brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

14. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      9 September 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
