
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03152/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2020                       |On 20 July 2020                      |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                EMMANUEL [B]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   The Appellant is a  national  of  Ghana,  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2005 with a settlement visa to join  his  parents.
    On 26 April 2018 he was convicted of possession with intent to supply a
    Class A drug, namely heroin, and also possession with intent to  supply
    a Class A drug, namely cocaine, and on 22 May 2018 he was sentenced  to
    two years imprisonment on each count to run concurrently.

2.   The Respondent made  a  decision  to  deport  him  on  account  of  his
    convictions on 7 February 2019, having made a deportation order against
    him on 6 February 2019. The Appellant appealed and First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Swinnerton dismissed his appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  6
    December 2019.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision and Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Keith granted him permission to appeal on 2 March 2020. He  found  that
    it was difficult to  discern  from  the  structure  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision, particularly in paragraphs 21 to 24, the extent to
    which the Judge had considered and applied paragraphs 399(a) and (b) of
    the Immigration Rules  and  that,  therefore,  grounds  2  and  3  were
    arguable. He found that  the  other  grounds  were  weaker  and  poorly
    drafted.

4.   The error of  law  hearing  was  listed  for  28  April  2020  but  was
    adjourned, due to the Covid-19 Pandemic. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Norton-
    Taylor made further directions on 23 April 2020. He invited the parties
    to inform the Upper Tribunal whether they were content for the error of
    law hearing to be heard without a hearing. He also gave them permission
    to make further submissions about the substance of the appeal.

5.    The Appellant's solicitors responded by email on 4 May  2020,  stating
    that the Appellant was not seeking to submit any further submissions or
    additional documentary evidence.  The  Respondent  responded  to  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor's directions on 12  May  2020  She  stated
    that she resisted all of the Appellant's grounds of appeal but  made  a
    more detailed response to grounds 2 and 3 of the Appellant's grounds of
    appeal.

6.   Neither party objected to the appeal being without a  hearing  and  the
    detail given by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith in his decision alerted  the
    parties to the issues which were central to the error  of  law  hearing
    and both parties were provided with an opportunity to respond to  these
    issues.  In  addition,  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Norton-Taylor's
    directions noted that Upper Tribunal Judge Keith's grant of  leave  had
    been "clear as to the focus of the Appellant's challenge to the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision".

7.   I have reminded myself of rule  2  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended, and the need to take into account the
    fact that the  need  to  deal  with  cases  fairly  and  justly  is  an
    overriding objective for the Upper Tribunal. In the light of  the  fact
    that the issues before me have been usefully narrowed by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Keith and as these issues arise from the manner in  which  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton applied the law to  the  facts  of  this
    appeal, it is my view that it  was  not  necessary  to  have  any  oral
    submissions in order to reach a decision on whether or  not  there  had
    been any errors of law in his decision .

8.   On 2 June 2020, the Appellant's solicitors wrote to the Upper  Tribunal
    seeking to assert that his deportation would also give rise to a breach
    of his family life rights, as  he  had  now  registered  his  customary
    marriage to his current partner in Ghana. This was not  evidence  which
    was before First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton  when  he  reached  his
    decision and, therefore, I cannot take it into account when considering
    whether there were any errors of law in his decision.

9.   It will only be if an error of law  is  found  in  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Swinnerton's decision,it is  set  aside  and  there  is  a  fresh
    hearing that  this  evidence  may  be  admissible.  Furthermore,  if  a
    decision is made to  retain  the  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    Appellant will have to make an application under  rule  15(2A)  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, as amended, for  it  to
    be admitted.

ERROR OF LAW DECISION

10.  As noted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Keith,  the  Appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal were largely general in nature, lacked focus and tended to  just
    recite case law without apply this to  the  facts  of  the  Appellant's
    case. They also failed to take into  account  that  the  Appellant  was
    subject to automatic deportation and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was bound to apply the law relating to those subject to a  deportation,
    as outlined in the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the
    Immigration Rules.

11.   However,  In  relation  to  sub-paragraphs399(a)  and   (b)   of   the
    Immigration Rules, case law indicates that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Swinnerton should have  considered  whether  the  Appellant  enjoyed  a
    parental relationship with his partner's son,  even though he  was  not
    the child's biological father. It was clear from his partner's  witness
    statement that she and her son had known the Appellant for three  years
    and that he took her son to school,  picked  him  up  from  school  and
    supported her to care for him.  She also said that a strong  father-son
    bond had developed between them. In addition, in her oral evidence  she
    said that her son had a very good relationship with the  Appellant  and
    this was not challenged by the Respondent. It  was  not  sufficient  to
    merely note that the Appellant's relationship with his partner had  not
    been a long one and that her son sometimes saw his biological father at
    weekends.

12.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton also failed  to  consider  whether
    the Appellant's deportation would have an unduly harsh  effect  on  the
    Appellant's partner's son.

13.  In addition, if  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Swinnerton  had  properly
    considered paragraph 399(a) of the Immigration  Rules  and  found  that
    this provision did not assist the Appellant, he should have  considered
    whether the public interest in  deportation  was  outweighed  by  other
    factors which would amount to very compelling circumstance. When  doing
    so, he should have  taken  into  account  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's partner's son but failed to do so,  as  can  be  seen  from
    paragraph 24 of his decision.

14.  For all  of  these  reasons,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Swinnerton's
    decision contained errors of law.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton's decision is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Swinnerton or Chohan.

Nadine Finch

Signed   Date 4 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


