
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03419/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|15 October 2018                               |28 November 2018              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               balwinder kaur
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Jussab, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State.  The  respondent,
    whom we shall call 'the claimant', is a national of India.  She came to
    the United Kingdom as a spouse in December 2011  and  subsequently  was
    granted an extension of her leave until 3 November 2016.   Just  before
    the expiry of that leave she  attempted  to  make  an  application  for
    further leave, but her application  was  returned  on  16  December  as
    invalid because she had not accompanied it with the correct  documents.
    She made a valid application on 23 December 2016  (by  which  time  her
    leave had expired), which was refused on 9 February 2017.

 2. She appealed against that decision.  Her  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge
    Loughridge  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  allowed.   The  judge's
    reasoning was as follows.  There  is  no  real  difference  between  an
    application being rejected  and  one  being  refused.   The  claimant's
    application leading to the refusal against which  she  appealed,  which
    was made within 14 days of the  rejection  of  her  previous  attempted
    application, should therefore be regarded as having been made within 14
    days of a refusal and as meeting the requirement that  any  application
    for further leave be made at a time when the applicant had been in  the
    UK without leave for no more than 14 days.  The judge went on  to  look
    at the  other  requirements  of  the  rules  and  determined  that  the
    applicant met them.  The appeal was allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
    largely because the judge considered that the fact that  the  applicant
    met the requirements of the rules was a weighty  consideration  in  her
    favour.

 3. The Secretary of State applied for and was granted permission to appeal
    on the ground that the judge took a mistaken view of the  rejection  of
    an application. The rejection  of  an  invalid  application  is  wholly
    different from the  refusal  of  a  valid  application.   The  rejected
    application was  invalid.   The  claimant's  leave  was  therefore  not
    extended by s 3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  and  expired  on  5
    December.  The notice of rejection was not a refusal.   The  claimant's
    application was made when she had been remaining without leave for over
    14 days.  She did not meet the requirements of the rules and the  basis
    on which the Judge allowed her appeal was flawed.

 4. At the beginning of the hearing before us Mr Jussab conceded  that  the
    Secretary of State's grounds were made out, that the judge  had  erred,
    and that the claimant's case had to be put wholly  outside  the  rules.
    We asked him to identify the basis upon which it could be said that the
    claimant ought to be regarded as having a right to remain in the United
    Kingdom despite not meeting the requirements of the rules.  He drew our
    attention to the fact that she has been in the United Kingdom for  some
    years and that both she and her husband are working here: he has  spent
    all his life here and she is said to  have  no  family  in  India.   Mr
    Jussab said that  the  claimant's  husband  'cannot  leave  the  United
    Kingdom', but that turned  out  to  be  simply  an  expression  of  the
    husband's present preference.

 5. Mr Howells pointed out that the claimant's husband has chosen to  marry
    a person who is not a British citizen and that does not of itself  give
    the claimant any right to remain if she does not meet the  requirements
    of the rules.  It may be that he will have to leave  his  relatives  in
    order to go to India and it may be that she has no relatives in  India,
    but they will have each other.

 6. We agree.  The position is that this couple are no doubt  content  with
    the life they have together here but there is not a shadow  of  a  good
    reason for saying  that  the  claimant  has  a  right  to  remain  that
    transcends the fact that she does not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    rules.  There is no perceptible reason why  the  appellant  should  not
    return to India, the country of which she is a national, accompanied by
    her husband if he wishes to be with her, and there is no evidence  that
    they would find the slightest difficulty in settling there and pursuing
    their life together there.

 7. We set aside the First-tier Tribunal's judgment for error of  law.   We
    substitute a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                     Date: 22 November 2018.

