
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03945/2016
                                                               HU/03949/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 November 2017                   |On 29 November 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                            MR RAJIB KUMAR BANIK
                                                             First Appellant
                               MRS JHUMA BANIK

                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Azeoke, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are husband and wife and are citizens of Bangladesh born
    on 12 December 1981 and 1 January  1987  respectively.   They  appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 27 January  2016  refusing
    their applications for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  outside
    the Rules on the basis of their family life.

 2. The appeals were heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Oliver on 22
    December 2016.  The appeals were dismissed under the Immigration  Rules
    and on human rights grounds in a decision  promulgated  on  25  January
    2017.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by the First-Tier Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was  made  to
    the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczuk on 11 September 2017.  The permission  states  that  although
    the Judge has significant  reservations  about  the  viability  of  the
    Article 8 claim on the basis of the evidence before him, his reason for
    refusing  to  adjourn  the  hearing,  in  circumstances  where  neither
    appellant attended, was too concise and lacked adequate analysis.   The
    permission goes on to state  that  at  the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, it will have to be explained, on behalf  of  the  appellants,
    how their Article 8 claim could have succeeded and thus, how any  error
    of law on the part of the First-Tier Judge could have been material  to
    the outcome.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states  that  the  Judge  has
    considered all the evidence he was directed to and has  given  adequate
    reasons for his findings.  It  states  that  the  grounds  are  just  a
    disagreement  with  his  findings.   On  15  December  the  appellants'
    solicitors were told their adjournment application  was  refused  which
    gave them a week to prepare all the documents  they  required  for  the
    appeal hearing.  The First-Tier Judge refused the oral  adjournment  at
    the  hearing  because  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  why  the
    appellants could  not  attend.   The  appellants'  representative  felt
    unable to make submissions at the First-Tier hearing.  The Judge  finds
    there is no breach of Article 8 as the appellants will  be  leaving  as
    one family unit and little private life evidence was served.

The Hearing

 5. I read out to the parties the  permission  to  appeal  and  I  informed
    Counsel for the appellants that what he has to do is  explain  how  the
    Article 8 claim could have succeeded had the adjournment  been  granted
    and had the appellants been able to give oral evidence.

 6. Counsel submitted that the appellants are relying on Article 3 which if
    successful will support their Article 8 claim.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellants have not claimed  asylum.   He  submitted  that  persecution
    should be taken into account  under  Article  3  and  integration  into
    society in Bangladesh should be  found  to  be  a  difficulty  for  the
    appellants.

 7. He submitted that had the appellants been able to  give  evidence  they
    could have given details of their circumstances and if these were found
    credible by the Judge then  oral  evidence  along  with  the  objective
    evidence could have resulted in the Judge allowing the appeal.  I asked
    Counsel if objective evidence had been before the Judge.  This was  not
    clear.  Counsel submitted that it was a material error not to grant the
    adjournment and hear the appellants' evidence about their situation  if
    they have to return to Bangladesh.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no error of law  in  the
    Judge's decision.  She submitted that the Judge did  not  err  when  he
    refused the adjournment.  She submitted that the  adjournment  requests
    were inconsistent.  The first adjournment request had  been  to  enable
    the  appellants  to  have  sufficient  time  to  collect  the  relevant
    documents and this had been refused because they had had ample time  to
    do this.   Seven days later a  further  adjournment  request  was  made
    stating that the second appellant had a medical appointment on the date
    of the hearing and had been advised that her husband should go with her
    to the hospital.  This was refused because there was no  evidence  that
    this was the case.  Then on 22 December 2016  the  appellants  did  not
    attend the hearing and their representative renewed the application and
    submitted a short bundle.  There was a hospital letter  with  this  but
    the Judge considered this and found that  it  did  not  show  that  the
    appellants were unable to attend the hearing.  She submitted  that  the
    appellants, although they had been alerted to what was required for the
    adjournment to be granted, had not  provided  sufficient  evidence  and
    they and their representative had been aware of the problem but did not
    take proper steps to deal with it.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that if there is an error  of  law  in
    the decision it does not appear to be  material.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph 11 of the decision which states that  the  representative  of
    the appellants felt unable to make submissions  and  as  there  was  no
    Presenting Officer the Judge had to deal with the case on  the  papers.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that it was open to the Judge to reach
    the decision he did and in the circumstances the appellants are  unable
    to complain about the adjournment not being granted.

10. She then referred to the appellants claiming under Article  3  of  ECHR
    and made reference to the refusal letter which states that if they want
    to make a claim on protection  issues  they  should  submit  an  asylum
    application but  they  did  not  do  that.   She  submitted  that  this
    indicates that they may well have had no confidence in an asylum  claim
    and what they are now trying to do is bolster a feeble Article 8 claim.

11. She submitted that there is no error of law in the Judge's decision but
    if I find there is, it is not a material error.

12. Counsel for the appellants stated that the situation in Bangladesh  for
    Hindus  is  appalling.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  should   have
    considered this under Article 3 of ECHR and because he did not do  that
    his decision is not complete.

13. He submitted that at paragraph 13 of the decision the Judge  refers  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules stating that the terms of the
    Rules relating to family life cannot be satisfied.  He  submitted  that
    the Judge has not made detailed findings and has  not  considered  what
    was before him.  He then submitted that all the evidence  which  should
    have been before the Judge was not before him and because of  this  the
    adjournment request should have been granted, and as he  did  not  have
    all the evidence before him, this has resulted in an unfair hearing.  I
    was asked to find that there is a material error of law in the decision
    and direct a re-hearing or a second stage hearing.

Decision and Reasons

14. It is clear from the evidence on file that an adjournment  request  was
    made on three occasions and on  each  occasion  it  was  refused.   The
    reasons for each refusal are  satisfactory.   It  was  found  that  the
    appellants and their representative had had sufficient time to  prepare
    the case and obtain any documents required and it was found that  there
    was insufficient evidence that the appellants were unable to attend the
    hearing to give evidence.  After the  second  adjournment  request  was
    refused the appellants and their representative were aware of what  was
    required but although medical evidence of the appellants' attendance at
    the hospital was made available there was nothing  to  state  that  the
    appellants were unable to attend the hearing to give  evidence.   There
    was no error of law in the Judge refusing the adjournment.

15. The refusal letter makes it clear that if a protection claim  is  being
    relied on then an asylum application should be made.  This is  repeated
    in the decision.  The appellants did not apply for asylum.

16. Counsel for the appellants states that the decision  was  made  without
    the Judge having sight of all the evidence.   What  he  appears  to  be
    referring to is objective evidence.  This is not an asylum claim.   The
    Judge is dealing with a family life claim under Article 8 of ECHR.

17. The permission states that at the hearing it will have to be  explained
    how the appellants' Article 8 claim could have succeeded  and  how  any
    error of law, on the part of the  First-Tier  Judge,  could  have  been
    material to the outcome.  Counsel has not explained this.  The  Judge's
    findings on the appellant's Article 8 claim contain no error of law and
    there is no error in the way that the hearing proceeded.

18. The burden of proof is on  the  appellant  and  if  objective  evidence
    should have been submitted  as  suggested  by  Counsel,  that  was  the
    appellants'  responsibility.   I  do  not  see  how  this  could   have
    strengthened their Article 8 claim and I find that what the  Judge  had
    before him was sufficient to enable him to reach a fair decision and he
    has properly explained his findings on how he reached his decision.

19. I have considered the case of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC)  and  I
    find that the First-Tier Tribunal  acted  reasonably  in  refusing  the
    adjournment request.





Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the Judge's decision promulgated on  25
January 2017 and Judge Oliver's decision must stand.

Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed                                  Date 28 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

