
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03428/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre, Priory    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Court                                         |                              |
|On 5th February 2020                          |On 2nd March 2020             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Mr baljit singh
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Ahmed (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Howells (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Obhi, promulgated on 23rd  July  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Priory Court on 5th July 2019.  In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India, and  was  born  on  15th  December
    1974, and  is  a  male.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 21st November 2018 refusing his application for  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom under Appendix FM at  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules, HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has been in the United  Kingdom  since
    26th March 1995.  He  had  initially  applied  for  asylum.   This  was
    refused.  His appeal was unsuccessful.  He is  now  in  a  relationship
    with a British national, Miss Narinder Kaur Kang, and they  have  known
    each other for nineteen years.  They had  been  married  in  accordance
    with their religious custom.  He has established a private  and  family
    life with his partner.  He should be permitted to remain in the  UK  on
    the basis that he has been in this country for over twenty  years.   He
    also claims that there is an acceptance by the Respondent that  he  has
    indeed been in the UK for twenty years.  However, he bases this  simply
    on the fact that he entered the UK in 1995.  The Respondent rejects the
    assertion that the Appellant has been  in  the  UK  for  twenty  years.
    Although he had entered the UK  in  1995.   He  has  not  provided  any
    evidence for the years from 1998 to 2008, that he was  indeed  resident
    in this country.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The Tribunal's findings bellow were that the Appellant had not been  in
    the UK for twenty years at the date of the application as  required  by
    paragraph 276ADE(1), and therefore had been unable to show that he  had
    lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  twenty  years  (paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii)).  The  judge  held  that  although  there  had  been  a
    previous decision by Judge Holt which was promulgated on 10th  December
    2015, the judge there had not been asked to determine, as a question of
    fact, "whether the Appellant had resided in the  UK  for  a  continuous
    period of twenty years" (paragraph 20).  The judge went on  to  further
    add that, "even if there had been a finding in relation to  the  point,
    that would have been a starting point"  in  the  consideration  of  the
    evidence, "but it is not even a finding" (paragraph 21).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application make the point that given that there was  an
    earlier decision by Judge Holt in 2015 this  meant  that  the  rule  in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  702  applied.   What  this  stated  was  that,
    whereas it was the case that a prior decision was a "starting point"  a
    subsequent judge could take a different view but only, as is stated  in
    paragraph 41(6), if the facts currently relied upon "are not materially
    different".  The grounds state that the facts here were not  materially
    different insofar as the determination of the question of the Appellant
    having been in the UK for twenty  years  was  concerned,  because  this
    question had actually been specifically determined by Judge Holt in the
    previous decision in 2015.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  10th
    October 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that there  had  been  a
    misinterpretation of  the  previous  decision  of  Judge  Holt  by  the
    Tribunal of Judge Obhi.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 5th February 2020, Mr Ahmed,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that it was important  to  recognise
    that at the time that Judge  Holt  promulgated  her  decision  on  10th
    December 2015, what she was doing was looking at  an  application  that
    had been made by the Appellant on the basis that he had been in the  UK
    for fifteen years only.  However, by the time  that  the  decision  was
    made by Judge Holt, she had firmly concluded that, "The  Appellant  has
    certainly been physically present in the United Kingdom for over twenty
    years now ..." (paragraph 22).  However, following  that  decision  the
    Appellant had then made, on the basis of his residence in  the  UK  for
    twenty years, a  further  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  14th
    February 2018.  By that stage, he was making an application when he had
    already been in the UK for twenty years (as this had been so  found  by
    Judge Holt in 2015).  The only remaining question was  whether  he  had
    been continuously in the UK for twenty years, and the judge  had  found
    previously that he had been continuously in the UK  for  twenty  years.
    The oddity in the determination by Judge Obhi lay in the fact that  she
    did not make any reference at all to what the judge  stated  previously
    at paragraph 22,  namely,  that,  "The  Appellant  has  certainly  been
    physically present in the United Kingdom for over twenty years now ..."

 8. In his reply, Mr Howells submitted that, if one looks  at  the  refusal
    letter (at page 66) it is clear that, the Secretary of State accepts on
    21st November 2018, that the appellant entered the  UK  on  26th  March
    1995 (see paragraph 4).  However, thereafter the Secretary  of  State's
    view is that "You  have  not  provided  evidence  that  you  have  been
    residing in the UK continuously from 1998 to 2008" (paragraph 29).   It
    had been accepted by the authorities that the Appellant had indeed been
    in the UK from March 1995  to  May  1989.   Notably,  from  the  period
    thereafter, it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  provided
    evidence to show that he was still in this country.   Nevertheless,  Mr
    Howells accepted that the judge's conclusion in the Tribunal  of  Judge
    Obhi, that the previous decision is one where "There is one sentence in
    the decision which states that the Appellant had only been  in  the  UK
    for about fifteen years (paragraph 19 of  the  decision),  but  nowhere
    does the judge say that she accepts that, he  has  resided  in  the  UK
    continuously for a period of twenty years  ..."   (paragraph  19),  was
    incorrect.  This is because Judge Holt  had  made  it  quite  clear  at
    paragraph 22 of her determination that  the  Appellant  "Has  certainly
    been physically present in the United Kingdom  for  over  twenty  years
    now".

Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that it falls to be  set
    aside.   This  is  because,  whereas  the   judge   quotes   from   the
    determination  of  Judge  Holt  previously  by  drawing  attention   to
    paragraph 19, she neglects to refer to paragraph  22  of  Judge  Holt's
    determination where it is made quite clear  that,  "The  Appellant  has
    certainly been physically present in the United Kingdom for over twenty
    years now ..."  That is a finding of a plain fact which  on  Devaseelan
    principles is one which is not materially different as a question, from
    that which was firmly determined as question  of  fact  by  a  previous
    Tribunal under Judge Holt. Insofar as Judge Obhi states that, "Even  if
    there had been a finding in relation to the point, that would have been
    a starting point of my consideration of the evidence,  but  it  is  not
    even a finding" (paragraph  21),  that  statement  is  incorrect.  What
    Devaseelan makes clear (at paragraph 39(1)), is that the first  judge's
    determination, "should always be the starting point", and this  plainly
    is a determination of fact, and that this particular  question  is  not
    one which it can be  said  is  "materially  different"  (see  paragraph
    41(6)) from what has already been determined by Judge Holt.   The  rule
    in Devaseelan, accordingly, was wrongly applied.

Remaking the Decision

10. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the previous
    judge, the evidence that I have heard today, and the decision of  Judge
    Obhi.  I am allowing this appeal because this is a case where, once  it
    is accepted that the Appellant "has certainly been  physically  present
    in the United Kingdom for over twenty years now", that  is  application
    thereafter on 14th February 2018, was  against  the  backdrop  of  that
    particular finding.  That being so, paragraph  276ADE  means  that  the
    Appellant "has lived continuously in the UK for at least twenty years",
    and that was the case "at the date of the application"  such  that  his
    appeal falls to be allowed.  For this reason I allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

11. This appeal is allowed.

12. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 14th February 2020


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a Fee award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 14th February 2020
