
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03887/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2017                        |On 20th December 2017         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                                     and
                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                                 MR ANUP RAI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (DEHLI)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr E Wilford, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Chris Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Anup Rai against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Brewer, promulgated on the 18th July  2017,  to  dismiss
    his appeal against refusal  of  his  application  for  entry  clearance
    (hereafter, "the decision") as the son of  Bhim  Rai  (hereafter,  "the
    sponsor").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal, who was  born  on  the  15th  July
    1988, and the sponsor is a person with settled  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom that was granted in recognition of his  military  service  with
    the Brigade of Gurkas in the British Army.

 3. The grounds upon which the appellant purported to  appeal  against  the
    decision were recited by Judge Brewer at paragraph 14 of his  decision,
    namely, that:

   i) The decision was not in accordance with Chapter 15, section 2A of  the
      applicable Immigration Directorate Instructions [IDIs];

  ii) The decision was incompatible with  the  right  of  the  appellant  to
      respect  for  family  life  under  Article  8  of  1951  Human  Rights
      Convention;

 iii) The decision was "otherwise not in accordance with the law"; and

  iv) "Discretion should have been exercised differently".

 4. We note from the outset that the only  ground  of  appeal  against  the
    decision that was in fact available to the appellant was that which  we
    have summarised at paragraph (ii) above [see sections 82 and 84 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 with effect from the 5th April  2015].  Whilst  it
    may well be, as Mr Wilford suggested, that section 2A of Chapter 15  of
    the IDI's is intended by the Secretary of State to  reflect  Article  8
    jurisprudence  that  does  not  alter  its  essential  character  as  a
    discretionary policy exercisable outside the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Tribunal did not  therefore  have  power  to  review  the  respondent's
    exercise of that discretion. This was  so  even  before  the  right  of
    appeal was further restricted by section 15 of the Immigration Act 2014
    (see Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72,  at  paragraph  57)  and  it  was
    certainly the case as at the date of decision (the 15th  January  2016)
    and the date of the hearing of the appeal (the 23rd June 2017).  We  do
    not therefore consider it either necessary or helpful to consider those
    grounds wherein it is argued that the judge misapplied the IDIs to  the
    facts of this appeal. We shall accordingly concentrate solely upon  the
    question of whether the judge undertook a materially flawed analysis of
    the single ground of appeal that was open  to  the  appellant,  namely,
    that the decision was unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
    1998 as being incompatible with his rights under Article 8 of the  1951
    Human Rights Convention.

 5. The appellant's history can be summarised as follows. The sponsor moved
    from Nepal to Hong Kong in 1994  or  1995,  taking  his  wife  and  the
    appellant with him. The appellant, however returned to Nepal  with  his
    mother a few months later. The appellant was at this time some 6  or  7
    years of age. In 2001, when he was aged  about  13  years,  his  mother
    rejoined his father in Hong Kong leaving the appellant  at  a  boarding
    school in Nepal. At the age of 18  years,  he  began  to  study  at  an
    engineering college in Kathmandu. From that day to this  he  has  lived
    together with his paternal cousin,  and  his  paternal  cousin's  close
    family members, in a house in Nepal that is owned by the sponsor.  That
    was the situation when, in 2014, his parents relocated from  Hong  Kong
    to the United Kingdom. At the date of the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal, he was studying for an MBA which he was due to complete  some
    15 months hence. He planned thereafter to undertake a PhD. His  parents
    have visited the appellant regularly in Nepal throughout the period  of
    their  physical  separation  and  have   continued   to   support   him
    financially.

 6. Judge Brewer concluded that the appellant had failed to  establish  the
    existence of family  life  as  between  himself  and  the  sponsor.  In
    reaching that conclusion, he had regard to the fact that the  appellant
    had lived apart from his father (the sponsor) since the  mid-1990s  and
    from his mother for the last 13 years. He also took account of the fact
    that the appellant had made all the key decisions in his life from  the
    age of 18 years. He accepted that there was what he termed "a  cultural
    notion"  that  Nepalese  children  were  not  considered  to  be  truly
    independent of their parents  until  such  time  as  they  are  married
    [paragraph 44].  However,  he  found  that  there  was  "no  compelling
    evidence"  that  the  appellant  was  emotionally  dependent  upon  the
    sponsor. He also found that the appellant was essentially living  in  a
    family unit with his paternal cousin, and his paternal  cousin's  close
    family members, with whom he shared "bills  and  food"  [paragraph  36]
    Finally, he concluded that "an element of [financial]  dependency"  did
    not suffice, on the particular facts  of  this  appeal,  to  justify  a
    finding of family life as between the appellant  and  his  parents  and
    younger sibling who now reside in the United Kingdom [paragraph 44].

 7. Mr Wilford submitted that the judge had  (a)  perversely  implied  that
    family life between the appellant and his parents had  been  eroded  by
    their decision to send him to a boarding school in  Nepal  whilst  they
    were residing in Hong Kong, (b) been unduly dismissive of his  parents'
    visits to him in Nepal, (c) had perversely concluded that his emotional
    connection to his parents had been displaced by the fact  that  he  was
    (i) now living with his paternal cousin and his family,  and  (ii)  had
    chosen to pursue a course of further education in Nepal, (d) failed  to
    place weight upon the fact that the appellant was under the age  of  30
    years, had yet to establish his professional life, was  unmarried,  and
    did not have children of his  own,  and  (e)  repeated  the  errors  of
    approach that had caused the Court of Appeal to set aside the  decision
    of the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge to dismiss the  appeal  in  Jitendra
    Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.

 8. We take Mr Wilford's final criticism of the judge's decision first. The
    errors of law that were identified by Lindblom LJ in Jitendra  Rai  can
    be summarised as (i) failing to make a distinct and definite conclusion
    as to the existence of 'family life'  between  the  appellant  and  his
    parents  [paragraph  30],  (ii)  looking  for  some  extraordinary   or
    exceptional feature in the appellant's dependence on his parents  as  a
    necessary determinant of the existence of his  family  life  with  them
    [paragraphs 36 and 37], and (iii) placing weight upon the fact that the
    appellant's parents had voluntarily chosen to relocate  to  the  United
    Kingdom leaving the appellant in the family home in Nepal.  We  do  not
    think that the judge in this appeal  committed  any  of  these  errors.
    Firstly, his conclusion that family life between the appellant and  his
    parents was not established on  the  evidence  before  him  is  clearly
    stated at paragraph 40 of his decision. Secondly, we  cannot  see  that
    the judge  at  any  stage  applied  a  test  of  'exceptionality'  when
    considering the possibility that an adult child might continue to enjoy
    family life with  his  parents  after  his  age  of  majority.  On  the
    contrary, the judge repeatedly stressed the  fact-sensitive  nature  of
    the task he was required to undertake and of the necessity to  consider
    all matters in the round [paragraphs 42  to  45].  In  support  of  his
    submission to the contrary,  Mr  Wilford  drew  our  attention  to  the
    judge's use of the word "compelling" in paragraph 36 of  his  decision.
    However, that was a reference to the strength of  the  evidence  rather
    than by way of a suggestion that there would need to be some compelling
    or exceptional level of dependency in  order  to  support  a  claim  of
    family life between parents and their adult child. Thirdly,  we  cannot
    see anything in the terms of the judge's decision to  suggest  that  he
    considered the voluntary nature of a  separation  between  parents  and
    their adult child as relevant to the purely factual question of whether
    family life had continued to exist thereafter.  It  is  true  that  the
    judge dwelt to some extent upon the  sponsor's  decision  to  send  the
    appellant to a boarding school in Nepal rather than to one in Hong Kong
    in 2001. However, this was within the context of deciding  whether  the
    appellant  met  the  requirements  for  the  favourable   exercise   of
    discretion outside the Immigration Rules rather than it being  relevant
    to the question of whether there was family life between them.

 9. Turning to Mr Wilford's other submissions, we are  satisfied  that  the
    judge was entitled to take account of  all  the  matters  to  which  he
    referred in support of his conclusion that family  life  had  not  been
    established and that he did not  overlook  anything  that  was  legally
    critical to that decision. The concept of 'family life' is  an  elusive
    one that is incapable of precise definition. It  is  perhaps  for  this
    reason that the authorities  tend  to  concentrate  on  what  does  not
    constitute family life rather than upon what does. We do not understand
    the judge to be saying that the fact that the appellant was sent  to  a
    boarding school at the age of 13 years necessarily  eroded  his  family
    life with his parents at that time. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that
    the judge was entitled to take it into account when deciding the extent
    to which the appellant is  currently  emotionally  dependent  upon  his
    parents in the United Kingdom. We do not  accept  that  the  judge  was
    unduly dismissive of the relevance  of  the  sponsor's  visits  to  the
    appellant in Nepal. Visits between adult  family  members  who  do  not
    reside together are commonplace, and the judge  was  thus  entitled  to
    conclude that they were not of themselves indicative  of  family  life.
    The appellant's current  residence  in  a  family  unit  comprising  of
    himself, his paternal  cousin,  and  his  paternal  cousin's  immediate
    family members, was an established fact to which  the  judge  was  also
    entitled to have regard in assessing the extent to which the  appellant
    continued to be dependent upon his parents for  emotional  support  and
    advice. The same is true of the appellant's independent decision-making
    in relation to his further education. Finally, the judge was not  bound
    to treat either his parents' contribution to his financial  maintenance
    or the cultural perception that unmarried adult children remain part of
    their parents' family until marriage as being decisive of the  question
    as to the existence of family life between them.

10. We therefore conclude that the First-tier Tribunal did not legally  err
    in finding that family  life  had  not  been  established  between  the
    appellant and his parents.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Judge                                                                  Kelly
Date: 20th December 2017

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

