
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03436/2015
                                                               HU/05210/2015
                                                               HU/04600/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 December 2016                       |On 19 December 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                           O M-O (First Appellant)
                          E M-O (Second Appellant)
                           M M-O (Third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Vokes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing their  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision
dated 20 July 2015 refusing them  further  leave  to  remain  on  article  8
grounds.

Background

2.   The first appellant ("the appellant") is a national of Nigeria born  on
    28 May 1970, the second appellant her first daughter born on 3 December
    2007 and the third appellant, her second daughter born on 18  September
    2012, also Nigerian citizens.   The  appellant  entered  the  UK  as  a
    student on 5 October 2007 and her leave was subsequently extended  both
    under Tier 4 and Tier 1 until 14 May 2012.  A further  application  was
    made on 11  May  2012  on  article  8  grounds,  but  was  refused.   A
    subsequent appeal was dismissed in  October  2014  with  permission  to
    appeal being refused by both  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  On 19 April 2015 a further application was made for  leave  to
    remain on article 8 grounds.

3.   The judge found that certain facts were not in dispute.  The  appellant
    had lived in Nigeria until she came to the UK to study for  an  MSc  in
    Strategy, Custom and Service Management.  She had not found  a  job  in
    which she could use her qualifications  but  had  obtained  an  NVQ  in
    Health and Social Care. She had worked for a time in a  care  home  but
    was not working at the date of hearing.  Her  husband  was  a  Nigerian
    national who had returned to Nigeria in 2008.  He was a certified fraud
    examiner working for a major international telecommunications  company.
    There were now two children of the family, but, very sadly, a  son  had
    died shortly after his birth in 2010.  The appellant had a mother,  two
    brothers and three sisters living in Nigeria, most of  them  in  Lagos.
    Her husband was from the south-east of Nigeria with a  father,  mother,
    brothers and sisters, some of whom lived in Lagos, whereas  his  father
    lived in south-east Nigeria.  They did not have any close relatives  in
    the UK.

4.   The judge dealt firstly with an issue of whether  there  was  a  safety
    risk to the family on return to Nigeria arising from the employment  of
    the appellant's husband.  It was said that he  had  given  evidence  in
    March 2014 to a Tribunal investigating an allegation of electoral fraud
    involving a Nigerian politician who then sought  his  prosecution.   It
    was decided that there were no grounds to prosecute, but the  appellant
    said that her husband continued to be harassed by  the  politician  and
    his supporters and had to seek refuge in accommodation  provided  by  a
    local church.  It was the judge's finding that the  appellant  and  her
    husband  had  fabricated  this  incident  to  boost  her   application,
    describing it as  simply  another  attempt  in  a  series  of  attempts
    designed to prolong her stay in the UK.

5.   The judge then went on  to  consider  health  issues  relating  to  the
    appellant.  He accepted that she had low mood and  anxiety,  was  being
    treated with standard anti-depressants and her condition had  no  doubt
    been aggravated by the death of her son in 2010.   He  noted  that  the
    appellant had remained in the community and been  responsible  for  the
    care of her two children.  There was nothing to suggest  that  she  was
    not managing this appropriately.  He then considered the  situation  of
    the children, noting that they both lived with the appellant  and  were
    in education, the second appellant attending  first  school  and  doing
    well and the third appellant attending nursery.  He commented that  the
    appellant took an active part in community affairs, including  being  a
    parent governor at school, a children's  teacher  in  a  local  church,
    assisting at a food bank and helping with care of the  elderly  in  the
    community.

6.   The judge then considered the best interests  of  the  children  saying
    that their best interests required them certainly to  remain  with  the
    appellant, and to be reunited with their  father  so  they  could  live
    together as a family.  He had a good job in Nigeria and  was  obviously
    settled there.  He went on to consider whether it  was  reasonable  for
    the second appellant to leave the UK.  He noted that she had lived  all
    her life in the United Kingdom and was settled  at  school,  but  at  8
    years of age she could not exist independently of her  family  and  the
    focus of the life of an 8 year old was usually within the  family.   He
    accepted that there would be an upheaval in moving but found  it  would
    be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK.   In  summary,  the  judge
    found that the appellants  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules ("the Rules") and there were  no  compelling  reasons
    why their appeal should be  considered  under  article  8  outside  the
    Rules.

The Grounds and Submissions

7.     In  the  grounds  it  is  argued  that  the  judge  made  a  material
    misdirection of law  by  finding  that  the  March  2014  incident  was
    fabricated when he said that he would have expected this to  have  been
    brought to the attention of the Upper Tribunal in October 2014 when  it
    was considering the previous appeal.  It  is  further  argued  that  he
    misdirected himself by holding it against the appellant  that  she  had
    not contacted the Nigerian police to see whether the document  at  112-
    113 was genuine and had failed to consider the documents in the  manner
    set out in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] AR 318.  Further, the judge had  failed
    to give adequate reasons for finding that in any event there  would  be
    protection and relocation available to the family if there were such  a
    risk.

8.   It is further alleged  the  judge  that  failed  to  consider  material
    matters when considering proportionality, including the fact  that  the
    appellant was very active in her local community.  It was not adequate,
    so it is argued, for the judge simply to say that he did not doubt  any
    of these things.  He also failed to consider the ties built up  by  the
    second and third appellants and the fact that the second appellant  was
    born in and had lived in the UK for eight  years.   He  had  failed  to
    consider the respondent's policy that strong reasons would be  required
    to refuse a case where a child had been continuously resident for  more
    than seven years, relying on PD and Others (article 8: conjoined family
    claims) Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 108. He had also failed to  consider  the
    fact that the appellant's son was  buried  in  the  UK  and  she  found
    comfort in visiting the grave.  This related directly to the extent  of
    her private life.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "2.  The grounds argue that the judge's assessment  of  credibility
             was inadequate, as was his consideration of the evidence as  a
             whole.  The grounds also argue that the assessment of  private
             versus public interests was flawed.


         3.   It is arguable that the judge's consideration  of  the  public
             interest factors in favour of removal was inadequate.   It  is
             also arguable that the assessment of the best interests of the
             children of the family was not sufficiently reasoned."

10.  Mr Vokes submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for his finding in relation to the alleged  difficulties  faced
    by the appellant's husband in Nigeria and had found that  the  incident
    was fabricated without giving  any  adequate  basis  for  the  finding.
    There were a number of documents in the appeal  bundle  at  112-168  to
    substantiate what was said about this risk and it  was  not  sufficient
    simply to dismiss the documents as forgeries.  He argued that the  view
    the judge had taken of these documents coloured  his  approach  to  the
    rest of the evidence.  The judge had further failed  to  take  adequate
    account of the length of the second appellant's  residence  in  the  UK
    referring to the judgment of the Court of Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and in particular to [46]  where
    the court said that when applying the reasonableness test the fact that
    a child had been in the UK for seven years must  be  given  significant
    weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise.

11.  He also submitted that the judge had failed to take proper  account  of
    the appellant's involvement in community affairs as this  was  directly
    relevant to the public interest in removal  and  her  integration  into
    British society.   Further,  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    emotional significance of the death of  the  appellant's  son  and  its
    relevance to her family and private life in the  UK.   In  summary,  Mr
    Vokes submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  an  adequately
    reasoned decision or take into account all relevant matters.

12.  Mr Harrison relied upon the rule 24 response.  He  submitted  that  the
    judge had reached findings properly open to him and  had  given  proper
    and reasonable consideration  to  all  the  relevant  factors.   Whilst
    accepting that the  judge  had  not  referred  to  any  of  the  recent
    authorities on article 8, that had not had any material bearing on  his
    findings and conclusions.

Assessment of Whether the First-tier Tribunal Erred in Law

13.  I must decide whether the judge erred in law, such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  I am satisfied that  he  did  for  the  following
    reasons.  The first relates to the way he dealt with  the  evidence  of
    whether the appellants would be at  risk  in  Nigeria  because  of  the
    events involving the appellant's husband.  The judge was not  satisfied
    that the events described had taken place and found that the  appellant
    and her husband had fabricated the incident to boost their application.
     He commented that the timing was significant in that it followed  from
    the dismissal by the First-tier Tribunal of the previous appeal but had
    not been brought to anyone's intention until  the  present  application
    was made, there had also been no attempt to contact the Nigerian police
    to see if the document was genuine, the appellant had  apparently  been
    able  to  obtain  copies  of  correspondence  between   her   husband's
    employer's solicitors and various people and if a member  of  staff  of
    the company had been threatened and steps  taken  for  his  protection,
    that surely could have been confirmed.

14.  The documents in the appeal bundle about this issue  run  from  109  to
    182 and include copy documents from proceedings  in  the  Federal  High
    Court of Nigeria, newspaper articles and e-mails.  Whilst this issue is
    of limited relevance to a claim based on article 8 where no  claim  has
    been made in relation to article 3, it may be material in  relation  to
    the judge's findings on credibility.  I accept  Mr  Vokes's  submission
    that the judge failed to give an  adequate  basis  for  rejecting  this
    evidence and describing it as a fabrication.  The judge drew an adverse
    inference from the fact that it had not been drawn to the attention  of
    the Upper Tribunal in the previous appeal but it would  not  have  been
    issue in those proceedings as  evidence  relating  to  facts  occurring
    after the date of decision can only in vary rare cases have any bearing
    on whether the Tribunal erred in law and in any event there appears  to
    be no adequate evidence about whether or not it these matters had  been
    brought to the attention of the appellant's representatives.

15.   Secondly,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge   gave   sufficient
    consideration to the length of the second appellant's residence in  the
    UK.   In  MA  (Pakistan)  the  Court  of  Appeal  confirmed  that  when
    considering the reasonableness test the fact that a child had  been  in
    the UK for seven years must be given significant weight  when  carrying
    out the proportionality exercise, referring to  guidance  published  in
    August 2015 in the IDI entitled "Family Life (as a Partner  or  Parent)
    and Private Life: 10-Yaer Routes)" where it is  expressly  stated  that
    once a seven year residence requirement is satisfied there need  to  be
    "strong reasons" for refusing leave and noted that after such a  period
    of time a child will have put down roots and developed social, cultural
    and educational links in the UK, such that it is likely  to  be  highly
    disruptive if the child is required to leave the UK.  That may be  less
    so when children are very young because the focus of their  lives  will
    be on their families and disruption becomes more serious  as  they  get
    older.  Whilst the judge did refer to the focus of young  child's  life
    usually being within the family, I am not satisfied that  it  is  clear
    that the judge gave significant weight to the length of residence or to
    the need for strong reasons for refusing leave in such cases.

16.  The issues normally to be considered when assessing the best  interests
    of a child have been set out in EV (Philippines) v Secretary  of  State
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 as depending on a number of factors such  as  their
    age, the length of time they have been in the UK, how  long  they  have
    been in education, what state their  education  has  reached,  to  what
    extent they have become distanced from  the  country  to  which  it  is
    proposed that they return, how renewable their connection with  it  may
    be and to what extent they  will  have  linguistic,  medical  or  other
    difficulties in adapting to life in that  country,  and  the  longer  a
    child has been in this country and the more advanced the stage  of  his
    education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question  and  the
    more deleterious the consequences of his return  and  the  greater  the
    weight that falls into one side of the scales.  I am satisfied that the
    judge failed to consider the best interests  of  the  children  in  the
    context of these factors.

17.  Thirdly, I am satisfied that the judge failed to  take  proper  account
    of the nature and extent of the appellant's  private  life  in  the  UK
    arising from her involvement with the community.  Whilst  acknowledging
    that he did not doubt any of these matters, I am satisfied that he  did
    not engage with the argument on the effect of  her  activities  on  the
    public interest as considered in UE  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2010] EWCA Civ 975.  Finally, the judge should have dealt  more  fully
    with the impact on the appellant's private lives of the  death  of  her
    son in 2010.  This was a major  point  being  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants and needed to be fully considered.

18.  For these reasons I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing to take all relevant matters into account  when  assessing  the
    extent of the appellants' private  and  family  lives  in  the  UK,  by
    failing to consider the full significance of the length of residence of
    the second appellant and  by  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting  the  evidence  about  the  events   concerning   the   first
    appellant's husband in Nigeria as a fabrication.

19.  In these circumstances, both Mr Vokes and Mr  Harrison  took  the  view
    that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    full rehearing.  In the circumstances of this case I agree that this is
    the proper course to take.

Decision

20.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law, such that the  decision  is
    set aside.  The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reconsideration by way of a full rehearing by a different  judge.   The
    anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains in force  until
    further order.





Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 16 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



