
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/03060/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 2 December 2019                     |  On: 9 December 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                               KALSOOM AKHTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  SL
    Farmer, promulgated on 15 July 2019. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by on First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow on 18 October 2019.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.







Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 9 November 2010 with  leave
    to enter as a Tier 4 General Student until 24 February 2012. Her  leave
    was initially extended until 28 June 2014 but  curtailed  to  27  April
    2013. She was subsequently granted leave to remain from  14  July  2013
    until 19 September 2014. Thereafter the appellant made and withdrew  an
    asylum  claim  and  made  further  submissions  which  were   variously
    certified and rejected. On 23 May 2017, the appellant  made  a  further
    human rights claim. It is the refusal of that claim in a decision dated
    7 February 2019 which is the subject of this appeal.

 4. The substance of the appellant's human rights claim is that she  has  a
    family life with her partner and child M, who was born  in  the  United
    Kingdom during July 2018. The respondent refused that  claim  primarily
    on suitability grounds as it was considered that the appellant had used
    deception in a  previous  application  by  relying  on  a  fraudulently
    obtained English-language test certificate. In addition, M  was  not  a
    qualifying child; there were no very serious obstacles to the appellant
    integrating in Pakistan and no exceptional circumstances had  been  put
    forward that would warrant a grant of leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found  that  the  appellant  met  the
    suitability requirements under the Rules, in  that  she  had  not  used
    deception. The judge considered the appellant's claim that she and  her
    partner were not married and that he had an outstanding asylum claim in
    the United Kingdom. The judge found that the appellant and her  partner
    had chosen not to marry and that the partner's asylum  claim  had  been
    refused  on  two  occasions.  The  conclusion  was  that  it  was   not
    disproportionate for the appellant and her child to return to Pakistan.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal mainly argued that the judge erred in failing  to
    attach any weight to the "historic injustice" issue  which  related  to
    the false accusation of deception, which had led to the curtailment  of
    her leave in 2013. In addition, it was submitted that the judge  failed
    to have regard to the third limb of Razgar in circumstances  where  the
    allegation of  dishonesty  was  resolved  in  her  favour  as  had  the
    overstaying following the 2013  issue  and  this  affected  the  public
    interest principle.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought,  with  the  judge
    commenting as follows:

    "it is arguable that the judge has not considered  whether  any  weight
    should be attached to the accusation of deception, which was found  not
    to be proved, and which resulted, according  to  the  grounds,  in  the
    Appellant's leave being curtailed in April 2013.  The  factor  has  not
    been considered in the proportionality balancing exercise."

 8. The respondent did not file a Rule 24 response.

 9. Shortly before the hearing, the appellant filed a  bundle  of  material
    which disclosed that following the  hearing  of  her  own  appeal,  her
    partner's protection appeal had been allowed and he had been recognised
    as a refugee by the Secretary of State. A photocopy  of  his  residence
    permit dated 4 October 2019  confirmed  that  this  was  the  case.  In
    addition, an application had been made to regularise  the  position  of
    the appellant's child with her partner.

The hearing

10. Mr Gajjar swiftly addressed the historic injustice point by  clarifying
    that the appellant's leave to remain was curtailed in 2013 for  working
    in breach and not deception. Consequently, he was not relying  on  this
    point. He asked that regard was had to the recent events, in  that  the
    appellant's partner was granted refugee status  after  the  appellant's
    appeal.  In addition, he argued  that  while  the  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's explanation that she did not use  deception  in  her  TOEIC
    examination, he did not  take  this  into  account  in  his  Article  8
    assessment despite suitability  being  a  factor  in  the  respondent's
    decision. Mr Gajjar argued that this was a material error  to  fail  to
    take into account positive findings.

11. Mr Bramble asked me to note that the appellant received  further  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 migrant notwithstanding that her  previous  leave
    was curtailed for working in breach. While  accepting  that  the  judge
    failed to  mention  his  positive  findings  that  there  had  been  no
    deception, this was not material. The judge provided clear reasoning in
    terms of Article 8 outside the Rules including in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise. As for the change in circumstances, no attempt  had
    been made by the appellant's representatives to hold the case  back  to
    await the outcome of her husband's appeal. The change of  circumstances
    could be addressed by the appellant applying for status as the  partner
    of a refugee.

12. Mr Gajjar had nothing further to add, in response.

13. At the end of the hearing I announced that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was upheld there being no material error of law.

Decision on error of law

14. The sole outstanding complaint with the decision  and  reasons  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is that the judge did not specifically mention  his
    positive findings on the issue of deception in conducting his balancing
    exercise. That is indeed the case. I heard no submissions on behalf  of
    the appellant as to what material difference it would have made to  the
    outcome of the appeal, had the judge mentioned those positive findings.
    All that could have been  said  is  that  the  appellant  did  not  use
    deception. That an appellant does not use deception should be a  normal
    state of affairs and not a matter  which  is  deserving  of  additional
    weight. At the time of the hearing, the appellant's circumstances  were
    that she had overstayed since 2014, she  had  a  very  young  child,  a
    partner who had an outstanding asylum  appeal  having  been  previously
    unsuccessful and that she had had recourse to  the  NHS.  The  positive
    findings on deception make no difference to these facts and  could  not
    have had  a  material  impact  on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  That
    circumstances have changed some months after the hearing could not have
    been foreseen by the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Signed:                                 Dated 4 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
