
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/03200/2019
      HU/09284/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2020                             |On 4 February 2021            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR Devang Arvindbhai Patel
                         MRS Suchitaben Devang Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Petterson , Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Gajjear, Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This hearing was held remotely via video link.  Neither party objected to
the hearing being held by video link.  Both parties participated by UK
Court Skype.  I am satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be held
because it was not practicable and that all of the issues could be
determined in a remote hearing.  Both parties confirmed at the end of the
hearing that it had been conducted fairly and there were no IT problems
during the hearing.



Respondent's immigration history and History of the appeal

The respondents are citizens of India, born on 8 July 1974 and 2 August
1998 respectively.  The first respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on
27 January 2009 as a Tier 4 Student with leave to remain until 2013.  He
then obtained further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student until 12 July
2015.  The second respondent entered the UK on 21 November 2014 with leave
to remain in line with the first respondent as his dependant until 12 July
2015.  On 9 July 2015 prior to the expiry of her leave, the second
respondent applied for leave to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant with the first
respondent as her dependent.  This application was refused on 29 December
2016. The decision was maintained following an application for
Administrative Review on 15 February 2017.

The respondents' immigration history subsequently became more complex.  On
27 February 2017 the first respondent made a human rights application which
was subsequently varied to a Tier 2 Migrant application on 26 September
2017 with the second respondent as his dependent. The application was
refused on 2 January 2018.  The decision was maintained on Administrative
Review on 8 February 2018 and again 19 March 2018.  On 21 March 2018, two
days later, the first respondent made an application on the basis of his
human rights outside of the immigration rules. The second respondent was
dependent on this application.  On 18 September 2018 the first respondent
lodged a human rights application on the basis of long residence which
varied the previous application.  On 3 January 2019 the first respondent
varied his application again by applying for indefinite leave to remain on
the basis of ten year's continuous lawful residence in the UK. The second
respondent was informed that she was not able to be a dependent on this
application because she had not completed 10 years lawful residence and she
lodged her own human rights application on 25 October 2018.    Her
application was refused on 12 February 2019 and certified as clearly
unfounded. She submitted a pre-action protocol letter. On 9 March 2019 the
respondent agreed to reconsider the application.  The first respondent's
application for indefinite leave to remain was refused on 2 February 2019.
The second respondent's application was refused with a right of appeal on
13 May 2019.

The first respondent appealed against the decision dated 2 February 2019 on
20 February 2019. The second respondent appealed against the decision dated
13 May 2019 on 23 May 2019.

 1. The appeals were linked  and  both  decisions  were  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Stedman, although he refers only to the decision dated 2
    February 2019.  The appeals were heard on  20  August  2019  and  in  a
    decision dated 12 September 2019, the judge  allowed  the  respondents'
    appeals on human rights grounds.

 2. On 7 January 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher  granted  permission
    to appeal.

The error of law hearing came before me on 21 February 2020. I set aside
the decision on the basis that there had been a material error of law for
the reasons in the decision dated 23 April 2020 appended to this decision,
primarily on the basis that the judge had failed to consider whether the
respondents met paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules which fed
into his findings on the proportionality of the decision.

The appeal was adjourned for re-making with the findings of fact made by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Stedman preserved as there was no challenge to
the factual findings made by the judge. There was then a delay in listing
the re-making appeal due to the disruption caused by the pandemic.

Decision under appeal

The decisions under appeal are a decision dated 2 February 2019 to refuse
the first respondent's human right's claim and a decision dated 13 May 2019
to refuse the second respondent's human rights claim.

Reasons for Refusal

 3. The Secretary of State's  position  is  that  the  respondents  do  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    because they have not completed ten years' continuous lawful  residence
    in the United Kingdom, nor do  the  respondents  satisfy  276ADE(1)(vi)
    because there are no very significant obstacles to their integration to
    India.  This is because  the  respondents  have  spent  most  of  their
    formative years in India, have retained knowledge of the life, language
    and culture from their country of birth.  In particular, Mrs Patel  did
    not arrive in the United Kingdom  until  2014.   The  couple's  parents
    remain in India.  Mrs Patel has only lived in the  United  Kingdom  for
    five years and the couple have been to India on holiday where they have
    a strong family network. Any qualifications and  skills  gained  whilst
    living and working in the United Kingdom can  be  used  to  reintegrate
    into life and society in India.

It is considered that there are no exceptional circumstances pursuant to
paragraph GEN.3.2 which would render the refusal a breach of Article 8 ECHR
because it would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
respondents or their child.

Grounds of Appeal

The grounds of appeal assert that it would be a breach of Article 8 ECHR to
remove the respondents from the United Kingdom.

The Burden and Standard of Proof

It is for the respondents to show that there has been or there will be if
the Secretary of State acts as she intends, an interference with their
human rights.  If interference is established, it is then for the Secretary
of State to establish that the interference is justified.  The standard of
proof is the balance of probabilities.

The relevant date for the determination of the Article 8 ECHR issue is the
date of the hearing. This is agreed by all parties.

Documents in Evidence

I have before me the previous documents produced at the appeal before First-
tier Tribunal Judge Steadman, including the Secretary of State's bundles,
the respondents' original 115-page bundle, as well as the skeleton argument
prepared by Mr Gajjear. There were no new documents before me. The
respondents did not seek to adduce any further evidence.

The Hearing

Mr Gajjear did not call the respondents to give evidence and the hearing
proceeded by legal submissions only, the factual findings in the previous
decision having been preserved in full.

Both representatives made legal submissions which are set out in the Record
of Proceedings. Mr Gajjear also relied on his previous skeleton argument.

Discussion and Analysis

Preserved Findings

The preserved findings are as follows:

The respondents are Indian nationals. The first respondent entered the UK
on 27 January 2009 and has lived in the UK for 12 years.   The second
respondent joined her husband in the UK as his dependent on 21 November
2014 at the age of 26 and has lived in the UK for 6 years. The respondents
have a child who was born in the UK on 29 July 2017 and has now lived in
the UK for 3 years and six months.

The first respondent has not accrued ten year's lawful continuous residence
in the UK [16].

In the UK, the first respondent completed a course in Business Management
Level 7 from the London College of Excellence. He then obtained a
Certificate of Acceptance of Studies ("CAS") to study at the School of
Computing and Business Studies. By August 2013 he had completed the ACCA
Advanced Business Diploma in Accounting and Business and the ACCA
professional level. By way of supplementary study, he then completed a
Lower Second Class BSC (Hons) degree in Applied Accountancy from Oxford
Brookes University. He last studied in 2013. [24]. (From the bundle the
Degree was awarded on 21 September 2015).  Since then, he has completed
some independent web-based studies [16].   The first respondent has not
worked since 2015. He is familiar with the UK tax system.

The second respondent obtained a First-class MA degree in Economics from
Sardar Patel University in India. She was previously working in an
accountancy firm in the UK [26].  (The evidence in the respondent's bundle
suggests that she has worked in the UK in a jeweller shop and at Seameadows
Supported Living and her Tier 2 Certificate of Sponsorship ("CoS")
describes her proposed job as web design).

The first respondent has devoted his personal life, energy and ambition
into his studies in the UK. The judge states at [31]; "This was an
investment choice he made regarding the direction of his life when in
India, coming here at the age of 20" and refers to the first respondent
spending many tens of thousands of pounds on his studies. He is ambitious,
hard-working and goal driven [34].

The first respondent would be devastated at having to leave the UK [35].

The respondents have strong ties to the UK. They have many friends in the
UK and are committed to integrating in the UK [37].

If returned to India, both respondents would cope. They would be able to
find employment and would be able to support themselves in India [36].

    Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE(1)(vi) and 276B of the immigration
    rules

I first give consideration to the immigration rules as these are accepted
to be a statement by the Secretary of State of where the balance should be
struck between the need to maintain immigration control and an individual's
right to respect for family and private life. This is the approach endorsed
by the Upper Tribunal in Bossade (s117A-D - interrelationship with the
rules) [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC). If the respondents can satisfy the
immigration rules, this is dispositive of the human rights appeal as found
in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.

    Appendix FM

It is agreed by both parties that the first and second respondents are not
able to meet the requirements of the immigration rules in respect of family
life with a partner under Appendix FM because neither partner is a British
citizen, settled in the UK or somebody who has been granted refugee leave
or humanitarian protection. I find that EX1 can only be considered in
conjunction with the remainder of the immigration rules at Appendix FM. I
find on this basis that the first and second respondents cannot meet the
requirements of R-LTRP 1.1. It is not asserted that either the first or
second respondents can meet the requirements of the parent rules R -LTRPT
or that the child can meet the requirements of the child rules and I agree
that this is the case.  Mr Gajjear did not seek to persuade me that either
of the respondents can meet the requirements of Appendix FM of the
immigration rules.

    Paragraph 276B - ten year's continuous lawful residence

It is agreed by both parties that the respondents cannot satisfy paragraph
276B of the immigration rules because neither respondent has accrued ten
years continuous lawful residence in the UK.  It appears to be accepted by
the Secretary of State in a letter dated 8 February 2018 that the
respondents held 3C leave until 19 March 2018 because they made an
application on 27 February 2017, within 14 days of their previous in -time
application for Tier 2 leave being determined on 15 February 2017 when the
Administrative Review was finalised.  The 27 February 2017 application was
finally concluded on 19 March 2018. In contrast in the decision under
appeal dated 2 February 2019, it is said by the Secretary of State that 3C
came to an end on 15 February 2017. Even giving the respondents the benefit
of the doubt in respect of 3C leave in 2017, I find that their 3C leave
came to an end on 19 March 2018 when the Administrative Review in respect
of the first respondents' Tier 2 Migrant application was concluded. At this
time, the first respondent had remained in the UK lawfully for 9 years
which was short of the ten year's continuous lawful residence required. Mr
Gajjear did not make any submissions to the effect that the first
respondent satisfied paragraph 276B of the immigration rules because he had
completed ten year's lawful residence in the UK.

For the sake of completeness, I find that 276B (v) of the rules (in respect
of the first respondent's breach of the immigration laws in the period
after 19 March 2018) does not operate to allow his period of overstaying to
be disregarded, because although the first respondent made a further
application within 14 days of the negative Administrative Review decision
on 19 March 2018 (on 21 March 2018), it is clear that the previous
application leading to the Administrative Review decision was itself made
out of time and that paragraph 39E does not apply in these circumstances
because the previous application needs to be made in time for the current
overstaying to be disregarded.

    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)

I turn to the issue of whether the respondents can satisfy 276ADE(1)(vi) of
the immigration rules in respect of private life. Mr Gajjear's submission
is that the respondents can satisfy this provision.

Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules states;

      (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on
      the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
      application, the applicant:

       (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
       lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any
       period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles
       to the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
       have to go if required to leave the UK.

 4. The first and second respondents must establish  that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to their integration  to  India,  were  they
    were to be returned there.  In considering these rules my  task  is  to
    assess the obstacles to integration relied on, whether characterised as
    hardship  or  difficulty  and  to  decide  whether   they   are   'very
    significant' (see Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 932).  Parveen is also
    authority for the principle that assertions in  relation  to  obstacles
    must be supported by evidence.

 5. I have regard to the following principles. Firstly, in  SSHD  v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 it is said;

      "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be
      made as to whether the individual will be  enough  of  an  insider  in
      terms of understanding how life in the society in that  other  country
      is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a
      reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on
      a day-to-day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable
      time a variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the
      individual's private or family life'

In AS v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1284 it is said;

      "Consideration as to obstacles to integration requires consideration
      of all relevant factors, including generic ones such as intelligence,
      employability and general robustness of character."

Mr Gajjear submitted that I should take a holistic approach to the issue of
'very significant obstacles'. He asked me to give weight to the fact that
the first respondent has been residing in the UK for 12 years; that he came
to the UK aged 20 and had been educated in the UK completing a post-
graduate diploma in Business and a BSC in Applied Accountancy from Oxford
Brookes as well as completing his ACCA qualifications. Mr Gajjear pointed
to the fact that the first respondent's accountancy experience related to
the UK tax system and that this would present an obstacle to the first
respondent obtaining employment in India. The time and money spent on his
studies would go to waste. He also argued that the reason that the second
respondent's Tier 2 application was refused was because the sponsor's
sponsorship licence was revoked in the 18-month period during which the
application was pending. Mr Gajjear pointed to the first respondent's
uncontested evidence that the first respondents' family do not accept the
marriage because the first and second respondents are from different castes
and that he has diminished family ties in India.

Mr Gajjear also pointed to the effect of the Covid pandemic in India where
there are large numbers of cases and obstacles to travel. These would
affect the respondents' ability to reintegrate into Indian society.

When assessing whether there are insurmountable obstacles to integration, I
note and take into account that the first and second respondents have both
spent the majority of their lives in India. The first respondent lived in
India until the age of 20 and the second respondent until the age of 26.
Both respondents are familiar with Indian culture. They speak Gujerati as
well as English and they have many friends of Indian origin in the UK as
indicated in the letters of support in their appeal bundle. They also have
links with the Temple.

The first respondent asserts that his family does not approve of his
marriage and this evidence is unchallenged by the Secretary of State.  The
second respondent still has close relatives in India including her parents.
She does not assert that she has been rejected by her own family. There is
no suggestion in the evidence that the couple have been threatened or are
at risk on return. They have not claimed protection or lodged an Article 3
ECHR claim. Mr Gajjaer did not make any submissions in respect of the
couple being harmed by their families if they return to India.

Even if the first respondent cannot rely on the support of his family in
India and this may present an initial difficulty for the respondents, I
find on balance that they can rely on the support of the maternal uncles
who have been supporting them in the UK over a period of several years.
This assistance could not continue in India for a short period whilst the
respondents settle themselves. The respondents have been able to support
themselves financially for a period of two and a half years since 2018
during which they have had no status or work. Moreover, the respondents
have been living in an independent family unit in the UK and I am satisfied
that the family would be able to live independently as a family unit in
India as they have done in the UK away from the first respondent's family
if necessary.

It is agreed as a preserved fact that the respondents would be able to cope
and find employment in India. Both respondents were educated to university
level in India prior to coming to the UK.   The first respondent is
undoubtedly an intelligent and educated individual with experience in
accountancy and business. He has transferrable education skills. Mr Gajjaer
asserts that because the qualifications gained in the UK relate to the UK
tax system there will be an obstacle to the first respondent obtaining
employment in India but has not produced any supporting independent
documentary evidence of this. I find that the first respondent undertook
these qualifications in the first place in the knowledge that he would be
expected to return to India at the end of his studies and furthermore the
first respondent has shown himself to be a quick learner by completing his
ACCA qualifications very quickly as found by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Stedman. I am satisfied that he would be able to get to grips with the tax
systems in other jurisdictions. The second respondent is similarly educated
and intelligent and has work experience in the UK in accountancy. Her
skills and education are also transferrable. Both respondents have, as
observed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Stedman, shown sufficient ability and
industry to be able to establish themselves in the UK and are resilient and
capable.

I find that the respondents can use their financial resources and
assistance from family members to set up initially in India and then seek
employment to support themselves. Both respondents speak their own
language, are literate and familiar with their own culture. They also speak
fluent English. They are both healthy. Their child has not yet started
school in the UK and could enter into the Indian education system. They are
manifestly enough of insiders to be able to participate in Indian society,
be accepted on a day to day basis and build up a variety of human
relationships. Mr Gajjear did not submit otherwise. The situation may well
be harder because of the current Covid crisis but the respondents did not
produce additional documentary evidence at the hearing in respect of the
extent of these difficulties.

Having taken all of the relevant factors into account in a holistic way, I
find that the respondents can return to India without significant hardship.
I accept that the move will cause some upheaval and disruption, but this
can be mitigated with the assistance of their family and their own ability
to use their skills to find employment. Given the individual circumstances
of the first and second respondents, I find that there would not be very
significant obstacles to their integration to India. I find that neither
the first nor second respondent can satisfy paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) of
the immigration rules.

    Article 8 ECHR

The House of Lords in the case of Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 states;

       "The ultimate question for the Appellate Immigration Authority is
       whether the refusal of leave to enter or remain in circumstances
       where the life of the family cannot reasonably be expected to be
       enjoyed elsewhere prejudices the family life of the applicant in a
       manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the fundamental
       right protected by Article 8".

Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL27 identified a number of step-by-step
questions to be asked in Article 8 cases where an applicant has established
a private or family life (or both). These questions are:

        a. Will the proposed removal, be an interference by a public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect
           for his private or family life?

        b. If so, will the interference have consequences of such gravity
           as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

        c. If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

        d. If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
           the interest of national security, public safety or the economic
           well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or
           crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
           protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

        e. If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate
           public aim sought to be achieved?

    Family/Private Life

It is not dispute that the first and second respondents are in a genuine
and subsisting relationship. They were married in India and the second
respondent came to the UK as a dependent of the first respondent in 2014.
The couple have a child together who was born in the UK on 29 July 2017.
The couple have been married for several years and continue to live in a
family unit with their child. I find that all of the family members have
family life with all of the other members of the family. On this basis I am
satisfied that Article 8 (1) is engaged in respect of family life. However,
the proposed removal would involve limited interference with the
respondents' family life as the family would be leaving the UK as a family
unit and would be able to maintain their family life with each other. (see
AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC).

Bearing in mind the low threshold of engagement set out in AG (Eritrea)
[2007] EWCA Civ 801, I find that the respondents have established private
life in the UK in terms of living in the UK for 12 years and 6 years
respectively.  The first respondent has studied in the UK from 2009 until
2015. Both respondents have worked in the UK and the couple have many
friends and some family in the UK. I find that Article 8 (1) is also
engaged in respect of private life.

I find that the removal of the respondents from the UK would constitute an
interference in their Article 8 right to respect for family and private
life.

With respect to the next stages of the Razgar test, I find that the
decision is in accordance with the law and pursues a legitimate aim namely
the economic wellbeing of the country often expressed as effective
immigration control.

    Proportionality assessment

I go onto consider the issue of proportionality.

In R (on the application of Agyarko and others v Secretary of State for the
Home Department (2017) UKSC 11 it was said; "The critical issue will
generally be whether, giving due weight to the strength of the public
interest in the removal of the person in the case before it, the article 8
claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  In general, in cases
concerned with precarious family life, a very strong or compelling claim is
required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control."

It is asserted by Mr Gajjear that the balance of proportionality should
fall in favour of the respondents because of the strength of their private
life in the UK including the age that the first respondent came to the UK,
his investment in his studies and his length of residence and the
respondents' potential future contribution to the economy. His additional
submission is that the weight to be accorded to the public interest in
removal should be reduced by what he refers to as an 'historic injustice,'
namely the refusal to award the second respondent a period of 60 days leave
after her Tier 2 application was refused because her sponsorship licence
was revoked.

In considering Article 8 ECHR outside of the rules, I am required by
section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended
by section 19 of the of Immigration Act 2014, when considering the issue of
proportionality, to have regard to those factors set out at section 117B.
Section 117A (3) confirms that the Tribunal is required to carry out a
balancing exercise setting the gravity of the interference against the
requirements of the public aims sought to be achieved.

The starting point is that the Secretary of State is entitled to control
the entry of foreign nationals into the territory and that the maintenance
of effective immigration control is in the public interest.

I adopt a balance sheet approach to Article 8 ECHR in accordance with
Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60. I must strike a fair balance between competing
public and private interests in accordance with the principles in Agyarko
and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department (2017) UKSC 11.

When considering the issue of proportionality, I must first take into
account the best interests of any affected child (which is a primary but
not determinative consideration) in accordance with ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
[2011] UKSC 4 s55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 with
reference to the numerous relevant factors set out in the various
authorities.

I make this assessment taking into account the principles in KO Nigeria and
others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 that the consideration of a child's best
interests must be made without taking into consideration the immigration
status of the children's parents but taking into account that in general it
is in the best interests of the children to remain in a family unit with
their parents. The question is whether it is reasonable to expect the child
to follow the parent with no right to remain in the UK to the country of
origin.

I note and take into account that the child is not a 'qualifying child'
because the child is not British and has not lived in the UK for 7 years.

I first consider the child's nationality. The child is not a British
national.  He does not have a statutory right of abode in the UK. I note
and take into account that nationality is an important factor in this
assessment. He is said by Mr Gajjear to be stateless. There is a letter in
the original respondents' bundle dated 3 May 2019 confirming that the
child's birth has been not been registered at the Indian High Commission.
There was nothing to suggest that the situation has moved on and I find
that at the current time the child has no nationality. There was no
explanation however in the evidence as to why two married Indian nationals
whose child was born in the UK would not be able to register him as an
Indian national and insufficient evidence was produced of either any failed
attempts to register the child or evidence of legal obstacles to
registration.

The child was born in the UK and has spent his entire life in the UK.  The
respondents did not provide any documentary evidence of the child's
enrolment at school or nursey. Thus, there would be no disruption in his
education in requiring the child to leave the UK. He would be able to start
the education system in India. The child is healthy and does not have any
special needs. At the age of 3 the main focus of the child will be his
immediate family. I find that the child will not have formed strong,
independent, social and cultural ties to the UK and that there is no deep
level of integration to the UK.

The child currently lives with his parents in Wembley. Neither parent
currently works and they are said to be supported by family members in the
UK.

It is an accepted principle that it is in the best interests of all
children as far as possible to grow up knowing and having a meaningful
relationship with both parents. I find for the reasons set out above that
this family can relocate to India as a unit. They have been able to live
independently in the UK and I find that they could do so in India, with the
help of those family members who have been supporting them in the UK if
necessary. I have already found that both respondents are highly educated
and have work experience. They are both Indian nationals and have spent a
considerable part of their lives living in India. Both members of the
couple are familiar with the language and culture.  I find that they are
loving and responsible parents who would support their child to adjust.
The child has some extended family in the UK but also has extended family
in India.

Having considered all of the relevant circumstances, I find that it is in
the best interests of the child to relocate with his parents to India, the
country of their nationality.

    Other factors relating to proportionality

I turn to other factors which weigh in the proportionality balance
including the immigration status of the first and second respondents.

    Historical injustice

Mr Gajjear's submission is that there has been "historic injustice" because
the second respondent was not afforded a further 60 days leave in order to
regularise her status after her sponsor's licence was revoked. In his
skeleton argument he relies on Patel v ECO (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17 and
AP (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 89.

The second respondent was assigned with a CoS in order to work as a full-
time web designer for Falcon Solutions Ltd on 8 July 2015 and the Tier 2
application was made the following day on 9 July 2015. The job was due to
start on 16 June 2015. At the date of the application the CoS was valid. It
is said by the Secretary of State that the sponsor' licence was revoked in
May 2016 after an investigation into the sponsor was commenced in August
2015 (shortly after the Tier 2 application was submitted) and the licence
was suspended. There was a subsequent delay while the sponsor was
investigated, and a decision was not made on the second respondent's
application until 29 December 2016, some 18 months after the application
was submitted and over 7 months after the sponsor's licence was revoked.

The second respondent's application was refused because she no longer had a
valid CoS at the date of the decision.   On Administrative Review the
second respondent argued that she should have been awarded a 60-day grace
period of leave in order to make a fresh application. The Administrative
Review failed.    The second respondent did not pursue the challenge
further by way of judicial review.

There was very little evidence before me as to when the second respondent
became aware that her sponsor's licence had been revoked although in the
submissions it is said that she did not become aware of this until she
received the decision on her Tier 2 application in January 2017.  In
circumstances when the second respondent had been offered a well-paid job
which was due to start as soon as she submitted her application and in
which she had been issued with a CoS for that purpose, it seems somewhat
surprising that the second respondent would not have chased up the sponsor
during the subsequent 18 month period.  She does not address in her witness
statement or oral evidence when she became aware that there was a problem
with the sponsorship licence, if she made any attempts to contact either
her sponsor or indeed the respondent in this 18-month period or whether she
attempted to find another sponsor.

Nevertheless, notwithstanding this lack of evidence, there has been no
challenge to the second respondent's credibility by the Secretary of State
and from R (Pathan) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 41 it seems that the respondent did
not have a policy of notifying Tier 2 Migrants that their sponsor's
sponsorship licences had been revoked until the date of the decision
itself. I am therefore satisfied on the balance of probability that the
second respondent was not aware that the sponsorship licence was revoked
until she received the negative decision on her application which was taken
on 27 December 2016.

In Pathan it was found that the respondent's failure to notify a Tier 2
Migrant as soon as possible that the sponsorship licence had been withdrawn
was procedurally unfair, because it did not afford an applicant a fair
opportunity to organise their affairs by submitting a further application,
for instance. The Supreme Court however fell short of finding that the
Secretary of State should have granted these migrants a further period of
60 days. The court also commented that the fact that the applicant in that
case (like the respondents before me) had submitted other failed
applications did not undermine the existence of the procedural unfairness.
It is not possible to look back to predict what would have happened had the
second respondent been notified in good time that her application would not
succeed.  It is not possible to say with any certainty that she would have
obtained another Tier 2 sponsor or succeeded on another application. She
would certainly have had the opportunity to vary her outstanding
application and continue her 3C leave. (Although the Secretary of State
appears to have subsequently accepted that 3C leave was extended by virtue
of the subsequent application in any event.)

I am satisfied in accordance with Patel (historic injustice; NIAA Pt 5A)
India [2020] UKUT 351 (IAC), that this procedural error did amount to
historical injustice rather than historic injustice. I am satisfied that
this historical injustice should be taken into account and that it has a
bearing on the proportionality exercise. The failure to notify the second
respondent was an error on the part of the Secretary of State. I give
weight to this failure. This historical injustice on the part of the
Secretary of State lessons the public interest in removing the respondents.

    Immigration status and precariousness

I give weight to the fact that none of the family members meet the
requirements of the immigration rules in respect of private or family life
in accordance with R (on the application of Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.


I note that the family initially lived lawfully in the UK. The first
respondent was in the UK as a student from 2009 and his initial leave was
valid until 2015. The second respondent arrived in the UK in 2014 and also
held leave as his dependent This was the last positive leave granted to the
respondents. The respondents were entitled to apply to extend their leave
under the rules and were permitted to remain lawfully in the UK by virtue
of 3C leave pending the outcome of their applications. The Secretary of
State accepts that 3C leave continued until March 2018 after which time the
respondents remained unlawfully in the UK.

Notwithstanding the rejection of the second respondent's Tier 2
application, the first respondent was able to submit a further human rights
application and vary that to his own Tier 2 Migrant application.  Had the
application been successful, the respondents would have been granted a
further period of leave.

The first respondent's Tier 2 application could not succeed because he had
not completed his degree qualification at the institution which had awarded
him the CAS, rather he had completed it as a supplemental study. This meant
that he was not exempt from the Resident Labour Market Test. His job had
not been advertised at the Jobcentre etc and his application did not meet
the stringent requirements of the rules. Understandably, in these
circumstances his application did not succeed and neither did the
subsequent Administrative Review applications. Similarly, the subsequent
human rights application made in March 2018, when the respondents had been
living in the UK for 7 years and 4 years respectively was not strong and
when the first respondent first applied in September 2018 on the basis of
long residence his application could not have succeeded under the
immigration rules. The second respondent did not make a further Tier 2
application and the evidence does not throw light on the reasons for this.
 I give weight to the respondents' failure to meet the immigration rules.

The respondents have remained in the UK as overstayers for over two years
since March 2018 and have chosen to submit further applications rather than
return to India and apply to return to the UK under the immigration rules.
Since that time, they have been aware that they have no basis on which to
remain in the UK. The respondents have not returned to India because they
prefer to remain in the UK and want to live here. It is worth restating
that Article 8 ECHR does not protect a preference to live in a particular
country. I give weight to the fact that the respondents remained unlawfully
in the UK after their applications had been rejected.

Mr Gajjear submits that the public interest in removal is diluted by the
fact that the respondent can apply to enter the UK as a Highly Skilled
Migrant and that in the context of a global pandemic this should tip the
balance of proportionality in his favour. Mr Gajjear did not specify under
what category the respondents could return and this assertion is not
supported by documentary evidence in the form of the documentation to
demonstrate that either respondent can now satisfy the immigration rules in
any category.  I do not accept Mr Gajjear's submission for this reason.

The first respondents entered the UK in a temporary category knowing that
he would need to return to India at the end of his studies unless he could
meet another category of the immigration rules. His wife was also aware of
this when she entered the UK in 2014. At that time the couple did not have
a child and her visa was due to expire in about a year. Both respondents
were aware that their immigration leave was time limited at all times since
their arrival in the UK and that if they wanted to remain in the UK, they
would need to meet the requirements of the immigration rules.  Their
private life was established when their immigration status was precarious
and continued to be developed at a time when their status was either
precarious or unlawful. In accordance with section 117B (5) of the
Immigration Act 2014, I give little weight to the respondent's private life
in these circumstances.

There is however a sliding scale.  I note in accordance with Rhuppiah v
SSHD [2018] UKSC 58 that the little weight provisions include a small
degree of flexibility and can be overridden by particularly strong features
of private life.

    Private life

 6. The respondents have strong links to their  local  community  including
    their Temple and have family members and friends in the UK.  They  have
    integrated themselves to the UK. The first respondent has resided  here
    for 12 years, has invested in his courses and  speaks  fluent  English.
    However, any individual who invests money in a degree course and worked
    hard at that course to obtain their goals would find  themselves  in  a
    similar position to Mr Patel.  I am not satisfied  that  this  type  of
    investment would differ materially from that of any other  student  who
    has spent time and money pursuing degree  level  or  post-degree  level
    qualifications in  the  United  Kingdom.  All  students  are  similarly
    expected to leave the United Kingdom at the end of their studies.   Mrs
    Patel has been here for only five years and has strong  ties  in  India
    with her immediate family.

 7. Mr and Mrs Patel would suffer limited hardship in returning  to  India.
    Many migrants desperately wish to remain in the UK and have  integrated
    themselves to life in the UK and may feel  disappointed  at  having  to
    leave.  The  circumstances  of  these   respondents   do   not   differ
    significantly from other migrants in  similar  circumstances  who  will
    also have formed ties with the community over  an  extended  period  of
    residence. I do  not  find  that  the  respondents'  private  life  has
    particularly strong features in the  Rhuppiah  sense.  Neither  of  the
    respondents are  unwell  or  have  health  problems  and  there  is  no
    individual in the UK who is financially, emotionally or psychologically
    reliant on them. The first respondent last studied over five years  ago
    and has not worked for a long time.   I do not find that  this  private
    life has such strong features that it outweighs the  precarious  nature
    of the respondent's immigration status.

    Other factors

The first respondent has been involved with assisting the victims of the
Grenfell Tower by making and collecting donations. There is insufficient
evidence to persuade me that the appellant's contributions are of
significant value to the community such that the balance of proportionality
would tip in his favour. I have had regard to RU (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2008]
EWCA Civ 754 and UE (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 975 in this
respect.

I find that section 117B(6) does not apply because child is not British,
nor has he been living continuously in the UK for 7 years.  The child is
not a qualifying child for the purposes of this statutory provision. This
is a neutral factor.

I find that the respondents do speak English which is in the public
interest in accordance with section 117B(2) but I also take into account
that this factor on its own is not sufficient for the respondents to be
granted leave to remain in the UK.

I consider section 117B(3). The respondents are financially independent
because they are supported by the uncles of the first respondent.  They
claim that if they are allowed to remain in the UK, they will work hard
contribute to the economy and pay tax and I have no doubt that this would
be the case. I find that that is a positive factor in their favour and I
give weight to it.  I note however that the public interest in firm
immigration control is not diluted by the appellant's self-sufficiency.
Forman (ss 117 A - C considerations) [2015] UKUT 412 (IAC).

I take into account that the respondents have no criminal convictions.  I
find that this is a neutral factor.

I have not accepted that the respondents will face problems in India as a
result of being estranged from the first respondent's family. I have found
that they will live in an independent financial unit.  There is
insufficient evidence before me that the child would not be able to obtain
an Indian nationality were the parents to apply for it.

I take into account that the first respondent has invested a considerable
amount of money studying in the UK and that he feels rooted in the UK and
has a strong desire to stay here. I also find that he has good friends and
would in his wife's words be "devastated" at having to return to India.
However, there was no medical evidence from a health care professional to
indicate that he has mental health issues or that he would suffer a rapid
and irreversible decline in his mental health if he were to return to
India. I do not find that this factor on its own outweighs the Secretary of
State's imperative to maintain immigration control in a fair and consistent
way.

I also find that if the respondents' assertions are realistic in respect of
obtaining visas to re-enter, it is open to them to return to India in order
to apply for the appropriate work or entrepreneur visa and enter the UK
lawfully with their child.

Having taken into consideration all the competing factors, including the
legitimate aim of a fair and consistent immigration system as well as the
economic well-being of the UK as well as  all of the circumstances of the
family, including the fact that none of the members of this family are
British, the child is not a qualifying child, that it is in the best
interests of the affected child to return to India with his parents, the
precariousness of the appellants' immigration status in the UK, and taking
into account the positive factors including the financial independence of
the family and the devastation and disappointment the family will
experience, as well as the reduced weight to the public interest as a
result of the historical injustice in not notifying the second respondent
promptly that the sponsor's licence had been revoked,  I find that the
balance of proportionality falls in favour of the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.


Signed                 R J Owens                   Date 2 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens


ANNEX

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/03200/2019
      HU/09284/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 February 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR Devang Arvindbhai Patel
                         MRS Suchitaben Devang Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Gajjar, Counsel instructed by Law Lane
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Stedman sent on 12 September 2019 allowing the respondents' human
    rights appeals.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fisher on 7 January 2020.

Background

 8. The first respondent arrived in the United Kingdom on 27  January  2009
    as a Tier 4 Student with leave to remain until 2013.  He then  obtained
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student until 12  July  2015.   The
    second respondent was granted leave to remain in line  with  the  first
    respondent as his dependant until 12 July 2015.  On  9  July  2015  the
    second respondent applied for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  2  Migrant.
    This application was refused on 29 December 2016 and an application for
    administrative review was refused on 15 February 2017.  On 27  February
    2017 the couple made a human rights application. The  first  respondent
    then  varied  the  application  on  26  September  2017  to  a  Tier  2
    application.  This was refused on 2 January 2018.  The application  for
    administrative review was refused on 19 March 2018.  On 21  March  2018
    the respondents lodged a human rights claim  which  was  refused  on  2
    February 2019.  This is the decision  which  was  the  subject  of  the
    appeal before First tier Tribunal Judge Stedman.

 9. The Secretary of State's position  was  that  the  respondents  do  not
    satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276B  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    because they have not completed ten years' continuous lawful  residence
    in the United  Kingdom,  nor  do  the  respondents  satisfy  276ADE(vi)
    because there are no very significant obstacles to their integration to
    India.  This is because  the  respondents  have  spent  most  of  their
    formative years in India, have retained knowledge of the life, language
    and culture from their country of birth.  In particular, Mrs Patel  did
    not arrive in the United Kingdom  until  2014.   The  couple's  parents
    remain in India.  Mrs Patel has only lived in the  United  Kingdom  for
    five years and the couple frequently go to India on holiday where  they
    have a strong family network.  Any  qualifications  and  skills  gained
    whilst living and working in  the  United  Kingdom  could  be  used  to
    reintegrate into life and society in  India.  It  was  considered  that
    there were no exceptional circumstances which would warrant a grant  of
    leave outside the Immigration Rules.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

10. The judge allowed the respondents' appeals  on  the  basis  that  their
    removal from the United Kingdom  would  constitute  a  disproportionate
    interference in their private life.  The judge  referred  to  the  fact
    that Mr Patel had lived in the United Kingdom for ten years. The  judge
    took into account Mr Patel's hard work,  energy,  ambition,  investment
    into his studies in the United Kingdom, his impressive academic history
    and the fact that he would be devastated to return to India.

Grounds of Appeal

11. The grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in  law
    in his assessment of Article 8 ECHR.  It is submitted  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in his use of the "compelling  circumstances  test"
    as outlined in Bossade (s117A-D interrelationship  with  rules)  (2015)
    UKUT 415 and Treebhawon and Others (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -  compelling
    circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC).  The judge accepted in the
    decision that the respondents could return to India and  that  'it  was
    hard to see that they would  be  unable  to  support  themselves'.  The
    decision that there would be a  disproportionate  interference  in  the
    couple's private life was irrational. The Secretary  of  State  submits
    that economic hardship or a preference for living in the United Kingdom
    are not exceptional reasons sufficient to  warrant  a  grant  of  leave
    outside of the Rules.  Mr Patel came to the UK as a student and  should
    not have had any reasonable expectation that his leave  would  lead  to
    settlement.  The judge has in fact adopted the 'near  miss'  principle.
    The fact that over the years an economic migrant to the United  Kingdom
    has worked hard to achieve his goals and integrate into British culture
    does not create a disproportionate interference in  his  private  life.
    It is open to the respondents to apply to return to the United Kingdom.

Permission to appeal

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on
    the basis that it is arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  the
    appropriate test of 'compelling circumstances'.

The Hearing

13. Mr Tarlow submitted that whilst the judge clearly had sympathy with the
    respondents because of the time, money and effort they had spent in the
    United Kingdom, the judge had made findings which were not open to him.
    He misapplied the law by failing  to  apply  the  appropriate  test  of
    'compelling circumstances'. The appellants did not meet the Immigration
    Rules in respect of family or private life and the judge concluded that
    they would be able to return to India.

14. Mr Gajjar relied on the Rule 24 reply. His argument is that it is clear
    from [18] to [22] of the decision that the judge has properly  directed
    himself to the weight to be given to the Immigration Rules.  The judge,
    as the finder of fact properly considered the evidence, identified  the
    issues and adopted the  correct  approach  in  relation  to  Article  8
    outside of the Rules.  He submitted that the question of weight  was  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal and should be left undisturbed.

15. He submitted that the  decision  of  the  judge  was  not  infected  by
    irrationality. At [30] the judge draws attention  to  the  particularly
    strong features of  the  respondent's  private  life  and  goes  on  to
    specifically label compelling features in relation to  the  respondents
    including the fact that Mr Patel had come to the UK at the age  of  20,
    had completed his ACCA degree and ACCA qualification by 2013,  had  not
    simply invested financially but  had  made  a  personal  and  emotional
    investment into life in the United Kingdom. His life  is  described  as
    being 'deeply interwoven'  into  the  fabric  of  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge took into account the emotional impact on Mr  Patel
    of leaving the UK.

16. In summary, Mr Gajjar submitted that this was a properly  reasoned  and
    balanced decision. He also submitted that since the Secretary of  State
    did not certify the application as bound to fail, the findings  of  the
    judge were within a rational range of responses. The judge  has  regard
    to section 117B of the Immigration Rules at [22] and  correctly  states
    that the lack of a burden on the tax payer and  the  ability  to  speak
    English are positive but neutral factors.  The  judge  has  taken  into
    account the public interest at [27]  but  points  to  the  particularly
    strong  features  of  private  life  at  [30].   Mr  Gajjar's   primary
    submission was that the reasoning was not irrational nor perverse.  The
    mere fact that another judge might come to a different  view  does  not
    lead to a material error.  The Secretary  of  State's  application  for
    permission  to  appeal  is  a  mere  disagreement  with   the   judge's
    conclusions.

Decision on Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the judge correctly firstly considered Mr  and  Mrs
    Patel's Article 8 claim, under paragraph 276 (i) (a) of the Immigration
    Rules. At [13] the judge acknowledged that Mr Patel had not accrued ten
    year's lawful continuous residence stating "The evidence  showed  quite
    clearly that there were  significant  gaps  where  the  appellants  had
    exhausted appeal rights and could not benefit from 3C  leave",  and  at
    [16] "it is plain then that the appellants do not meet the criteria for
    ten years' continuous lawful residence under paragraph 276(i)(a) of the
    Rules and the Article 8 appeal therefore by reference to the Rules must
    fail."

18. The judge then at [17] says:

         "the failure to meet the requirement of the Rules as reflecting the
         respondent's expressed position on proportionality and  the  public
         interest, may well only be a starting point in a  broad  evaluative
         judgment of Article 8, but it nevertheless will  weigh  heavily  in
         the balancing exercise I must undertake.  I am bound  to  give  the
         public interest element significant weight and I do so."

19. The judge then turns to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules  having
    regard to those statutory factors set out at 117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration, Asylum and Act 2002.

20. The judge fails to have specific regard to 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and does not make specific findings on  whether  there  would  be
    would be 'very significant obstacles' to Mr and Mrs Patel's integration
    to India.  Although the judge does not explicitly give consideration to
    this issue, at [36] the judge states:

         "By the same token I found I was not in entire  agreement  with  Ms
         Gledhill who formulated the question for  me  thus:  'there  is  no
         reason why they cannot go back.  They  could  go  back  and  work.'
         Practically, logistically that statement may well be true.  I  have
         no doubt that if returned to India this family would cope.   It  is
         hard to see that they would  remain  unemployed  or  ultimately  be
         unable to support themselves thereafter all the appellant had shown
         sufficient ability and industry to come to the UK and carve a  life
         for himself quite successfully."

21. I am satisfied that the judge failed specifically to address the  issue
    of  whether  there  are  any  'very  significant  obstacles'   to   the
    respondents'  private  life  taking  place  in  India  and   that   the
    determination is flawed in this respect. This issue was dealt  with  by
    the Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal and it was  incumbent
    on the judge when  deciding  whether  the  appellant  met  any  of  the
    Immigration Rules in respect of private life to consider not  only  the
    ten year route  under  276(i)(a)  but  also  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  I am also satisfied that had the judge directed his
    mind to this issue, it is clear from [36] that  the  judge  would  have
    found that there were no very significant obstacles to the respondents'
    integration in circumstances where the  judge  found  that  the  family
    would be able to cope and would be able to support themselves in India.



22. The judge goes on to consider Article 8 outside of  the  ambit  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The judge states at [20]:

         "There is no threshold test for Article 8 to be engaged outside the
         Rules. In R (on the application of Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC  11,
         the Supreme Court explained that the ultimate question in Article 8
         cases is whether  a  fair  balance  has  been  struck  between  the
         competing public  and  individual  interests  involved  applying  a
         proportionality test."

23. The judge then goes on to say;

          "The Immigration Rules and IDIs do not depart from  that  position
         and are compatible with Article 8 ECHR.  Appendix  FM  is  said  to
         reflect how the balance will be struck under Article 8,  so  if  an
         applicant fails to meet the Rules, it should only be  in  genuinely
         exceptional circumstances that there would be a breach  of  Article
         8.  The Rules set out the Secretary of State's policy and as  such,
         must be given considerable weight."

24. The judge then goes on to  set  out  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Article 8  public  interest  considerations  at  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, applicable in  all  cases
    and considers those factors. Having accepted the appellant's  evidence,
    the judge found that  Mr  Patel  had  completed  and  passed  his  ACCA
    examinations and had last been able to study in the United  Kingdom  in
    2013 and since then had continued to study online. Mrs Patel had an  MA
    in economics in India and had previously worked in an accountancy  firm
    in the United Kingdom. The  judge  found  that  Mr  Patel  had  devoted
    himself, his personal life, his energy, ambition into  his  studies  in
    the United Kingdom. The Judge comments that it was;

         "essentially an investment choice [Mr  Patel]  made  regarding  the
         direction of his life when in India and coming here at the  age  of
         20 where he consecrated himself  to  his  studies.  His  hard  work
         proved  fruitful:  he  obtained   qualifications   culminating   in
         obtaining a degree and his  ACCA  examinations  by  2013-just  four
         years after his arrival here."

25. At [33] the judge said:

         "There can be no question that the appellant has  spent  very  many
         tens of thousands of pounds of his own money either  directly  from
         his own previous earnings and savings or by way of support from his
         maternal uncle to pay for his university courses and for the  ACCA.
         He has also needed to be  financially  independent  over  the  past
         decade which he has demonstrated. The cost financially to  him  and
         his family overall would have been very significant."

26. The judge accepted Mrs Patel's evidence about the impact  that  removal
    would have on her husband. She stated it would 'devastate' him and  the
    judge did not find this claim to be an exaggeration. The  judge  states
    at [35]:

         "In my view removal from the UK would have a significant impact  on
         the appellant.  His  hard  work  and  dedication  as  well  as  his
         financial investment, if brought to  an  end,  would  have  a  very
         personal and serious impact on him and, by virtue of that,  on  the
         second appellant and child."

21.   The judge then went onto consider whether these  factors  amounted  to
    compelling or exceptional circumstances.  At [37] he stated:

         "The evaluation of a specific set of circumstances relating  to  an
         individual's  private  life  will,  even  adopting  the  structured
         approach as far as possible, lead to results which may seem  appear
         generous on a narrower interpretation of the legal  framework.   In
         this case I  have  been  wholly  impressed  by  the  determination,
         ambition and historic success of this appellant and I have  equally
         been impressed with this family's committed integration to  British
         life and society which is  abundantly  clear  from  their  evidence
         including photographs of them as a family and in the diverse  range
         of letters of support".

27. And at [38]

         "The appellant has been in this country for a decade  and  that  is
         not an  insignificant  amount  of  time.   In  the  scheme  of  the
         appellant's life it is also significant, representing almost a half
         of his adult life.  While in no way do I  seek  to  adopt  a  'near
         miss' principle by reference to the ten year route to settlement, I
         do have regard to the length of time he  has  been  here  and  that
         included the past five years or so with the  second  appellant  who
         has also left her previous life to establish herself here with  her
         husband.  I find that the interference with the  appellant's  right
         to private life will be substantial and given what he  has  already
         invested of himself, his time and  resources,  the  impact  on  him
         personally (and ergo  his  family)  amounts  in  my  view  to  very
         compelling or exceptional circumstances."

28. In my view what the judge has failed to do is to consider  firstly  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules  which  require  that
    where an applicant has not resided in the United Kingdom unlawfully for
    twenty years he would need to demonstrate  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to his integration to the country of  return.   I
    am satisfied from this decision the judge's conclusion  on  this  issue
    was that there were no such obstacles given the level of Mr  Patel  and
    Mrs Patel's education, their ability and industry, the  way  they  have
    carved out a  life  for  themselves  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    conclusions at [36] that if returned to India this family would cope.

29. Having found that Mr and Mrs Patel did not reach this test,  he  should
    have gone on to consider the test of 'compelling circumstances' in line
    with Treebhawon and Others.  This notes the following at headnote  (I):
    " Where the case of a foreign national who is not an offender does  not
    satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Article  8  ECHR  regime  of   the
    immigration rules, the test  to  be  applied  is  that  of  'compelling
    circumstances".

30. I am satisfied that the judge has misdirected himself in respect of the
    'compelling circumstances test' given his findings of fact  in  respect
    of the appellants and that this  constitutes  an  error  of  law  which
    renders the decision of the First-tier Tribunal unsafe.  The  error  is
    material and I set aside the decision. The facts as found by First-tier
    Judge Stedman are preserved.

Remaking

31. Mr Gajjar submitted that were I to find that there was a material error
    of law the appeal should be remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Mr Tarlow submitted that since all of the evidence was  in  the  bundle
    and the facts were agreed that it  would  be  possible  to  remake  the
    decision in the Upper Tribunal.  I am satisfied that it is  appropriate
    to remake this decision in the Upper Tribunal because the facts are not
    in dispute and it is a matter of applying the correct legal tests.

Notice of Decision


32. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error of on a point of law.

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

34. The appeal is adjourned for re-making in front of the Upper Tribunal.

35. No anonymity direction is made in this appeal.


Signed      R J Owens                        Date        23 April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

