
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/03132/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 11 February 2019                           |On 13 February 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    V N W
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khubber, of Counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the  respondent  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
          Hutchinson on 24 October 2018. For convenience,  the  parties  are
          referred to as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


       2. The appellant is a Jamaican national born on  23  September  1978.
          She entered the UK as a visitor in 2001 and  overstayed.  She  was
          subsequently arrested for drug related offences in 2010, convicted
          on seven counts and sentenced to 42 months of imprisonment on each
          count, to be served concurrently. A deportation order  was  served
          upon her in 2011 but different dates for this  are  given  in  the
          evidence. She then claimed asylum and the matter was  reconsidered
          by the respondent. Her appeal against the respondent's refusal  to
          grant her protection or to grant leave on human rights grounds was
          dismissed by a panel of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  way  of  a
          determination promulgated by Judge Astle on  17  April  2012.  The
          appellant claimed to have responsibility for three  children  (one
          of whom is her niece). They are now in foster care  following  the
          appellant's further convictions in 2015 for common assault  (on  a
          female bus passenger for which she received a suspended  sentence)
          and for assaulting an eight year old child in her care.  According
          to Dr B's report, her own children also showed signs of  prolonged
          physical abuse.   The  appellant  is  permitted  to  have  monthly
          supervised  contact.  It  appears  from  the  evidence  that   the
          appellant has also  made  use  of  false  documents  and  National
          Insurance numbers in order to take employment and  has  shoplifted
          on many occasions.


       3. The appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Place  on  2
          October 2018 following a hearing at  Nottingham  on  17  September
          2018.  The judge found that the appellant was at risk  of  suicide
          and allowed the appeal on article 8. She also found that it  would
          be in the best interests of  the  children  to  continue  to  have
          monthly contact with the appellant and on that basis  allowed  the
          appeal under article 8 as well.


          The Hearing


       4. Mr Lindsay represented the respondent at the hearing before me  on
          11 February 2019.  He relied on his grounds which he  expanded  in
          his  submissions.  He  pointed  out  that  whilst  the  judge  had
          considered   the   appellant's   documentary   evidence   on   the
          availability of effective support mechanisms in Jamaica and  found
          that there was insufficient evidence on which to  make  a  finding
          that there was no support available, she did not then give reasons
          for why she found, nevertheless, that there would  be  a  risk  of
          suicide after removal. He submitted further that  there  had  also
          been no consideration of support mechanisms in the UK and that the
          judge's finding that the high threshold of suicide risk  had  been
          made out was unreasoned.

       5. Mr Lindsay also submitted that the judge had  misdirected  herself
          with respect to her assessment of the appellant's credibility.  He
          pointed out that she had been found to be lacking  in  credibility
          by the panel of the First-tier Tribunal in 2012 and  that  if  she
          had wanted  to  depart  from  that  conclusion,  she  should  have
          provided good reasons  for  doing  so.  It  had  always  been  the
          respondent's case that the appellant was not to  be  believed  and
          notwithstanding no direct challenge to the oral  evidence  by  the
          Presenting Officer at  her  recent  hearing,  there  had  been  no
          concession made. The 'findings' at paragraph 12 were  insufficient
          where there had been previous compelling adverse findings and more
          was required in order for those to be set aside.


       6. Mr Lindsay submitted that weight had been placed on  the  forensic
          reports but the judge's approach to the reports was  also  flawed.
          The  doctors  had  not  been  aware  of  the  adverse  credibility
          findings. Had they been so aware, they may  not  have  so  readily
          accepted the appellant's claim of more than one  suicide  attempt.
          Reliance was placed  on  JL  (medical  reports-credibility)  China
          [2013] UKUT 145.


       7. With respect to the judge's cursory consideration of article 8, Mr
          Lindsay submitted that there had been no engagement with 117C. the
          judge had failed to consider whether it would be unduly  harsh  to
          deport the appellant and it was unclear as to why she had  allowed
          the  appeal  on  article  8  grounds.  A  proper  assessment   was
          particularly  important  where  cases  of  foreign  criminals  and
          deportation were concerned.


       8. I then heard submissions from Mr Khubber  for  the  appellant.  He
          submitted that the judge had approached the case  with  care,  had
          understood and appreciated the evidence and had  made  appropriate
          findings. Even if she had been generous, that did not amount to an
          error of law. He submitted that the  judge  had  the  guidance  on
          suicide in mind. She also considered the Devaseelan principles but
          evaluated the case for herself. The  appellant's  credibility  was
          not challenged by the Presenting Officer.


       9. Mr Khubber  submitted  that  the  judge  had  taken  a  discerning
          approach to the evidence and had rejected the country  information
          as to the lack of support in Jamaica. He referred me to  Y  and  Z
          (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362 and submitted that there could  be
          cases where even the  existence  of  support  was  not  enough  to
          prevent suicide. Taking me through the six  guiding  points  of  J
          [2005] EWCA Civ 629, he submitted that the  judge  had  considered
          them all. He submitted that in principle, an article 3 claim could
          succeed in a suicide case and that was precisely  what  the  judge
          found  having  assessed  all  the  evidence.  He  submitted   that
          irrespective of the availability of support mechanisms, a  suicide
          risk may be so profound as to amount to an article 3 breach.


      10. With regard to the previous credibility findings,  the  judge  was
          well aware that Devaseelan was a starting point. There  were  five
          witness statements from the appellant all of which post-dated  the
          previous determination. There had been no medical evidence at  the
          time of the previous hearing. The judge heard  oral  evidence  and
          found the appellant to be an honest witness. There was no error in
          that. The nexus between the previous case and the present one  was
          very far apart. Six years had passed. There  had  been  no  direct
          attack on the  appellant's  credibility.  The  hospital  discharge
          letter referred to previous suicide attempts. The doctor's  report
          was detailed. It was difficult to  see  how  the  judge  could  be
          criticized.


      11. On article 8, it was accepted that s.117C had not been referred to
          and that there had been no assessment of the "unduly harsh"  test.
          That could be said to be immaterial, however,  if  the  article  3
          decision were to be upheld, or the matter could be remitted to the
          First-tier Tribunal for article 8 findings to be made.


      12.  Mr  Lindsay  responded.  He  submitted  it  was  enough  for  the
          respondent to show that  the  judge  had  erred  on  the  sixth  J
          principle for the decision to be set  aside.  There  had  been  no
          consideration at all of how the risk to suicide  could  have  been
          made out when there had been  no  analysis  of  effective  support
          mechanisms either in the receiving or  the  returning  state.  The
          respondent did not dispute that the doctor had found  there  would
          be a high risk of suicide in the UK if the appellant were notified
          of a negative decision, but the judge failed entirely to  consider
          whether the UK  had  effective  mechanisms  in  place  to  prevent
          suicide. This amounted to a clear error. On the credibility point,
          whilst there may have been further evidence, this did not  release
          the judge from the duty of having to give  reasons  for  departing
          from the previous determination.


      13. I then permitted Mr Khubber to make a brief reply and he  referred
          me to Y and Z and the judge's findings at paragraph 24. Mr Lindsay
          had the last word and emphasised that the presence or  absence  of
          effective support mechanisms remained an issue  for  consideration
          and the judge had failed in that respect.


      14. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      15. I have considered all the evidence before me and have  had  regard
          to the submissions made. I reach my decision having taken all that
          before me into account and having considered  the  evidence  as  a
          whole. I am mindful of the potentially serious consequences of  my
          decision and I have made it with care. I have also endeavoured  to
          make it promptly.


      16. There is no dispute over  the  legal  framework,  the  appellant's
          criminal and immigration background and the fact that her children
          (possibly including her niece)  are  in  the  care  of  the  local
          authorities. The issue is whether her assessment of the  claim  of
          suicide and subsequent findings are adequate and sustainable.


      17. As I see it, there are three main lines of argument put forward by
          the respondent. The first is whether the  judge  properly  applied
          the six J  principles,  particularly  the  sixth.  The  second  is
          whether her approach to the issue of  credibility  is  sustainable
          and thirdly whether the  article  8  assessment  and  analysis  is
          adequate.


      18. Taking the last point first, I am able to quickly  find  that  the
          judge erred. Indeed, Mr Khubber fairly conceded  that  there  were
          difficulties with the judge's approach. There was no assessment of
          s.117C, given that the judge was dealing with the deportation of a
          foreign criminal, and no analysis or consideration of  the  unduly
          harsh  test.  I  note  that  both  written  submissions  from  the
          appellant's representative and from the  Presenting  Officer  made
          specific arguments on s.117. In the circumstances, the  article  8
          findings cannot, therefore, stand. Of course, the judge's failings
          in this respect may not matter too much if the decision on article
          3 were to be upheld, so I now turn to that.


      19. I would state at the outset that given  the  mass  of  documentary
          evidence adduced, the complex background  of  the  case  including
          previous  litigation,  and  the  issues  involved,   the   judge's
          determination is surprisingly brief and her findings even more so.
          That in itself, however, is not necessarily a problem but, in this
          case, I fear it is.


      20. I accept Mr Khubber's helpful submission that the judge  did  have
          regard to the principles of J. I note that these are  assessed  at
          paragraphs 18-25. The judge considered whether the  treatment  the
          appellant would suffer on return  to  Jamaica  (i.e.  whether  she
          would commit suicide) would reach a minimum level of severity  (at
          18 and 20).  She considered the causal link between the threat and
          the expulsion (at 21).  She accepted that the risk did  not  arise
          from any potential act of the  receiving  state  (at  22)  and  Mr
          Khubber submitted that this  also  covered  the  fifth  principle,
          which is not mentioned by the judge, whether the appellant's  fear
          of ill treatment in  the  receiving  state  was  objectively  well
          founded. The judge does not refer to the fourth principle as  such
          but that can be inferred by her general findings. When considering
          the sixth and final principle, whether  the  removing  and/or  the
          receiving state had effective mechanisms to  reduce  the  risk  of
          suicide, the judge fell into error.


      21. The judge refers to one news article some three years out of  date
          about the availability of  mental  health  care  in  Jamaica.  Not
          surprisingly, given the size  of  the  bundles  before  her,  this
          single page of information did not impress her  and  she  did  not
          find  it  persuasive  (at  23).  She  then   stated:   "There   is
          insufficient evidence for me to make a finding that there are  not
          effective support mechanisms available in Jamaica". As Mr  Lindsay
          argued, that must mean  that  the  judge  found  that  there  were
          sufficient mechanisms in place but the judge does not dwell on the
          matter any more, proclaiming that she does not find the  point  of
          relevance because the appellant would be at a high risk of suicide
          even before she were  to  reach  Jamaica.  This  finding  is  made
          entirely upon Dr B's opinion as contained in part 7 of her report.
          That opinion is reached without any  consideration  whatsoever  of
          the mechanisms that may be available to  assist  in  reducing  the
          risk. No evidence of the systems in place in  the  UK  to  address
          suicidal individuals was referred to either in the  report  or  by
          Counsel at the hearing. In spite of  the  total  absence  of  such
          evidence, the judge made a finding that the appellant would be  at
          high risk of committing suicide in the UK. Such a finding, without
          any assessment other than the opinion of the forensic psychologist
          and  one  hospital  discharge  letter  from   October   2017,   is
          unsustainable. The discharge letter, whilst referring to  previous
          attempts  gives  no  information  on  how  that  information   was
          obtained. Moreover, Dr B reported that the appellant was  mentally
          stable and had not felt suicidal since  November  2017.  Whilst  I
          fully accept that in rare and extreme cases, the risk  can  be  so
          high and profound that mechanisms even if in place may not  reduce
          the risk but the judge has not given any sustainable  reasons  for
          why that might be so in this case. In any event, she  would  still
          be required to consider what is available and then to give reasons
          why she finds the available support would not help someone such as
          the appellant. That has not been done.


      22. A further problem which links in with the second ground argued, is
          that Dr B accepted the appellant's evidence of  gang  warfare  and
          violence in Jamaica when these were matters found by the  previous
          First-tier Tribunal to have been fabricated.  It  is  unclear  how
          much of her conclusion was based on that acceptance. Of course, as
          Mr Lindsay argues, this also impacts upon the  judge's  assessment
          as if the doctor might have taken a different view had  she  known
          all the relevant facts, then it is also possible  that  the  judge
          would have made a different decision.


      23. I have considered Dr B's report carefully to see whether  she  was
          aware of the previous adverse credibility findings that were  made
          in respect of the appellant's evidence. Dr B purports to list  all
          the evidence she was given at Appendix  II  but  unhelpfully  that
          consists of just the number of pages read and  no  details  as  to
          what the documents were.


      24. Coming on to the Devaseelan issue,  I  accept  that  the  previous
          determination was some  years  ago  and  that  the  appellant  had
          prepared several witness statements since then but, as Mr  Lindsay
          submitted, the judge is still required to give reasons for why she
          departed from the adverse findings made. She is entitled to do so,
          of course, but more is needed than what is contained in  paragraph
          12. No reference is made to what  persuaded  her  to  believe  the
          appellant. there is no mention of any  of  the  evidence  and  the
          absence of any direct  challenge  to  the  oral  evidence  by  the
          Presenting Officer does not relieve the judge of a duty to explain
          why she made positive findings of credibility.


      25. It is not the case, as Mr Khubber argued,  that  the  issues  were
          completely different from those previously considered because  the
          judge referred to the appellant's consistent  reference  to  gangs
          and violence putting her at risk in Jamaica (at 15) without giving
          any reasons why this was accepted  as  credible  in  circumstances
          where the previous fact finding Tribunal found the claim had  been
          fabricated.


      26. Having,  therefore,  carefully  considered  the  determination,  I
          conclude that the judge erred  in  law  to  the  extent  that  her
          conclusions cannot stand.


      27. I have considered very carefully whether there are  findings  that
          can be preserved, knowing that my decision will not be welcomed by
          the appellant, but no submissions were made to me on this  and  as
          the findings are largely interlinked and largely unreasoned and/or
          dependent on Dr B's opinion which raises separate difficulties (as
          set out above), I conclude that it would be unsafe to preserve any
          findings. I, therefore, set aside the  decision  in  its  entirety
          other than as a record of proceedings.


      28. As the appeal shall have to be re-heard and findings of fact  will
          need to be made on all issues, the matter is remitted back to  the
          First-tier Tribunal.


          Decision


      29. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  the
          appeal is remitted to another  judge  of  that  Tribunal  for  the
          decision to be re-made.


          Anonymity


      30. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 12 February 2019




