
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03724/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2018                         |On 15th March 2018            |
|Typed, corrected, signed and sent to          |                              |
|Promulgation on 13th February 2018.           |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR PUKAR SAHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwalla, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balrood, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  to
    avoid  confusion  I  am  going  to  refer  to   her   throughout   this
    determination as being, "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of and resident in  Nepal,  whose  date  of
    birth is 10th December 1987.  He made application to the  Secretary  of
    State for entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as  an  adult
    dependant of his father,  Mr  Kessar  Bahdur  Sahi,  a  former  British
    soldier in the Gurkha regiment.  That application was refused.

3.   The respondent appealed that decision and his appeal  was  heard  by  a
    panel of the First-tier Tribunal,  comprising  Judges  Scott-Baker  and
    Algazy, sitting at Taylor House on 27th March 2017.  They  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8.  The claimant, dissatisfied  with  the  appeal,
    asserted that the judges had erred in law by finding that Article 8 was
    engaged,  because  the  respondent  was  financially  and   emotionally
    dependent upon the sponsor.  The grounds then suggest  that  Article  8
    was not engaged and that the evidence  did  not  demonstrate  emotional
    dependency to the Kugathas standard. It was suggested that in assessing
    the respondent's emotional and  financial  dependency,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred.

4.   Mr Balrood made reference to paragraph 37 of the  determination,  where
    Counsel appearing on behalf of the  respondent  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, relied on an acknowledgement by the Entry  Clearance  Manager
    in his review that he was satisfied that Article 8(1) was engaged.

5.   Mr Balrood drew my attention to the fact that there was  no  Presenting
    Officer before the panel of the First-tier Tribunal and that they were,
    therefore, in a position where the question of whether or not Article 8
    was engaged was not a matter for them to decide, since it  had  already
    been accepted on behalf of the claimant that it was.  The panel of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  deal  with  the  question  of  proportionality  at
    paragraphs 50, 51 and 52 of their determination  and,  given  that  the
    sponsor had explained in his witness statement to the Tribunal that  he
    would have settled in the United Kingdom on his discharge if he had the
    opportunity to do so, the Tribunal had not erred, Mr Balrod  submitted.
    He invited me to uphold the decision of the Tribunal.

6.   Ms Fijiwalla, who appeared on behalf of  the  claimant,  accepted  that
    she was  in  some  difficulties  given  the  concession  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager in his review at page 2.

7.    Neither  representative  having  further  comments  to  make,  I  have
    concluded that I must uphold this determination.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's review quite clearly indicates that  he  was  satisfied  that
    Article 8 was engaged.  There was  no  Presenting  Officer  before  the
    Tribunal and so the question of whether or not Article  8  was  engaged
    was not something that need trouble them, since  it  had  already  been
    accepted that it was.

8.   In the circumstances I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  have  not
    materially erred in law and her determination is upheld.  The appeal is
    allowed.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal was allowed, the First-tier  Tribunal  made  a  fee  award  in
favour of the appellant of the full amount of any fee paid.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

