

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/03222/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 February 2019                      |On 19 March 2019                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                Monirul Islam
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Shah, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a decision promulgated on 18 January 2019 I set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal came before me to be
    remade.  It proceeded on the basis of submissions only.


 2. I have taken into account the documents in the Respondent's bundle, the
    Appellant's witness statement dated 17 April 2018, the Respondent's
    guidance on examining identity documents, and four pages containing
    copies of Right of Abode vignettes provided by Mr. Shah.

 3. At the outset of the hearing, I acknowledged that at [9] of my error of
    law decision I had confused the issue of whether the vignette was
    issued in Nigeria or to a Nigerian.  It was a mistake to state that the
    vignette was issued in Nigeria, but rather I should have stated that it
    had been issued to a Nigerian.  However, as accepted by both
    representatives, this was not material and did not affect my decision.



Burden of proof

 4. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant and the standard of proof is
    the balance of probabilities.  However, where the Respondent alleges
    fraud, the burden of proof lies on the Respondent to show that the
    Appellant has practised deception or fraud.


 5. It was accepted that the Appellant had applied under section 10 of the
    2002 Act for a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode in the
    United Kingdom.  In order to prove that he had the Right of Abode right
    of abode under section 2, it was agreed by both representatives that he
    needed to show that he was related as claimed to his father, and that
    he was born after his father had registered as a Citizen of the United
    Kingdom and Colonies ("CUKC").

The Respondent's Decision

 6. The Respondent listed the documents which had been submitted by the
    Appellant.  These consisted of his current Bangladesh passport, a copy
    of his lost Bangladesh passport endorsed with a Certificate of
    Entitlement to the Right of Abode, his birth certificate, a school
    letter, a letter from the Mayor's Office in Nairal, Bangladesh, his
    father's certificate of registration as a CUKC, and a police crime
    reference number.


 7. The birth certificate, school letter and letter from the Mayor's Office
    were issued in October 2011.  The birth certificate showed that the
    Appellant's birth was not registered until 12 December 2011, 41 years
    after his claimed date of birth.  No documentary evidence issued at or
    around the time of birth had been provided, nor had any other evidence
    of the relationship between the Appellant and Golam Rabbany Miah been
    provided.  As such, these documents could not be relied on as an
    accurate record of the Appellant's date of birth, or to establish his
    relationship to Golam Rabbany Miah, registered as a CUKC on 22 October
    1969.

 8. Judge Adio found that, as the Appellant had provided a copy of a
    Certificate of Entitlement purportedly issued in Dhaka in 2005, and
    this certificate had not been revoked, that the Appellant was entitled
    to a Certificate of Entitlement.  He made his finding on the grounds
    that there was no clear evidence presented to establish that the
    Certificate of Entitlement was a forgery.  The reasons for refusal
    letter stated that regrettably, the Home Office file which contained
    the relevant evidence was lost and so the forgery report was
    unavailable at the time of the hearing before Judge Adio.

 9. The Respondent conducted further enquiries and established that the
    copy passport provided bore the serial number B1121745, and contained a
    purported UK Right of Abode vignette number 7X317945, and purported
    Immigration Officer's landing stamp number 3185.  The copy was examined
    by a specialist document examiner, who noted various irregularities and
    who came to the conclusion that the Right of Abode vignette was a
    counterfeit, and the landing stamp was a counterfeit.  A copy of the
    report was enclosed.

10. A search of the visa application system, which records details of all
    applications for UK entry from overseas since 1998, had no results when
    interrogated to provide details of all visas issued at Dhaka where the
    applicant's family name was Islam, the forename started with "Mon" and
    the date of birth was 1 January 1970.  If the Certificate of
    Entitlement presented was validly issued, the Respondent would expect a
    record to exist on this system.

11. "Examination of locally held records confirms that Right of Abode
    vignette number 7X317945 was not issued by Dhaka to your client in
    2005, but was issued from this office on 21st October 2004 to a
    Nigerian national born 1969.  These vignettes are secure documents,
    sequentially numbered in booklets, and the counterpart is updated with
    the recipient's details and retained by the issuing office when the
    vignette is affixed in the holder's passport.  The counterpart of this
    vignette is held at this office and can be presented as evidence if
    necessary - a redacted copy of the counterpart is enclosed for your
    reference."

12. The Respondent was satisfied that sufficient evidence existed to
    conclude that the copy of the Certificate of Entitlement submitted in
    support of the application was counterfeit, and could not be relied
    upon to establish a Right of Abode in the UK or verify entitlement to
    be issued of such a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode.
    The application was refused as the evidence presented was insufficient
    to establish that the Appellant was related as claimed to Golam Rabbany
    Miah, or that he was born after Golam Rabbany Miah registered as a
    CUKC.

The Appellant's case

13. The Appellant's case is set out in the documents referred to above.  I
    do not intend to set out the Appellant's case here but will refer to it
    as and when necessary in giving the reasons for my decision.


Decision


14. I have carefully considered the Document Verification Report ("DVR")
    provided by the Respondent (Annex D of the Respondent's bundle).  The
    date at the top is 24 January 2015 but the date at the end is 24 August
    2015.  The substance of the report is contained at [8] to [12].  At [8]
    the writer of the report states that on 12 April 2012 he received a
    photocopied Bangladeshi passport.  Upon examination of the photocopied
    documents he concluded that the purported Right of Abode vignette and
    Immigration Officer's landing stamp were counterfeit and a tick box
    forgery report was produced.  That tick box report is provided at Annex
    E1 of the Respondent's bundle (the "2012 Report").  At [3], under the
    heading "Reasons for above conclusion", it states:


    "Page 12 of the above photocopied passport contains what purports to be
    an Immigration Officer's landing stamp from Heathrow Terminal 3 dated
    14 December 2005 and numbered 3185.  This stamp is counterfeit as there
    are errors within the font and registration of the text and it does not
    conform to the expected layout and design."


15. No details are given of the errors, or how it does not conform to the
    expected layout and design.  Further, no copy of what a genuine stamp
    from Heathrow Terminal 3 in 2005 would have looked like is attached to
    the 2012 Report.


16. At [9] of the DVR the writer of the report states that he was able to
    compare the photocopied items with a specimen example but again, no
    specimen example has been provided with the DVR of what a genuine stamp
    from Heathrow Terminal 3 in 2005 would have looked like.  At paragraph
    10E there is reference to the Immigration Officer's stamp but this just
    repeats what is said at [3] of the 2012 Report.  Therefore, although
    the writer of these reports, the same individual, states that he
    compared the photocopied items with a specimen example, the Respondent
    has not provided that specimen example to show how there are errors
    within the font and registration of the text, and how it does not
    conform to the expected layout and design.  I therefore attach no
    weight to the DVR and the 2012 Report insofar as they refer to the
    Immigration Officer's landing stamp.

17. Turning to the Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode
    vignette, the 2012 report states as follows:

    "Page 13 of the same photocopied passport contains what purports to be
    a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode vignette bearing the
    serial number 7X317945.  This vignette is counterfeit as there are
    errors within the font used and Home Office records confirm that this
    vignette was not issued in Dhaka."

18. The 2012 Report does not attach any vignette to show what it should
    look like, nor does it include any Home Office records showing where
    this vignette was issued.

19. In the DVR at [10A] to [10D] it states that "the spacing of the serial
    number is inconsistent" and the font used is not as expected.
    Secondly, "the alignment of the pre-printed text and title headings are
    misaligned".  Thirdly, "the design of the document does not appear as
    expected".  The writer acknowledges that it is a photocopy.  Finally,
    it states at [10D]:

    "Checks against Home Office records confirm that Right of Abode
    vignette numbered 7X317945 is a genuine serial number from a genuine
    vignette, however, the genuine vignette was not issued in Dhaka,
    Bangladesh as this copied item purports."

20. I note that there is far more detail in the DVR than the 2012 report,
    despite it being written three years later.  There is no explanation
    for this.


21. In the Respondent's bundle is a copy of a document which bears the
    number 7X317945. This appears to be the redacted copy of the
    counterpart of the vignette as referred to in the reasons for refusal
    letter, although it is not clear how it has been redacted.   I set out
    at [9] of the error of law decision that this was the only evidence
    provided to corroborate the Respondent's claim that the Appellant's
    Right of Abode vignette was not issued in Dhaka.  At the hearing before
    me Mr. Avery said that the vignette was issued in Leeds.  He submitted
    that there was a secure process for the issuing of vignettes, and that
    they came in a book, like a cheque book.  One part was detached and put
    into the passport, and the counterpart would be left in the book.
    However neither the 2012 Report nor the DVR refer to Leeds.  Had the
    writer of the report known where the vignette was issued, I would have
    expected him to have stated this in the report.


22. The Respondent's claim is that this photocopied document is the
    counterpart of the genuine vignette which bears the number 7X317945.
    First, it is a very poor copy, and it is not at all clear that it is a
    book which has been copied.  Secondly, and more importantly, it does
    not indicate where it was issued.  If this is the counterpart, it is
    not clear from where it has come, and neither is it at all clear to
    whom it was issued.   From what I can make out, it states "MONSURU" on
    one line and ABAYO" on the next, but there are some more letters at the
    end of this word which I cannot accurately make out.  Beneath this it
    states "NGA", and then "7-11-1969".  It then states "2(1)(A)", "A02",
    "21/10".  There is no explanation of what this means.

23. No attempt has been made to provide the original counterpart, despite
    the Respondent stating in the reasons for refusal letter that this
    could be done.


24. The DVR states at [11] that the writer of the report is of the opinion
    that the purported Right of Abode vignette is a counterfeit.   An
    example Certificate of Entitlement to a Right of Abode vignette has
    been provided in the Respondent's bundle.  However, it is not clear
    whether this has been provided by the Appellant or the Respondent, as
    the handwriting is very similar to that used in the grounds of appeal.
    A handwritten note states that it was issued by the British High
    Commission in Dhaka.  The stamp on it which states "B. H. C. Dhaka"
    appears to be the same as the stamp on the Appellant's.  The date has
    been redacted.  It is clear from the Respondent's own guidance that the
    format of these vignettes has changed, so the date of any genuine
    example vignette is of paramount importance.  I find that I can attach
    little weight to this vignette to show that the one provided by the
    Appellant was counterfeit given that I do not know when it was issued.

25. A second example has been provided, again a poor copy, and again, it
    appears that this has been provided by the Appellant, given that the
    handwriting is very similar to that used in the grounds of appeal.  A
    handwritten note along the side states "Example of Right of Abode".
    This does not indicate where it was issued.  Again, the date has been
    redacted.  "Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode" is not in
    the same font as that on the other example.  If the Respondent is going
    to allege that one reason that the Appellant's Certificate of
    Entitlement is a forgery is because of the font, these two examples do
    not strengthen his case, given that the font used is different.

26. Taking all of the above into account, I find that the Respondent has
    not satisfied the burden of proof to show that the Certificate of
    Entitlement to the Right of Abode, or the Immigration Officer's stamp,
    were counterfeit.  The DVR is not thorough which, given that the
    examiner examined a photocopy in 2012, and three years later, in 2015,
    was asked to remember what he had done in 2012, is arguably
    unsurprising.  No evidence of the processes undertaken has been
    provided.  In submissions, Mr. Avery described the process, and stated
    that it was secure, but I have no evidence to corroborate this.
    Further, as I pointed out in the error of law decision, given that I
    have no proper evidence as to where the copy of the counterpart
    allegedly issued to a Nigerian has come from, I have no proper evidence
    to show that the one issued to a Nigerian is not counterfeit.  It
    states that it has come from the Respondent's records but I do not know
    where those records are or why they would be any more secure than the
    ones in Dhaka.

27. I find that the Respondent did not dispute that the Appellant lost his
    original passport.  It was when the Appellant applied for a new
    Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode for his new passport
    that the evidence was looked at again.  Given that this is a serious
    allegation of forgery, the evidence before me is woefully inadequate to
    show that the vignette and the stamp in the lost passport were forged.
    I find that the DVR does not show that the vignette or the stamp are
    false, given the lack of detail, and the lack of comparable examples.
    I therefore attach no weight to the DVR.

28. The Respondent stated in the reasons for refusal letter that little
    weight could be attached to the documentary evidence provided.  The
    same was submitted by Mr. Avery, on the grounds that the stamp and
    vignette were forged.  However, I have found that the Respondent has
    not shown that they were forged.  No proper consideration was given in
    the reasons for refusal letter to the Appellant's father's Certificate
    of Registration as a CUKC.  As I stated in my error of law decision,
    the Confirmation of Registration as a Citizen of the United Kingdom and
    Colonies which was provided by the Appellant was obtained from the
    National Archives.  It is certified as a true and authentic copy of the
    Appellant's father's Confirmation of Registration as a Citizen of the
    United Kingdom and Colonies (C2 of the Respondent's bundle).

29. As I set out in the error of law decision, the information about the
    Appellant's parents which is found in this certificate, his father's
    name and his father's wife's name, Shafikun Nessa, is the same as that
    contained in the Appellant's passport (B1 of the Respondent's bundle).
    It is not the Respondent's case that the passport itself was not
    genuine - the Respondent's case was that the vignette and stamp were
    counterfeit, not the passport.  On the copy of the passport (B1) it can
    clearly be seen that the Appellant's father and mother are the same as
    set out in the Certificate of Registration (C2).  There is no
    acknowledgement of this in the reasons for refusal letter.  Neither is
    there any acknowledgement that one of the documents provided by the
    Appellant had been obtained from the National Archives, and certified
    as a true and authentic copy by the National Archives (C1).

30. I find that it is significant that the same names of the Appellant's
    parents are listed on the document certified as true by the National
    Archives and also in the Appellant's passport, which it has not been
    alleged is false.  Therefore, there are two documents in the
    Respondent's possession, provided to the Respondent when the
    application was made, which show that the Appellant's father was Golam
    Rabbany Miah and that Golam Rabbany Miah registered as a Citizen of the
    United Kingdom Colonies on 22 October 1969.

31. Further, the copy of the passport states that the Appellant's date of
    birth is 1 January 1970 (B2).  The passport was issued in January 2005,
    prior to the birth certificate.  I find that the Appellant was born
    after his father registered as a CUKC.

32. I have found that no weight can be attached to the DVR, and that the
    evidence provided by the Respondent does not go anywhere near to
    establishing that the landing stamp and vignette were forged.  I find
    that I can rely on the evidence provided by the Appellant which shows
    that that he is related as claimed to his father, and that he was born
    after his father registered as a Citizen of the United Kingdom and
    Colonies.  I find that he has shown that he is entitled to the Right of
    Abode under section 2(1) of the 2002 Act.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 13 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  The Respondent did  not  satisfy  the
burden of proof to show that the Appellant provided  forged  documents.   He
had evidence before him in the form of the copy of the  passport,  which  he
did not  allege  to  be  forged,  and  the  certificate  from  the  National
Archives, that the Appellant was related as claimed to his father, and  that
he was born after his father registered as a CUKC.  In the circumstances,  I
make a fee award for the entire fee paid.


Signed                                  Date 13 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
