
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/03718/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 January 2018                     |        On 16 February 2018          |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                 asia begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Brewer who, in a determination  promulgated  on
    19 September 2017, dismissed the appellant's appeal against a  decision
    of the Secretary of State  to  refuse  her  leave  to  remain  both  on
    immigration grounds and under the provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 21 January  1950.   She
    entered Britain as a visitor in 2005 and  I  understand  then  made  an
    application for leave to remain which was refused.  That  decision  was
    not appealed and therefore the appellant overstayed after the beginning
    of 2006.

3.   In 2013 she made an application for leave to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds.  That was refused and the appeal  against  that  decision  was
    allowed.  The Secretary of State then appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and in February 2017 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Shaerf set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier judge and remitted the appeal for a  hearing
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.  In these circumstances  the  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Brewer  on  15  September
    2017.

  4.  Judge Brewer set out the decision of the respondent  in  paragraphs  3
    through to 9 of  his  determination.   It  was  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of Section R-LTRP.1.1(a) or (d)
    of Appendix FM as she had no partner or dependent children  in  Britain
    and moreover she did not qualify under paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules
    in that she had not lived in Britain continuously for twenty years, was
    over the age of 25 and there were no very significant obstacles to  her
    returning to Pakistan.  With regard to  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR it was noted that she claimed that she had family
    life with her children and grandchildren, her medical  conditions  were
    noted and it was noted that she received  care  and  support  from  her
    family in Britain.  The respondent,  however,  did  not  consider  that
    there  were  any  exceptional  circumstances  in  her  case   and   the
    relationship between the appellant and her grandchildren was not strong
    enough to amount to such exceptional circumstances.  It was pointed out
    that medical treatment would be available in Pakistan  and  whilst  not
    equivalent to that  available  in  Britain  there  was  not  sufficient
    difference to engage Article 3  of  the  ECHR.   Moreover,  the  family
    support she received was not sufficient to warrant  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Rules.  The judge considered the terms of the Rule relating
    to entry clearance as an adult or dependent relative but found that the
    appellant could not comply with those requirements.  He then went on to
    set out Sections 117A, 117B and 117D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.

5.   He referred to the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Agyarko  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11 which indicted that the term "exceptional circumstances"
    would mean circumstances in which the Secretary of State's decision  to
    refuse leave to remain would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences
    for the appellant and that that  would lead to  a  decision  not  being
    proportionate. He then went on to refer to the judgments in Beoku-Betts
    [2008] UKHL 39, Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC  11
    and Razgar.  He also referred to the judgment of the European Court  of
    Human Rights in Jeunesse (application no. 12738/10).      He noted  the
    basis of the appeal was that the appellant would be unable  to  live  a
    normal life in Pakistan because of her care needs and that family  life
    existed and it was not proportionate for that to be interfered with.

6.   He set out the evidence, accepting  that the  appellant  suffered  from
    Type 2 Diabetes, Parkinsons disease, generalised osteoarthritis, lumbar
    spondylosis with joint pain and vitamin D deficiency and that  she  had
    restricted mobility and required "close personal  support".   She  had,
    before coming to Britain lived in her parents' house which had now been
    inherited by her two brothers both of whom were in  Britain.   She  did
    not know if the house remained in the family.  She has  seven  children
    (four sons and three daughters) in Britain all of whom, apart from  her
    younger son, were in Britain prior to her arrival  in  2005.   She  has
    lived with one or other of her sons, receiving personalised  care  from
    the family, although he said there is precious  little  evidence  given
    about that.  He found that the support  given  was  with  standing  and
    movement and said that, although there was a reference to her inability
    to manage her "daily life",  it was unclear what that meant  and  there
    was no medical evidence to support that broad assertion,  although  her
    GP had referred to her needing assistance to get to the bathroom.

7.   In paragraphs 29 onwards the judge  first  considered  the  appellant's
    claim under the Immigration Rules pointing out that she  did  not  meet
    the requirements of either R-LTRP1.1(a) or (d) and that the application
    was, he considered properly refused under the rules.   Turning  to  the
    issue of private life he stated that it was not contended that any part
    of the Rules other than 276ADE(1)(vi) was applicable and he  said  that
    the key was that it had been argued before  him  that  there  would  be
    significant obstacles to the appellant returning  to  Pakistan  whereas
    the respondent took the opposite view.  He stated  that  the  appellant
    said that if she returned to Pakistan she could not live a normal  life
    although it was accepted that the threshold was a high one.

8.   The judge first dealt  with  the  issue  of  the  medical  support  the
    appellant had been receiving in Britain,  citing a number  of  relevant
    cases.  He found that the appellant's illness did not fall "within  the
    paradigm of Article 3".  He stated that in GS (India) it was made clear
    that if an Article 3 claim failed Article 8 could not succeed without a
    separate or additional factual element which brought  the  case  within
    the Article 8 paradigm.  He noted that it was not suggested that no, or
    no adequate, medical care  would  be  available  in  Pakistan  for  the
    appellant and that she was relying on the personal care provided by the
    family.  Having referred again to relevant case law he then went on  to
    say there was no  obligation  on  the  UK  to  provide  care  in  these
    circumstances.  He referred to the cost of medical care and  said  that
    it was clear that Article 3 did not impose a medical care obligation on
    the contracting state with the clear result of allowing the claimant to
    remain in Britain would be to impose such an obligation on  the  United
    Kingdom.  He said that he could not conclude that  no  or  no  adequate
    medical care was available to the appellant in Pakistan nor that  there
    was not a place there in the system for  caring  for  the  elderly  and
    infirm patient and therefore he found that the appellant did  not  meet
    the standard of exceptionality required by 276ADE(1)(vi).

9.   He went on to consider the appellant's claim  outside  the  Rules.   He
    accepted that the appellant was exercising family life with her  family
    in Britain and that therefore the first question in Razgar was answered
    in the affirmative.  In paragraphs 46 he  considered whether or not any
    interference was in accordance with the law - he  found  that  it  was.
    When he then considered proportionality he took into account  the  need
    to maintain effective immigration control.   In paragraph 50 he wrote:-

         "I have on the one hand considered the Appellant's support from her
         family and the way she is, as it was put to me, part and parcel, of
         her grandchildren's lives.  My view on the evidence was  that  this
         must be somewhat overstated given her lack of mobility and apparent
         communication  difficulties,  for  example  she  spoke  no  English
         whereas all her grandchildren were born and brought up in  the  UK.
         I also note again that all her family, save for her  youngest  son,
         left her in Pakistan when they came to the UK.  I note the need  to
         maintain immigration control and that  the  Appellant  deliberately
         overstayed, in my judgment, to gain access to care under the NHS."

     Clearly, having weighed up all factors, he found that the decision  was
    proportionate  and therefore he went on to dismiss the appeal.

11.  The grounds of appeal argue that the judge had failed to  consider  and
    deal with significant obstacles for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules and that he had given inadequate consideration of
    the Article 8 proportionality issue and finally that inadequate reasons
    were given for the conclusion and the decisions reached.

12.  Mr Sharma relied on those grounds.  He argued  that,  when  considering
    the provisions of Rule 276ADE,  the judge had  erred  when  considering
    the ability of the appellant to integrate on return  to  Pakistan.   He
    emphasised that this case was not founded on  a  claim  for  protection
    under Article 3 of the ECHR.  What was being said was that  she  needed
    help with her daily life and that there were very significant obstacles
    for her to overcome should she attempt  to  reintegrate  into  life  in
    Pakistan.  Mr Sharma stated that it was not the issue of money  or  the
    availability of medicines or medical care which was in  issue,  it  was
    the fact that her disability made it difficult for her  to  get  around
    and that she  had  no  family  to  look  after  her  in  Pakistan.   He
    emphasised all her children had settled status in Britain and that  her
    ancestral home was no longer available for her.   He  argued  that  the
    decision given for  refusing  the  claim  under  Rule  276ADE  was  not
    adequate.

13.  He argued that the judge had erred  by  not  taking  into  account  the
    unavailability of personal care.  The appellant had always  lived  with
    children who looked after her daily  needs.   I  was  referred  to  the
    emotional ties between the appellant and her  children  and  Mr  Sharma
    asserted that the judge  had  erred  in  the  balancing  exercise  when
    considering the proportionality of removal, given the  life  which  the
    appellant was living here.

14.  In reply  Mr  Tufan  noted  that  the  grant  of  permission,  although
    lengthy, did not appear to point out an arguable error  of  law  -  the
    judge granting permission had stated merely that:-

         "It is arguable that the judge's findings at paragraph  50  of  the
         decision  as  to  lack  of  mobility  and  apparent   communication
         difficulties does not lead to a conclusion that the  evidence  must
         be somewhat overstated."


15.  In any event he argued that the findings of the judge  were  reasonable
    and were not irrational in any way, although he accepted that the judge
    had been wrong in his reference to the issue  of  exceptionality.   The
    relevant issue was that the judge had not  found that  there  were  any
    significant obstacles to the appellant  returning.   The  reference  in
    paragraph 12 of the determination to Section EC-DR  of  the  Rules  was
    relevant insofar as it must be taken in conjunction with the  terms  of
    paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 which made it clear that:-

         "The applicant or, if the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents... must be unable, even with  the
         practical and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required
         level of care in the country where they are living, because -


         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonable provide it; or


         (b)  it is not affordable."

     Clearly, those requirements were not met.

16.  He also referred to the fact that the appellant was resorting  to  care
    from the NHS to which she was not entitled - there  was  no  indication
    that any payment had been made for payment for the treatment which  she
    had received.  He stated that the judge had fully settled out  all  his
    reasons for his decision and reached a conclusion which was fully  open
    to him and in no way perverse.

17.  In reply  Mr  Sharma  emphasised  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  the
    reference to exceptionality and said that was a material error and  the
    relevance was significant obstacles - there was no one to provide long-
    term personal care for the appellant  in  Pakistan  and  there  was  no
    finding why the judge had come to the  conclusion  that  the  appellant
    could not succeed in that regard.  The  only  such  long-term  personal
    care that was available in  Britain.   He  argued  that  the  issue  of
    overstaying should not be weighed in the balance of the proportionality
    in the decision.

18.   I  consider  that  there  was  no  material  error  of  law   in   the
    determination of the Immigration Judge.  Not only did the judge set out
    in full the relevant statute law and the relevant Rules but he also set
    out in some detail the relevant case law.  It was not argued  that  the
    appellant would not be able to afford the medical treatment which would
    be  required,  in  Pakistan,   nor  indeed  that  it  would  have  been
    impossible to find anyone who could care for her.  What was argued  was
    that she had lived for many years with a family here  who  were  caring
    for her and that that is what the situation that  she  and  the  family
    wished to continue.

19.  The judge did properly consider the terms  of  the  Rules  and  he  was
    entitled to point out  that  the  appellant  could  not  succeed  under
    paragraph 276 of the Rules because the appellant could  not  show  that
    she could meet the requirements of E-ECDR.2.5 at (b).  Although  it  is
    the case that the judge  preferred  the  issue  of  exceptionality,  he
    clearly bore in mind the terms of the judgment  in  Agyarko  where  the
    term 'exceptionality' and 'very significant obstacles'  are  elided  in
    paragraph 45 where it was stated that:-

         "45. By virtue of paragraph EX.1(b), 'insurmountable obstacles' are
             treated as a requirement for the  grant  of  leave  under  the
             Rules in cases to which that paragraph  applies.  Accordingly,
             interpreting the expression  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the
             Strasbourg case law, leave to remain  would  not  normally  be
             granted in cases where an applicant for leave to remain  under
             the partner route was in the UK in breach of immigration laws,
             unless the applicant or their partner would face very  serious
             difficulties in continuing their family life together  outside
             the UK, which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
             serious hardship. Even in a case where  such  difficulties  do
             not exist,  however,  leave  to  remain  can  nevertheless  be
             granted outside the Rules in 'exceptional  circumstances',  in
             accordance  with  the  instructions:  that  is  to   say,   in
             'circumstances in which refusal would result in  unjustifiably
             harsh consequences for the individual such that refusal of the
             application would not be  proportionate'.  Is  that  situation
             compatible with article 8?"

20.  The reality is here that the judge did weigh up all  relevant  factors.
    He found that the appellant could not succeed under  the  Rules.   When
    considering  the  additional  factors  he  was  fully  aware   of   the
    appellant's needs and her attachment to her family here and  conversely
    her lack of relatives in Pakistan but he was  fully  entitled  to  take
    into account the fact  that  this  appellant  was  an  overstayer  and,
    without authority had accessed the national health service here  -  she
    had used the resources in this country to which she was  not  entitled.
    I consider that the judge did properly take into account  all  relevant
    factors and therefore reached a conclusion which was fully open to  him
    thereon.  It cannot be said that his decision was perverse let alone in
    any way unreasoned.



Notice of Decision

21.  For these reasons I find that there is no material error of law in  the
    determination of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  dismiss
    this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   [pic]                      Date:  12 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
