
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03759/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th February 2020                |On 14th April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             TAPIWANASHE KADANGO
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety; Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Barnfield, Counsel instructed by Genesis Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mr
    Kadango.  However, for ease of reference, in the course of this
    decision I adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer
    to Mr Kadango as the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the
    respondent.


 2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  He arrived in the UK in
    December 2001 when he was 11 months old, with his mother.  Following an
    unsuccessful claim for asylum that was made in December 2001, on 8th
    October 2007, the appellant, his mother and his sister were granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK under the legacy programme.  On
    5th December 2017, the appellant was convicted at Wolverhampton Crown
    Court of Robbery and possessing an offensive weapon in a public place.
    He was sentenced to a 41-month term of imprisonment.


 3. Between 26th April 2017 and 21st November 2018, the appellant has
    received five criminal convictions for eight offences.  On 16th October
    2018, the appellant was served with a 'Decision to Deport' pursuant to
    the Immigration Act 1971, and informed that the respondent deems his
    deportation to be conducive to the public good under s3(5) of the
    Immigration Act 1971.  The appellant was invited to set out any reasons
    why he should not be deported to Zimbabwe.  The appellant made
    representations dated 8th January 2018.  The appellant was served with
    a decision to refuse the human rights claim dated 1st April 2019.  The
    appellant's appeal against that decision was heard by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Howorth and allowed for reasons set out in a decision
    promulgated on 11th September 2019.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 4. The background to the appeal is set out at paragraphs [2] to [8] of the
    decision.  It is uncontroversial that the appellant has received a
    sentence of over 12 months and a series of other sentences such that he
    is a foreign criminal liable to deportation.  As to the appellant's
    offending, the judge stated at paragraph [32]:


         "The appellant's criminal history is serious. The appellant's
         incarceration appeared to have no effect on his offending
         behaviour, and he continued to offend whilst in detention. There is
         a public interest in deporting serious criminals and the
         appellant's offending is of the type that is particularly
         abhorrent, that is violent offending involving weaponry."


 5. In assessing the Article 8 claim, the decision maker was required to
    consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A of the immigration rules apply.
    If not, the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
    other factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
    above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  As the appellant
    does not have children or a partner, paragraph 399 does not apply.  At
    paragraph [11], the judge sets out paragraph 399A of the immigration
    rules.


 6. It was accepted that the appellant has been lawfully resident in the UK
    for most of his life and paragraph 399A(a) is met. For reasons set out
    at paragraphs [34] to [37] of her decision the judge found the
    appellant is socially and culturally integrated in the UK, and thus
    paragraph 399A(b) is met.  The judge then went on to consider whether
    there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration into Zimbabwe.


 7. The judge accepted, at paragraph [36], that the appellant has been on
    holiday to Zimbabwe in 2010 or 2011. She also found the appellant does
    not speak the Shona language and speaks only English.  At paragraph
    [38], she found the appellant may have some knowledge of traditional
    customs or cultural knowledge.  The judge found it unlikely that
    neither the appellant's mother nor stepfather have any surviving family
    members or friends in Zimbabwe that would assist at any level with the
    appellant's integration to Zimbabwe. The judge referred to the
    conflicting evidence given by the appellant's mother and his stepfather
    as to whether his stepfather had returned to Zimbabwe in 2015. The
    judge preferred the evidence of the appellant's stepfather who claimed
    that he returned to Zimbabwe in 2015 to accompany a colleague to a
    funeral.  The judge found it is likely that the appellant's stepfather
    met with friends or relatives in Zimbabwe whilst there.  At paragraph
    [42], the judge found it more likely than not that the appellant's
    mother and stepfather have some family members or friends in Zimbabwe
    who may be able to provide some support to the appellant.  The judge
    found the appellant, whilst now an adult, has never started living an
    independent life without his mother and stepfather.  The judge found it
    would be a significant barrier to integration in Zimbabwe if the
    appellant were to live alone without his mother and stepfather.


 8. The judge considered the general situation in Zimbabwe and refers to
    the report of Professor Aguilar that was relied upon by the appellant.
    Overall, the judge found the report to be of little assistance but
    considered it helpful in respect of the general economic position the
    appellant would face in Zimbabwe. She noted the economy is in a poor
    state and the appellant would be returning to a country that has a very
    high level of unemployment.  At paragraph [50], the judge concluded as
    follows:


         "The threshold to show significant obstacles is high. It cannot
         just be inconvenience to the appellant; difficulty or hardship
         itself will not suffice. I do however find the threshold and
         Article 399A(c) is met. I note that at least the appellant's
         immediate family are in the UK. Also, that the appellant's
         biological father has not ever had contact with the appellant and
         there is no suggestion he would provide support. Whilst I do not
         accept that there is absolutely no-one to provide support, I do
         note that even the immediate family are here in the UK, and any
         support given is likely to minimal (sic) and not include
         accommodation, for example. Whilst I except (sic) the appellant's
         mother will arrange for accommodation for the appellant in the
         short-term, this is not a long-term solution and I find that the
         appellant ultimately will have to find work. The lack of language
         skills in a country with such high unemployment is likely to make
         this difficult. I am also mindful of the fact that the appellant
         has not lived alone previously and this in itself would in my view
         amount to a significant obstacle to integration in Zimbabwe."


 9.  The judge concluded that paragraph 399A of the immigration rules
    applies.  The judge went on to consider the public interest
    considerations set out in s117 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002, noting the appellant is a foreign criminal and the
    deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.  The judge
    noted, at paragraph [52], that the ".. Offending of the appellant is
    extremely serious and therefore the public interest in relation his
    heightened".  At paragraphs [54] to [57], the judge stated:


         "54. If I am found to be incorrect in respect of 399A I would also
         find that there are very compelling circumstances as to why the
         appellant should not be deported. These are that the appellant
         committed all offences both outside and whilst serving his
         sentence, as a minor. Prior to turning eighteen the appellant
         ceased being poorly behaved in prison and has earnt a number of
         positive endorsements, particularly from the Diamond report.


         55.  I must put at the forefront of my mind that the circumstances
         must be very compelling and even when considering the guidance in
         Maslov v Austria (application no. 1638/03). I do bear in mind the
         additional weight in which the UK puts on the public interest in
         deportation. In Maslov, reasoning given stated that 'a settled
         migrant who has lawfully spent all or the major part of his or her
         childhood and youth in [this] country very serious reasons are
         required to justify exclusion'. The appellant has done all of his
         offending as a child whilst lawfully resident in the UK. There has
         been a dramatic change in his behaviour since prior to becoming an
         adult and this is outlined by the Diamond report.


         56.  I also find that the appellant's family are tight knit and
         whilst they were unable to stop him from offending in the first
         instance, I believe their support in him leaving a crime behind
         (sic) will be invaluable. I find it would be extremely difficult
         for the appellant to continue to sustain these relationships on
         deportation from the UK.


         57.  I accept that the appellant was found in September 2018 in the
         Youth Justice Board report to be a high risk of reoffending,
         however, I find that the appellant has subsequently addressed his
         offending behaviour with considerable success, and I find it
         unlikely that were he reassessed now, that would remain the
         reported outcome. I sincerely hope the appellant is able to
         continue his good behaviour into adulthood."


The appeal before me


10. The respondent advances three grounds of appeal. First, in concluding
    that there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration into Zimbabwe, the judge confined her consideration to the
    appellant's ability to find a job or sustain life in Zimbabwe without
    making a broad evaluative judgement.  Second, in considering whether
    there are very compelling circumstances to outweigh the public interest
    in deportation, the judge erred in attributing great weight to the fact
    the appellant was a child at the time he committed his offences.  That
    is a factor that would have been reflected in the sentences he received
    and without more, youth could not amount to a very compelling
    circumstance. Third, the judge fails to provide adequate reasons for
    her conclusion that the appellant is socially and culturally integrated
    in the UK and why the appellant's conviction is insufficient to
    demonstrate very serious reasons to justify the appellant's expulsion,
    where previous convictions, incarceration and the presence of family
    did nothing to stop him from further offending.


11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic on 16th
    October 2019. The matter comes before me to determine whether the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material error of
    law, and if so, to remake the decision.


12. Before me, Mr McVeety adopts the grounds of appeal and submits the
    judge accepts the seriousness of the appellant's offending that is
    described as being "particularly abhorrent, that is violent offending
    involving weaponry".  The judge noted at paragraph [32], that the
    appellant's incarceration appeared to have no effect on his offending
    behaviour, and he continued to violently offend whilst in detention.
    At paragraph [57], the judge noted the appellant was found in September
    2018 to be a high risk of reoffending.  However, in the same paragraph,
    the judge irrationally found the appellant has subsequently addressed
    his offending behaviour with considerable success.


13. He submits the judge was required to consider whether there would be
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Zimbabwe
    and that required a broader evaluative exercise than that completed by
    the Judge.  He refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD -v-
     Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, in which Sales LJ said, at [14]


         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration" into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out
         in section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one. It is not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not appropriate to treat the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself in the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the
         individual will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on and a
         capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable time
         a variety of human relationships to give substance to the
         individual's private or family life."


14. Mr McVeety submits the judge refers to the appellant's age at the time
    the offences were committed, but failed to have regard to the fact that
    the sentencing judge had said that the Robbery was well-planned and not
    only were their disguises used, but there was the production of not
    just a bladed article, but an imitation firearm, to threaten and to
    seek compliance.  The sentencing judge noted that the starting point
    for an adult convicted of a carefully planned Robbery jumps to 9 years
    with a range of 7 to 14 years.  Bearing in mind the appellant's age,
    the judge treated it as a less sophisticated robbery and bearing in
    mind the guidance on sentencing of children and young people, noted the
    main principle to be the prevention of re-offending and the need to
    have in mind the welfare of the child. The judge noted that if the
    appellant had been an adult, the very least sentence imposed would be
    in the region of six years imprisonment.  That was reduced by one
    third, to reflect age, reducing the sentence to one of 48 months. The
    judge further reduced the sentence given to the appellant to 41 months,
    to reflect the change of plea by the appellant on his trial date.


15. Mr McVeety submits that at paragraph [35] of her decision, the judge
    refers to the lack of evidence regarding the appellant's integration in
    the UK. Although the appellant may have attended school in the UK and
    later college, there was no evidence regarding the private life
    established by the appellant, and no evidence upon which the judge
    could rationally conclude that the public interest in deportation of
    the appellant is outweighed by the private life established by him. The
    judge noted the appellant has never lived away from his family, but
    they were plainly unable to have any influence over him and prevent his
    offending.


16. In reply, Mr Barnfield submits the grounds of appeal amount to a
    disagreement with the weight attached to the evidence, and findings
    made that were open to the judge.  He submits the judge clearly had in
    mind, at paragraphs [32] and [52] of her decision, the strong public
    interest in the deportation of foreign national criminals.  Mr
    Barnfield submits that on the evidence, it was open to the judge to
    find that the appellant would be incapable of finding a job or
    accommodation and so the most basic requirements for integration could
    not be met.  He submits that in reaching her decision, the judge
    carefully considered not only the age of the appellant at the time of
    his offending, but also the progress that he has made since becoming an
    adult.  At paragraphs [56] and [57] of her decision, the judge
    acknowledges the offending, but in looking at the matter overall, the
    judge was entitled to consider that the appellant comes from a tight
    knit family and to consider the support of the family to be invaluable.




Discussion


17. Section 3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 Act provides that a person who
    is not a British citizen is liable to deportation from the United
    Kingdom if, among other things, "the Secretary of State deems his
    deportation to be conducive to the public good".  The Immigration Rules
    set out the approach to be followed by the Secretary of State where a
    foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that the deportation
    would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8
    ECHR.  So far as relevant to this appeal, the immigration rules state:


         "390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary of State will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         it will only be in exceptional circumstances that the public
         interest in maintaining the deportation order will be outweighed by
         other factors.


         ...


         Deportation and Article 8


         A398. These rules apply where:


         (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
         deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


         (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
         him to be revoked.


         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights
         Convention, and


         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years.


         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because they have been
         convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or


         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the
         law,


         the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
         public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are very compelling circumstances over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.


         ...


         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -


         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and


         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and


         (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.


              ...


18. Section 117Ain Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002  NIAA 2002 provides that, when a court or tribunal is required to
    determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches a
    person's right to respect for private and family life under Article 8,
    and, as a result, would be unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998,
    the court, in considering the public interest question, must (in
    particular) have regard to the considerations listed in section 117B
    and, additionally, in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
    criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.


19. The law relating to the deportation of foreign criminals was considered
    by the Supreme Court in Ali v Home Secretary [2016] UKSC 60. Lord Reed
    JSC, with whom the other members of the Court agreed, referred to the
    Strasbourg jurisprudence and said, at paragraph [26]:


         "In a well known series of judgments the [European Court of Human
         Rights] has set out the guiding principles which it applies when
         assessing the likelihood that the deportation of a settled migrant
         would interfere with family life and, if so, its proportionality to
         the legitimate aim pursued. In Boultif v Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR
         50, para 48, the court said that it would consider the nature and
         seriousness of the offence committed by the applicant; the length
         of the applicant's stay in the country from which he or she is to
         be expelled; the time elapsed since the offence was committed and
         the applicant's conduct during that period; the nationalities of
         the various persons concerned; the applicant's family situation,
         such as the length of the marriage, and other factors expressing
         the effectiveness of a couple's family life; whether the spouse
         knew about the offence at the time when he or she entered into a
         family relationship; whether there are children of the marriage,
         and if so, their age; and the seriousness of the difficulties which
         the spouse is likely to encounter in the country to which the
         applicant is to be expelled. Two further factors were mentioned in
         �ner v The Netherlands (2006) 45 EHRR 14, para 58: the best
         interests and well-being of the children, in particular the
         seriousness of the difficulties which any children of the applicant
         are likely to encounter in the country to which the applicant is to
         be expelled; and the solidity of the social, cultural and family
         ties with the host country and with the country of destination. In
         Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47 , paras 72-75, the court added that
         the age of the person concerned can play a role when applying some
         of these criteria. For instance, when assessing the nature and
         seriousness of the offences, it has to be taken into account
         whether the person committed them as a juvenile or as an adult.
         Equally, when assessing the length of the person's stay in the
         country from which he or she is to be expelled and the solidity of
         the social, cultural and family ties with the host country, it
         makes a difference whether the person came to the country during
         his or her childhood or youth, or was even born there, or whether
         he or she only came as an adult. Some of the factors listed in
         these cases relate to the strength of the public interest in
         deportation: that is to say, the extent to which the deportation of
         the person concerned will promote the legitimate aim pursued.
         Others relate to the strength of the countervailing interests in
         private and family life. They are not exhaustive."


20. Lord Reed explained (at paragraph 38):


         "The implication of the new rules is that paragraphs 399 and 399A
         identify particular categories of case in which the Secretary of
         State accepts that the public interest in the deportation of the
         offender is outweighed under article 8 by countervailing factors.
         Cases not covered by those rules (that is to say, foreign offenders
         who have received sentences of at least four years, or who have
         received sentences of between 12 months and four years but whose
         private or family life does not meet the requirements of paragraphs
         399 and 399A) will be dealt with on the basis that great weight
         should generally be given to the public interest in the deportation
         of such offenders, but that it can be outweighed, applying a
         proportionality test, by very compelling circumstances: in other
         words, by a very strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put it in the SS
         (Nigeria) case [2014] 1 WLR 998 . The countervailing considerations
         must be very compelling in order to outweigh the general public
         interest in the deportation of such offenders, as assessed by
         Parliament and the Secretary of State. The Strasbourg jurisprudence
         indicates relevant factors to consider, and paragraphs 399 and 399A
         provide an indication of the sorts of matters which the Secretary
         of State regards as very compelling. As explained at para 26 above,
         they can include factors bearing on the weight of the public
         interest in the deportation of the particular offender, such as his
         conduct since the offence was committed, as well as factors
         relating to his private or family life. Cases falling within the
         scope of section 32 of the 2007 Act in which the public interest in
         deportation is outweighed, other than those specified in the new
         rules themselves, are likely to be a very small minority
         (particularly in non-settled cases). They need not necessarily
         involve any circumstance which is exceptional in the sense of being
         extraordinary (as counsel for the Secretary of State accepted,
         consistently with the Huang case [2007] 2 AC 167 , para 20), but
         they can be said to involve 'exceptional circumstances' in the
         sense that they involve a departure from the general rule."


21. As Lord reed recognised, in Maslov -v- Austria, the Grand Chamber
    stated that "when assessing the nature and seriousness of the offences
    committed by an applicant, it has to be taken into account whether he
    or she committed them as a juvenile or as an adult".  However, in SSHD
    v Olarewaju [2018] EWCA Civ 557 the Court of Appeal allowed the SSHD's
    appeal against the UT's decision upholding the decision of the FtT
    allowing the appeal of an appellant whose offences had all been
    committed as a juvenile. O had entered the UK aged 9 as a visitor (but
    remained illegally until he was given DLR with his family until his
    18th birthday the respondent informing him he still remained liable for
    deportation). The FtT found he had been rehabilitated (he not having
    committed any offending for 2 years - in fact he had offended
    significantly post FTT decision, but the Court of Appeal put that out
    of its mind).  The Court of Appeal noted that O would have received a
    lighter sentence as a juvenile, noted the significance of
    rehabilitation was limited as it was only one factor of the public
    interest, noted that the judge had described returning to Nigeria as a
    "very real culture shock" rather than in terms of "very significant
    obstacles" and considered that youth without more could not amount to
    "very compelling circumstances" as otherwise it would hardly ever be
    possible to deport someone whose offences had been committed under the
    age of 18.  However, O accepted before the FtT that he did not bring
    himself within paragraph 399 or 399A of the Rules and, hence, that he
    had to show that there were "very compelling circumstances" over and
    above those described in those paragraphs 399 or 399A.  In the appeal
    before me, FtT judge Howorth found that paragraph 399A applies, and by
    extension, Exception 1 set out in s117C(4) of the 2002 applies.  Thus
    for all intents and purposes, the public interest in the deportation of
    the appellant is outweighed under Article 8 by countervailing factors.




22. I reject the claim that the judge erred in her consideration of whether
    the appellant is socially and culturally integrated the UK.  The
    question is whether having regard to his upbringing, education,
    employment history, history of criminal offending and imprisonment,
    relationships with family and friends, lifestyle and any other relevant
    factors, the appellant was at the time of the hearing socially and
    culturally integrated in the UK.  Given that the appellant has lived
    all but the first 11 months of his life in the UK, was educated here,
    and has no ties with Zimbabwe, other than knowledge of traditional
    customs or cultural knowledge, it was open to the judge to conclude
    that his entire social and cultural identity has been formed in the UK.
    The judge's finding that, at least as a child, he was socially and
    culturally integrated in the UK therefore seems inevitable.


23. In Akinyemi -v- SSHD (No 2) [2019] EWCA Civ 2098, the Court of Appeal
    held that the correct approach to the balancing exercise is to
    recognise that the public interest in the deportation of foreign
    criminals is a flexible one, and that there would be a small number of
    cases where the individual circumstances reduced the legitimate and
    strong public interest in removal. The Court of Appeal held the Upper
    Tribunal had attached insufficient weight to the fact that the
    appellant had been lawfully in the UK his whole life.  The appellant in
    that case was born in the UK in 1983 and had never left. His parents
    were Nigerian nationals who had come to the UK lawfully. Due to the
    legislation in force at the time of his birth, the appellant did not
    acquire British nationality automatically; nor did he acquire it
    subsequently, despite having been entitled to it for many years. Since
    his teenage years, the appellant had been convicted of 42 offences,
    including causing death by dangerous driving and drug offences. In
    January 2015, a deportation made against him was upheld by the UT on
    the basis of the 2002 Act. In reaching its decision, the Upper Tribunal
    took into account the appellant's repeat offending and expert
    psychological evidence that he was at medium risk of reoffending. Other
    factors included his moderate risk of suicide, his social and cultural
    integration into the UK and his lack of family connections in Nigeria.
     At paragraph [39] Sir Ernest Ryder set out the correct approach:


         "... The correct approach to be taken to the 'public interest' in
         the balance to be undertaken by a tribunal is to recognise that the
         public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals has a
         moveable rather than fixed quality. It is necessary to approach the
         public interest flexibly, recognising that there will be cases
         where the person's circumstances in the individual case reduce the
         legitimate and strong public interest in removal. The number of
         these cases will necessarily be very few i.e. they will be
         exceptional having regard to the legislation and the Rules..."


24. At paragraph [40], Sir Ernest Ryder held that "one has to be careful to
    identify as a relevant fact that the appellant was in the UK lawfully
    for the whole of his life". The question which Sales LJ was addressing
    in Kamara, was the third limb of section 117C(4)(c).  That is, whether
    there would be very significant obstacles to the claimant's integration
    into the country to which he is proposed to be deported.


25. Here, the FtT judge accepted that there would be significant obstacles
    to the appellant's integration into Zimbabwe.  Here, the fact that the
    appellant had arrived in the UK when he was 11 months old was plainly a
    relevant consideration.  The judge found the appellant does not speak
    the Shona language and speaks only English, although he may have some
    knowledge of traditional customs or cultural knowledge. The evidence
    before the Tribunal was that the appellant has always lived with his
    mother and stepfather up until the point of his incarceration and he
    would return to that environment on release. The judge found that the
    appellant has not started living an independent life without his mother
    and stepfather and living alone without his mother and stepfather would
    be a significant barrier to his integration in Zimbabwe.  The judge
    referred to the evidence concerning the general economic position in
    Zimbabwe noting the economy is in a poor state and the appellant would
    be returning to a country that has a very high level of unemployment.
    The judge noted the appellant's immediate family are all in the UK, and
    any support that may be available to him is likely to be minimal and
    would not include accommodation. The judge noted the appellant will
    ultimately have to find work but his lack of language skills in a
    country with such high levels of unemployment, is likely to make this
    difficult.


26. In my judgment, given the undisputed facts that the appellant has only
    visited Zimbabwe for a short holiday in 2010 or 2011, since he left
    when he was 11 months old, knows no one in Zimbabwe and would have no
    financial support from any family members or friends if sent there, it
    was open to the judge to find that there would be very significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration into Zimbabwe.  The judge also
    accepted that the difficulties that the appellant would face in
    obtaining accommodation, and employment are relevant given the evidence
    accepted by the tribunal that the economy in Zimbabwe is in a poor
    state and the appellant would be returning to a country that has a very
    high level of employment.


27. In my judgement, the judge undoubtedly considered all matters in the
    round.  The public interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal is
    not set in stone and must be approached flexibly.  In my judgement, the
    judge had proper regard inter alia to the appellant's length of
    residence in the UK, the ties that he retains with his family, his
    immigration and offending history, and the family circumstances
    described in the evidence and the matters set out in the experts
    report.


28. As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    412, it is necessary to guard against the temptation to characterise as
    errors of law what are in truth no more than disagreements about the
    weight to be given to different factors, particularly if the judge who
    decided the appeal had the advantage of hearing oral evidence. The
    assessment of such a claim is always a highly fact sensitive task.  The
    FtT judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole and she
    plainly did so, giving adequate reasons for her decision.  If the
    Tribunal judge applied the correct test, and that resulted in an
    arguably generous conclusion, it does not mean that it was erroneous in
    law.  I have carefully considered the grounds of appeal advanced by the
    respondent but in my judgement, the decision was one that was open to
    the judge on the evidence before her and the findings made.


29. It follows that I dismiss the appeal.


Decision:


30. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Howorth, stands.




Signed        V. Mandalia               Date          31st March 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

