
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03088/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/03092/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing under Rule 34    |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 30 October 2020                            |On 6 November 2020           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                 Kamrul [I]
                                  Salma [K]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Londonium Solicitors (written submissions)
For the Respondent:    No representative and no submissions


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh who was born respectively  on
    31 December 1986 and 16 June 1985.  They are a married  couple.   On  4
    May 2019, the second appellant gave birth to their child in the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. On 27 April 2017, the appellants made an application for further  leave
    to remain on the basis of Art 8 of the ECHR.  The first  appellant  had
    initially arrived in the UK on 6 October 2010 as a Tier 4  Student  and
    the second appellant had entered the UK on 4 March 2013 with  leave  as
    his dependant.

 3. On 31 January  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
    appellants leave to remain under Art 8 of the ECHR (including under the
    relevant Immigration Rules relating to Art 8).

The Appeal

 4. The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    initially listed for hearing on 26 April 2019 but was adjourned at  the
    request of the appellants.  The adjourned  hearing  was  listed  on  20
    August 2019  but  that  was  also  adjourned  at  the  request  of  the
    appellants.

 5. The appeal was then re-listed on 16 January 2020 before Judge Cohen  at
    the Taylor House Hearing Centre.  On 10 January 2020, six  days  before
    the scheduled hearing, the appellants'  legal  representatives  made  a
    further  application  to  adjourn  the  hearing.   The  basis  of  that
    application was that the second appellant  was  unable  to  attend  the
    hearing because of her poor health, including  both  her  physical  and
    mental health.  A letter of support from the second appellant's General
    Practitioner (Dr Tamara Hibbert) dated 9 January 2020 was enclosed.  On
    14 January 2020, that  application  was  refused  by  a  Tribunal  Case
    Worker.

 6. As a consequence, the appeal  was  listed  before  Judge  Cohen  on  16
    January 2020.  At that hearing, the  appellants'  Counsel  renewed  the
    application  to  adjourn  the  hearing  on  the  basis  of  the  Second
    Appellant's health.

 7. The judge refused that application and  the  appeal  proceeded  in  the
    absence of the  appellants.   Judge  Cohen  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals on human rights grounds, under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 8. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    basis that the refusal of the adjournment was unfair in  the  light  of
    the  supporting  medical  evidence  concerning  the  second  appellant.
    Permission was initially refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Froom) on 22 April 2020.  However, on 6 July 2020, the  Upper  Tribunal
    (UTJ Lindsley) granted the appellants permission to appeal.   With  her
    permission decision, UTJ Lindsley issued directions that, in the  light
    of  the  COVID-19  crisis,  her  provisional  view  was  that  it   was
    appropriate to determine the issues of whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    made an error of law and, if so, whether its  decision  should  be  set
    aside, without a hearing.  She invited  submissions  from  the  parties
    both as to the substantive issue raised in the appeal and  also  as  to
    whether the appeal should be determined without a hearing.

 9. In response to those directions, the appellants made submissions as  to
    the legal issue, namely whether the judge's decision not to adjourn the
    hearing was unfair.  The appellants raised no objection to  the  appeal
    being determined without a hearing.

10. The Respondent filed no  submissions  in  response  to  UTJ  Lindsley's
    directions.

11. In the light of the  party's  submissions,  and  neither  party  having
    raised any objection, having regard to the interests of justice and the
    overriding objective of determining the appeal justly  and  fairly  and
    the nature of the legal issue raised, I am satisfied that it is in  the
    interests of justice to determine this appeal without a  hearing  under
    rule 34 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2698 as amended) and para 4 of the Amended General Pilot  Practice
    Directions: Contingency Arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and the
    Upper Tribunal (14   September  2020)  issued  by  (then)  Vice  Senior
    President and (now) Senior President of Tribunals,  the  Rt.  Hon.  Sir
    Keith Lindblom.

12. The sole issue raised in the grounds of appeal and in  the  submissions
    made subsequent to the grant of permission concerns the fairness of the
    judge's decision not to adjourn the appeal.

Discussion

13. The judge dealt with the adjournment application made at the hearing by
    the appellant's Counsel in paras 12-13 of his determination as follows:



         "12. The appellant did not attend his appeal  but  was  represented
             before me.   Mr  Parkin  sought  a  further  adjournment.   He
             indicated that the appellant will be likely to be fit to  give
             evidence within 6 to 12 months.   I  refused  the  adjournment
             request.  I indicated that  the  appeal  had  been  previously
             adjourned for medical reasons  on  multiple  occasions  dating
             back to 26 April 2019.  There was no prospect of  the  parties
             being fit enough to give evidence  within  a  week  reasonable
             timescale (sic).  Matters have moved on as the 2nd appellant's
             depression  related  to   miscarriages   but   she   has   now
             successfully  given  birth.   Mr  Parkin  indicated  that  his
             instructions were to  withdraw  if  the  adjournment  was  not
             granted.  He however asked  for  permission  to  seek  further
             instructions.  He reverted and indicated  that  he  wished  to
             make brief submissions.

         13.  I was not provided with any evidence that the appellants  were
             currently taking any anti-depressants.  The appellants had not
             displayed  suicidal  ideation  or  self-harm.   They  had  not
             required  any  treatment  in   hospital   under   section   or
             voluntarily  in  respect  of   mental   health   necessitating
             treatment as an in-patient."

14. In granting permission to appeal, UTJ Lindsley summarised  the  judge's
    reasoning at para 4 and the basis on which she considered  the  grounds
    were arguable at para 5 of her decision:

         "4.      At paragraphs 12 and 13 of the decision the issue  of  the
             adjournment is dealt with by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
             He finds that it was not right to adjourn the appeal  for  the
             following reasons: there was  no  medical  evidence  that  the
             appellants were currently taking medication,  self-harming  or
             had suicidal ideation  or  required  any  hospital  treatment;
             there was no evidence that the  appellants  would  be  fit  to
             attend the hearing in a reasonable period of time; the  appeal
             had been adjourned on multiple occasions since April 2019; and
             the second appellant had now given birth moving on  the  issue
             of her having depression as a result of miscarriages.

         5.   It is arguable that the decision was unfair given the  medical
             evidence from the second appellant's GP  at  page  18  of  the
             bundle [] and the submissions set out at pages 14 to 17 of the
             bundle on this issue.  It is also arguable  that  the  reasons
             for refusing the adjournment are not  adequate  in  addressing
             this evidence."

15. The First-tier Tribunal has a discretion to adjourn a hearing.  That is
    set out in its case management powers in rule 4(3)(h) of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 (SI 2014/2604) where it is stated:

         "In particular, and  without  restricting  the  general  powers  in
         paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal may -

         ....

         (h)  adjourn or postpone a hearing; ..."

16. Further, by rule 28 the First-tier Tribunal may proceed with a  hearing
    where a party fails to attend where it is:

         "(a) satisfied that the party has been notified of the  hearing  or
         that reasonable steps have been taken to notify the  party  of  the
         hearing; and

         (b) considers that it is in the interests  of  justice  to  proceed
         with the hearing."

17. It is clear that the discretion must be exercised fairly.  The issue is
    not whether the discretion was exercised reasonably or  rationally  but
    fairly.  That was made plain by the Court of Appeal in SH (Afghanistan)
    v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 where at [13] Moses LJ (with whom Ward  and
    Patten LJJ agreed) said:

         "...when considering whether the Immigration Judge  ought  to  have
         granted an adjournment, the test was not irrationality.   The  test
         was not whether his decision  was  properly  open  to  him  or  was
         Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse.  The test and  sole  test  was
         whether it was unfair."

18.  Further  exposition  was  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418   (IAC)   (McCloskey   J,
    President).  There, in the judicial headnote,  the  (then)  President's
    view is summarised as follows:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct tests; and acting  irrationality.   In  practice,  in  most
         cases the  question  will  be  whether  the  refusal  deprived  the
         affected party of his right to a fair hearing.  When an adjournment
         refusal is challenged on  fairness  grounds,  it  is  important  to
         recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether
         the FtT acted reasonably.  Rather, the test to be applied  is  that
         of fairness: was there any  deprivation  of  the  affected  party's
         right to a fair hearing?"

19. In relation to applications for  adjournments,  the  President  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  has   issued
    guidance in the "Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2014: The  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014" at para 8(a) in the following terms:

         "8.  Factors weighing in favour of adjourning an appeal, even at  a
             late stage of proceedings, include:

             (a)  Sudden illness or other compelling  reason  preventing  a
                  party or a witness attending a hearing.  Normally  such  a
                  reason should be supported by medical  or  other  relevant
                  evidence, unless  there  has  been  insufficient  time  to
                  obtain  such  evidence.   However,  where  there   is   no
                  likelihood that the party  will  be  able  to  attend  the
                  hearing within a reasonable period, a hearing may  proceed
                  in absence where the Tribunal considers that  this  is  in
                  the interests of justice in terms of Rule 28."

20. Judge Cohen's reasons in paras 12-13 were brief.  He  appears  to  have
    been influenced by the fact that the appeals  had  been  adjourned  for
    medical reasons "on multiple occasions dating back to 26  April  2019".
    As far as I am able to tell, there were only two previous adjournments:
    one in April and one in August 2019  both  for  medical  reasons.   The
    judge was undoubtedly correct to note that there was no  evidence  that
    the second appellant (he refers to the  "appellants")  was  taking  any
    anti-depressants.  He also said that she  had  not  displayed  suicidal
    ideation or self-harm arising from her mental health.  Stating that, it
    is not clear whether the judge had taken into account the  letter  from
    Dr Hibbert submitted in support of the application for an  adjournment.
    She is the second appellant's GP.  In her letter dated January 2020, Dr
    Hibbert said this:

         "The above named patient is being treated for depression and has  a
         35 week old baby  to  look  after.   She  has  started  counselling
         sessions exclusively for women who are pregnant or who have  babies
         up to 52 weeks old.  [The second appellant] is currently in a  very
         vulnerable  position  with  her  depression;  she  is  also  having
         investigations for heavy  periods  and  found  her  pregnancy  very
         difficult.

         In view of her physical and mental poor  health  she  has  anxiety,
         insomnia and even suicidal thoughts.  I do not think  she  will  be
         fit to attend a Tribunal on 16th January 2020.  It can take 6 to 12
         months for mood to stabilise and it will be better to postpone  the
         hearing until then.  I hope this letter  will  be  considered  when
         setting the date for the next hearing."

21. Contrary to what the judge said in para 13 of  his  determination,  the
    only medical evidence before him was to  the  effect  that  the  second
    appellant was having "suicidal thoughts".  It was also  the  GP's  view
    that the second appellant would not be fit to attend a  hearing  on  16
    January 2020.  That medical evidence was unchallenged before the judge.
     The respondent was not, in fact, represented at the hearing.    Whilst
    the judge did not, necessarily, have to accept the medical evidence, he
    did have to grapple with it and its conclusion,  based  upon  the  GP's
    knowledge of the second appellant's  health,  that  she  was  unfit  to
    attend the hearing.  The judge did not do that and also failed to  take
    into account that, in fact, the second appellant is prone  to  suicidal
    thoughts.

22.  Whilst  it  may  be  relevant  that  the  appeal  had  been  adjourned
    previously, that was not a factor which could, in itself, determine the
    fairness of proceeding with the hearing in the absence  of  the  second
    appellant.  There is no doubt that  the  evidence  of  the  appellants,
    including the  second  appellant,  would  be  an  important  factor  in
    determining their Art 8 appeal.  That is,  of  course,  without  having
    regard to the underlying fairness that individuals should  be  able  to
    take part in their appeal  hearings  if  they  wish  to.   There  is  a
    suggestion in the judge's reasoning, when he  refers  to  there  having
    been "multiple occasions" when adjournments have been granted, that  he
    overstated  the  history  of   the   appeals.    Those   two   previous
    adjournments, it must be taken were properly granted on  the  basis  of
    medical evidence concerning the second appellant.  This was not a  case
    where it was being said that the appeal had no future prospect of going
    ahead with the second appellant present.  The  GP  indicated  that  the
    second appellant's mood might take "6 to 12 months" to stabilise.

23. In my judgment, the judge erred in law by failing to grapple  with  the
    medical evidence sufficiently and thereby gave inadequate  reasons  for
    his decision to refuse the adjournment application  which  resulted  in
    unfairness, in all the circumstances, to the second appellant.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision cannot stand and is set aside.

25. Having regard to the nature of the error, namely  that  the  appellants
    were unfairly deprived of a hearing, and having regard to para  7.2  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement, the proper disposal of  this
    appeal is that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
    rehearing before a judge other than Judge Cohen.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             3 November 2020

