
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03673/2018
                                                               HU/05039/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2019                              |On 18 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  PAVAN [D]
                                 VENKATA [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, instructed by Clyde, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants were born on 30 March 1981 and 5 June 1985  respectively
    and are citizens of India. They are husband and wife. I shall hereafter
    refer to the first appellant as the 'appellant.'  Both  the  appellants
    acknowledge that the appeal of the second appellant is  dependent  upon
    that of the appellant.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom initially in October 2006 with
    entry clearance as a student. He was granted further  leave  to  remain
    but left the United Kingdom on  10  October  2011.  He  returned,  with
    leave, in March 2013. On  12  June  2017,  the  appellant  applied  for
    indefinite leave to  remain  on  the  basis  of  long  residence.  That
    application is refused by decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  7
    December 2017. The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which, in a decision promulgated  on  8  October  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeals. The appellants now  appeal,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. The appellants assert that the judge's  decision  and  findings  as  to
    credibility are vitiated by procedural impropriety, namely  that  there
    was a failure to recognise that the appellant was a vulnerable  witness
    with mental health issues. The appellant relies on two medical  reports
    both post-dating the decision of the Tribunal. There is a  letter  from
    the appellant's GP dated 18 October 2018 and a report by Dr  Alexander,
    a consultant psychiatrist, dated 16 October  2018.  The  psychiatrist's
    report states that the appellant has a 'generalised  anxiety  disorder'
    and 'might struggle to convey information clearly.' The  report  states
    that the appellant 'should be considered as a disabled  person  due  to
    his mental illness.' The appellant asserts that, through  no  fault  of
    her own, the judge had failed to have regard to the appellant's  mental
    condition which has only been  diagnosed  following  the  hearing.  The
    appellant relies inter alia on AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.

 4. The psychiatric report of Dr Alexander appears to have been based on  a
    single meeting with the appellant  on  12  October  2018.  It  was  the
    doctor's opinion the appellant's mental capacity was impaired 'due to a
    very high level of anxiety and secondary depression.'

 5. The report contains  curious  features.  The  doctor  states  that  the
    appellant 'finds it difficult to  communicate  with  people  especially
    when he is under stress' but  it  is  not  clear  whether  that  is  an
    objective diagnosis or the doctor simply reporting what  the  appellant
    had told him. Dr Alexander went on  to  state  that  'during  the  Home
    Office interview [the appellant] was not able to answer  the  questions
    put to him properly. This is because of his severe  anxiety  state  not
    because he did not want to answer the  questions.'  Again,  it  is  not
    clear whether the doctor is here giving an opinion or simply  recording
    the appellant's comments. If the former, I do not see how the doctor is
    able to explain  why  the  appellant  gave  particular  answers  at  an
    interview which  took  place  long  before  the  doctor  ever  met  the
    appellant. The manner in which the report is written, confusing opinion
    with the appellant's own account, is unhelpful.

 6. Mr Hussain, who appeared for the appellant before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    urged me to  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  on  the  basis  of  Dr
    Alexander's report. Even if I were to give substantial  weight  to  the
    contents of the report (which, for  the  reasons  stated  above,  I  am
    reluctant to do) I would find that, even if the judge  had  been  aware
    that the appellant was suffering from generalised anxiety disorder, the
    outcome of the appeal would have been no different.  I  agree  with  Mr
    Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of State, that the  core  finding
    of the judge remains wholly unaffected by the  view  she  took  of  the
    appellant's credibility as a witness.  This  was  an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds against a decision of the Secretary of  State.  Relevant
    to the question  of  proportionality  under  Article  8  ECHR  was  the
    exercise, subject to his policy, by  the  Secretary  of  State  of  the
    discretion to discount from the appellant's  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom an absence from the jurisdiction of more than 6 months. Indeed,
    the grounds of appeal offer no criticism of the judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality other than in respect of that core issue.

 7. The judge was aware that the respondent's policy guidance  of  3  April
    2017 provided that 'if the applicant has been absent from  the  UK  for
    more than six  months  in  one  period  or  18  months  in  total,  the
    application should normally be refused. However, it may be  appropriate
    to  exercise  discretion  over  excess  absences   in   compelling   or
    compassionate  circumstances,  for  example  where  the  applicant  was
    prevented from returning to the UK through unavoidable  circumstances.'
    The Secretary of  State  had  not  exercised  that  discretion  in  the
    appellant's favour. The appellant  had  been  absent  from  the  United
    Kingdom between 10 October 2011 13 March 2013, a period of  17  months.
    The appellant claimed that he began to suffer from back pain  in  India
    during a family visit and that he was told by his doctors there to take
    12 months' bed rest. In short, the judge did not believe the appellant.
    At [60], she made the following admirably clear findings of fact:

         "Therefore having assessed all of the evidence I  find  is  a  fact
         that the first appellant was  not  suffering  from  the  complaints
         associated with back pain described by him;  was  not  admitted  to
         hospital in India during a  family  visit  there  from  the  United
         Kingdom;  was  not  hospitalised   subsequently;   nor   prescribed
         treatment including 12 month bed  rest  which  prevented  him  from
         returning to the United Kingdom as he had planned to do in 2011."

 8. The judge's reasons for  reaching  those  findings  depended  upon  her
    inability to accept that the appellant would have  been  prescribed  12
    months' bed rest for a bad back. The Secretary of State had produced to
    the judge generic evidence from several sources none of which indicated
    that such prolonged bed rest was an inappropriate treatment. The  judge
    has given cogent and clear reasons why she was to prefer that  evidence
    to that of the appellant himself together with the documentary material
    from India which he had produced. That was a finding opened  the  judge
    who was not obliged, as  the  appellant  now  asserts,  to  prefer  his
    evidence to that produced by  the  respondent.  Significantly,  in  the
    light of the appellant's recently diagnosed mental condition, the judge
    did not disbelieve the appellant for any reason that can  be  explained
    away by his  claimed  vulnerability.  Rather,  the  judge  reached  her
    finding because she was persuaded  by  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    respondent.  Had  the  judge  been  aware  of  the  appellant's  mental
    condition, I find that the outcome would have been no different.

 9. The appellant also complains that the judge took judicial knowledge  of
    matters properly falling within the ambit of expert evidence. The judge
    did not believe that the appellant had been prescribed antibiotics  for
    his bad back. The grounds of appeal point out that letter from a doctor
    at the Indian hospital recorded that the appellant  had  complained  of
    the fever and had been prescribed antibiotics. I find that this finding
    of the judge, even if it failed to take account of the Indian  hospital
    evidence, was discrete, separable from her other findings and  did  not
    in any way vitiate what she has said  regarding  the  appellant's  core
    claim that he had been confined to bed for 12 months.

10. Finally, the appellant claims that the judge made an error of fact. The
    judge found that both the appellant and his wife had been  absent  from
    the United Kingdom for 17 months. It is now asserted that the wife  was
    not absent from the United Kingdom for that period.  That  may  be  the
    case but I agree with Mr Mills that if  the  judge  misunderstood  that
    part of the evidence, it was  an  error  which  does  not  in  any  way
    undermine the judge's central finding.

11. The judge, therefore, has made an article 8 the CHR assessment which is
    thorough and balanced.  She  was  entitled,  notwithstanding  the  most
    recent medical evidence, to  find  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    prescribed 12 months' bed rest as he  claimed  that  the  Secretary  of
    State,  in  consequence,  exercised  his  discretion  as  regards   the
    appellant's absence from the United Kingdom correctly. The judge  found
    accordingly that the appellant did not meet the requirements of HC  395
    (as amended). That finding, in  turn,  operated  as  a  factor  in  the
    judge's assessment of proportionality which I find is free  from  legal
    error. Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.




Notice of Decision

12. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 13 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

