
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal
Numbers: HU/03051/2016

                                                      HU/03056/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30th January 2018                       |  On 16th February 2018          |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                               Arun Saru Magar
                              Anita Saru Magar
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
                    Solicitors (19-20 Chambers)

For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, a brother and sister,  are  the  adult  children  of  a
    former member of the Brigade  of  Gurkhas,  who  died  in  2009.   They
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, dismissing their appeals against the respondent's refusal  to
    grant them entry clearance to come to  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    Appendix Armed Forces of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended)
    and/or Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The appellants' mother, the father's second wife, came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2012 and settled here as their father's widow.  She  is  the
    sponsor in these appeals. The family  background  is  set  out  in  the
    sponsor's witness statement.

 3. The appellants' father was already married to his first wife,  who  was
    in declining health, when he married the sponsor,  so  that  she  could
    look after the family (the father, the  first  wife,  and  their  three
    children).  Two of the first wife's children  are  now  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant's father and the sponsor had no children  until
    after the first wife's death in 1982, when they began a family of their
    own.  They had two children, the appellants in this appeal.

 4. The appellants' father died in 2009, but  the  sponsor  was  unable  to
    benefit from the respondent's change  in  policy  regarding  wives  and
    widows of Gurkhas until 2012, when she had saved enough money  to  make
    an application for herself.  She had only  enough  money  for  her  own
    application and travel, but not for that of the appellants.

 5. Following the decisions in Ghising and Gurung, the First-tier  Tribunal
    was required to find as a fact whether the appellants' father  intended
    to settle in the United Kingdom and would have done  so,  but  for  the
    historic injustice.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellants
    and sponsor had not discharged the burden of showing that such was  the
    case.

 6. The sponsor's witness statement for the First-tier Tribunal stated that
    her husband was very proud of his service in the British  Army  Brigade
    of Gurkhas and several times told her that he loved the United  Kingdom
    and that he sincerely wished to settle here with  his  family,  but  at
    that time there  was  no  policy  of  settlement.  The  record  of  the
    sponsor's evidence in the First-tier Tribunal was as follows:

         "8.  In cross examination, [the sponsor] confirmed that she married
             her husband on April 16 1975 after he  had  retired  from  the
             Gurkhas.  [The first appellant] was born in 1990  followed  by
             [the second appellant] in 1991.  After leaving the  army,  her
             husband  worked  on  the  family's  agricultural  land.   [The
             sponsor] did not work in the United Kingdom.  She was  reliant
             on benefits.  Her children [the appellants]  were  financially
             dependent on her.  If they  were  permitted  to  come  to  the
             United  Kingdom  they  would  be  able  to  work  to   support
             themselves.  [The sponsor] said that she  currently  lives  on
             her own in one room.  She rents this from Mr Chetam  Rana  who
             lives in the house with his wife and child.  If  her  children
             are allowed to come to the United Kingdom she  will  look  for
             other accommodation.

         9.   [The sponsor] told me that [J], a son from her husband's first
             wife was still living in Nepal.  Her children  were  in  touch
             with him although they did not live in the same place.  [D and
             M], the other children  by  [the  father's]  first  wife  were
             currently  in  the  United  Kingdom.   [M]   arrived   between
             2007/2008 followed by [D] in 2010.  [The sponsor] told me that
             she has no other relatives in  Nepal.   The  house  where  her
             children live is owned by [D].  Since arriving in  the  United
             Kingdom she has been back to Nepal on  three  occasions.   She
             last went back in March 2017 for three weeks.  She stayed with
             [the appellants]."

 7. The First-tier Tribunal took into  account  the  following  matters  in
    finding that the sponsor and appellants had not discharged  the  burden
    of proof upon them:

      1) The marriage between the father and the  sponsor  took  place  nine
         years after the father left the Gurkhas and these  appellants  were
         not born until over two decades following his leaving the army,  24
         years and 25 years afterwards;

      2) There was no evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  to  indicate
         that the family were reduced to destitution in Nepal,  which  might
         have provided them with an incentive to come to the United Kingdom,
         had that been possible;

      3)  On  the  contrary,  in  Nepal,  the  family  were  in   reasonable
         circumstances, with a house of their own, a small area of  land  to
         cultivate and some small-time construction contracts;

      4) The appellants and their mother had provided was no explanation why
         the father would have wanted to settle  here,  save  the  sponsor's
         assertion that he loved the United Kingdom; and finally,

      5) There was no evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
         father had ever applied for settlement in  the  United  Kingdom  or
         sought advice on whether or not that was possible;

    It is not clear upon what evidence the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made
    these findings of fact and credibility. None of the matters relied upon
    by the Judge appear to have been put to the sponsor, either  in  cross-
    examination or by the Tribunal.  The father cannot  be  criticised  for
    failing to seek advice on coming to the United Kingdom before  he  died
    in 2009; it was not then open to him to do so,  because of the historic
    injustice.

 8. The Upper Tribunal may only interfere with a finding  of  fact  in  the
    circumstances set out in R (Iran) at paragraph 90.2.  In this case  the
    finding of fact  is  procedurally  unfair  and  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and  furthermore  the  sponsor,
    was not given any opportunity to respond to the matters now relied upon
    during the hearing.

 9. For those reasons and with some reluctance I set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I do  not  feel  able  to  remake  it  today,
    without evidence from the sponsor, so I remit the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.



Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Signed:        Judith  A  J  C  Gleeson                     Date:         15
February 2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
