


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03993/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On : 11 August 2016                        |On : 15 August 2016            |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 ihieme [c]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Following a grant of permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appellant's   appeal   against   the
   respondent's decision of 31 July 2015 to refuse his application for leave
   to remain on human rights grounds, it was  found,  at  an  error  of  law
   hearing on 7 June 2016, that the First-tier Tribunal had made  errors  of
   law  in  its  decision.  The  decision  was  accordingly  set  aside  and
   directions made for it to be re-made.

2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ] 1974, entered the  United
   Kingdom on 25 April 2010 with entry clearance as a visitor valid until  7
   October 2010. He entered into a relationship with a British woman and  on
   [ ] 2012 a son, [K], was born from  that  relationship.  The  appellant's
   relationship with his partner ended and his son remained living with  his
   ex-partner. The appellant applied to  the  family  court  for  a  contact
   order. An Interim Contact and Interim Prohibited Steps Order was made  in
   his favour and further contact proceedings are ongoing.


3. On 19 September 2013 the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
   remain on the basis of his family life with his son.  Following  requests
   made by the respondent, the appellant confirmed that  he  was  unable  to
   provide his son's British passport as proof of his nationality, as his ex-
   partner was not being cooperative. The appellant's application  was  then
   refused on 27 November 2013 on the basis  that  the  respondent  was  not
   satisfied that his son was British and that he could not, therefore, meet
   the requirements of Appendix FM, R-LTRPT 1.1(d) with reference to E-LTRPT
   2.2.


4. The appellant then applied for  a  reconsideration  of  his  application,
   submitting evidence of contact with his son in the form of contact centre
   invoices, contact report  forms,  a  court  order  and  photographs.  His
   application was refused on 31 July 2015, again  on  the  basis  of  there
   being no evidence to show  that  his  son  was  a  British  citizen.  The
   respondent considered that the appellant could not, therefore,  meet  the
   requirements of the immigration rules. In considering whether exceptional
   circumstances existed to justify a grant of leave outside the rules,  the
   respondent accepted that the appellant had contact with his son  but  did
   not accept that the circumstances were exceptional.


5. The appellant appealed that decision and his appeal  came  before  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal and was decided on the papers without  an
   oral hearing. The judge found that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
   mandatory requirements of Appendix FM as he could not show that  his  son
   was a British citizen. The judge found also that the requirements of  the
   rules in relation to private life could not be met.  However  the  judge,
   considering the appellant's  case  outside  the  rules,  found  that  the
   respondent's decision was not proportionate as there was contact  between
   the appellant and his son, the best interests of the child were  for  the
   appellant to remain in  the  UK  and  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
   respondent to suggest that the child was not British.

6. Following the respondent's application for permission and  the  grant  of
   permission, the appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 7  June
   2016, with Mr Tufan appearing for the respondent.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Martin agreed with the basis for the grant of permission, namely that the
   judge had engaged in speculation and reversed  the  burden  of  proof  in
   requiring the Secretary of State to establish  that  the  child  and  his
   mother were British.  She therefore set  aside  the  Frist-tier  Tribunal
   Judge's decision. On the basis that the nationality of the  child  was  a
   crucial issue in the appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  adjourned  the
   case in order for efforts  to  be  made  to  obtain  information  on  the
   appellant's son's status.


7. The appeal then came before me.  I  noted  that  Mr  Tufan  had,  in  the
   meantime, emailed the Tribunal confirming from his own enquiries that the
   appellant's former partner and the mother of  his  child  was  a  British
   national.


8. At the hearing before me Mr  Tufan  confirmed  that  the  respondent  now
   accepted that the appellant's son was a British  national.  He  confirmed
   that that was the only issue that had been raised by  the  respondent  in
   this case and that no other challenge had been made by the respondent  to
   the First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing the appeal. On that basis  he
   agreed that the appeal stood to  be  allowed.  I  therefore  allowed  the
   appeal.


9. In view of Mr Tufan's confirmation there is no need  for  me  to  provide
   detailed reasons for allowing  the  appeal.  However,  for  the  sake  of
   completeness, I provide the following brief reasons.


10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hawden-Beal found, at [12]  of  her  decision,
   that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his son
   and that, if his son were proved to be British, it was not reasonable  to
   expect his son to leave the UK. She also accepted, as did the respondent,
   that there was regular contact between the appellant  and  his  son.  The
   only reason for the appellant not being able to meet the requirements  of
   the immigration rules was the fact that it had not been  shown  that  his
   son was a British national. The only challenge to the judge's decision by
   the respondent in the grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  in
   regard to her findings on Article 8 outside the rules.  The  respondent's
   grounds specifically stated at [2] that "the determinative point  is  the
   son's alleged British citizenship".


11. On the basis that  it  is  now  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
   appellant's son is British, and given the other unchallenged findings  of
   the First-tier Tribunal, it is clear that  all  the  requirements  of  E-
   LTRPT.2.2-2.4 and E-LTRPT.3.1-3.2 have been met, for the purposes  of  R-
   LTRPT 1.1.(d)(ii) and  that  paragraph  EX.1  applies.  Accordingly,  the
   appellant has been able to demonstrate that he can meet the  requirements
   of the immigration rules as a parent and  the  appeal  succeeds  on  that
   basis.

DECISION

12. The original Tribunal was found to have made an error of law. I  re-make
   the decision by allowing the appellant's  appeal  under  the  immigration
   rules.










Signed                                           Date 15/08/2016

 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede

