
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03848/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 November 2017                        |On 14 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                               ms tawa tiamiyu
                       (anonymity direction not made)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel, instructed by Greenland Lawyers
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant entered the United Kingdom illegally on 2 June  2007  and
    has remained in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
2.   On 11 September 2015 she applied for leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of private and family life.  She said that she was
    in a relationship with a British partner who also had a  child  in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   Although it was accepted that there  was  a  genuine  relationship  the
    evidence, as presented to the Secretary of State, showed only that they
    had been living as a couple from October 2013 which was not  two  years
    from the date of the application.  Little detail had been  provided  as
    to the status of [M], the child, or the  relationship  with  him.   The
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that the partner had a genuine and
    subsisting parental relationship with the child or indeed  was  related
    to him nor  that  there  were  any  insurmountable  obstacles  or  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration in Nigeria.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin on 7 February 2017.   The
    Judge noted in particular the vagueness of the evidence as  to  contact
    with [M].  The Judge was not satisfied as to the status either  of  [M]
    or of the appellant's partner.  The Judge noted inconsistencies in  the
    evidence as presented by the appellant and by her partner.  He found no
    reason  why  family  life  could  not  be   established   in   Nigeria,
    particularly as the partner was also  of  Nigerian  origin  if  not  of
    Nigerian nationality.

5.    Challenge  was  made  to  the  decision  on  a  number   of   grounds,
    particularly on the basis that neither the appellant  nor  the  sponsor
    had fully understood what was said to them in the course of the hearing
    and that in those  circumstances  it  was  unfair  to  criticise  their
    evidence in the way that the Judge did.

6.   Permission was granted to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant and her sponsor may not have been  fully  understood  in  the
    answers which they gave.

7.   Ms Yong,  who  represents  the  appellant,  submitted  that  given  the
    difficulties which were acknowledged by the Judge, in appellants  being
    able to express themselves it was wrong for the Judge to have proceeded
    with the hearing but in any event some of the conclusions of the  Judge
    arose from misunderstanding of what was said.  She invites me  to  find
    that the proceedings were unfair such as to set aside the decision.

8.   As to the understanding of the sponsor and appellant that  is  set  out
    by the Judge in paragraph 5 of the determination:

         "The Appellant did not request an interpreter either before  or  at
         the hearing and appeared to understand the questions  put  to  her,
         though many of her answers had to be repeated several times  before
         both representatives and I could  be  satisfied  we  had  correctly
         understood  her  answer.   Some  difficulty  was  also  experienced
         understanding the Sponsor but it was clear that the representatives
         were happy to have the answer given again, where necessary,  and  I
         was satisfied that we did all eventually understand what was  being
         said and that both had understood the questions  put.   During  the
         Sponsor's evidence the Appellant appeared more than once orally  to
         prompt/correct the Sponsor's  evidence.   It  was  agreed  with  Mr
         Waheed after the second such occasion that if  the  Sponsor's  oral
         evidence were to have value it would be better for the Appellant to
         wait outside until the Sponsor had completed  his  evidence  -  and
         that course was taken."

9.   It is of significance therefore that at the hearing the  appellant  had
    been represented by Mr Wahid.  It is clear that the Judge  had  careful
    consideration to the way in which questions were answered and consulted
    the  representatives  on  this  issue.   Ms  Yong  sought  to   produce
    supplementary statements from the appellant and sponsor to  the  effect
    that they had experienced some difficulties at the hearing as a  result
    of which answers were not coherent or they could not express themselves
    properly.  It is said that such affected the response to the  questions
    asked.

10.  In the light of that contention I invited Ms Yong to highlight what  it
    was in the evidence that was recorded in the determination,  which  was
    either misunderstood or not fully expressed.  She  contended  that  the
    matter that was of real concern was that in the course of his  evidence
    the sponsor had been asked about [M] and said that social services  had
    become involved  with  him  and  the  matter  was  going  to  court  at
    Camberwell.  That had led the Judge at paragraph 21 to say as follows:

         "The status of [M] remains unclear and the inability of the Sponsor
         to say what the Court  case  concerning  him  was  about  tends  to
         suggest he plays little or no role  in  his  life.   The  differing
         accounts of the Appellant and the Sponsor as to when and how  often
         he sees [M] would be consistent with that  conclusion,  as  is  the
         failure of the Appellant to provide documentary evidence of any  of
         the kinds set out in paragraph 8 of the Home  Office  letter  of  7
         January 2016 confirming contact between the Sponsor  and  [M].   If
         his claim to accompany him to violin school or parents' evenings is
         correct, this should  have  been  very  easy  for  him  to  obtain.
         Furthermore, if [M] regularly stays with him, it is  reasonable  to
         assume that [MO], his Carer, would be happy  to  confirm  this  and
         attend court to answer questions about the role of the  Sponsor  in
         [M]' life but there is no evidence from her and she did not attend.
          The Appellant has not proved, I find, that  his  Sponsor  has  any
         meaningful involvement in the life of  [M],  whose  status  in  the
         United Kingdom also remains unclear.  Whilst it is generally in the
         interests of a child to live with or have regular contact with both
         parents, I am not satisfied  that  the  child's  rights  in  either
         respect are being exercised for his benefit by the Sponsor and  the
         fact that there would appear to be a court case relating to [M]  in
         which Social Services are involved means that  it  is  not  at  all
         clear that  regular  contact  with  the  Sponsor  is  in  the  best
         interests of [M] in any event."


11.  It is suggested on  behalf  of  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  that
    although social services are indeed involved with [M] there is no court
    case and that that was a matter of confusion. Social Services seemingly
    are involved with [M] as to how  he  came  into  the  country.   It  is
    submitted therefore that because mention  was  made  of  a  court  case
    erroneously, such led the Judge to take an adverse view of the  sponsor
    and his contact in the context of the remarks that have been made.

12.  Were that to be the only significant matter then clearly that would  be
    an important matter to look at in terms of the overall fairness of  the
    hearing.  The reality is, as was made clear by the Judge in the passage
    to which reference has been made, there was much more to the  issue  of
    [M] than simply a court case.  There was a lack of any clarification as
    to his status and the Judge, having heard the differing accounts as  to
    contact, did not accept that the evidence as provided  by  the  sponsor
    and appellant was reliable on that aspect.  As the  Judge  made  clear,
    there were other means available to clarify the issue of  contact.   It
    is not suggested that any of the inconsistencies that the  Judge  found
    arose from misunderstanding or from lack of proper interpretation.  The
    status of [M] still remains unclear and  has  not  been  clarified  nor
    indeed has any statement been obtained either from social  services  or
    indeed from his carer.

13.  It is important to understand that this  is  an  application  that  was
    considered by the Judge  in  the  wider  context  of  someone  who  was
    unlawfully present in the United Kingdom. Finding that the evidence  of
    the appellant and the sponsor were full of inconsistencies, credibility
    was doubted on a number of issues.  In particular  it  was  claimed  by
    both the appellant and  the  sponsor,  that  the  sponsor  had  medical
    conditions that required treatment.  Neither seemed to be able to  give
    any detail as to the medications which were required.

14.  It was not found by the Judge that the appellant and the  sponsor  were
    credible as to the account that they gave and particularly her  account
    as to whether or not she worked in the United Kingdom  and  what  links
    she had.

15.   Clearly  it  is  an  important  matter  to  determine   the   parental
    relationship which the sponsor has with [M]. That had not been done  at
    the hearing and there is no suggestion that any lack  of  understanding
    served  to  distort  the  evidence  that  actually  was  presented   or
    contributed to the lack of it.

16.  It is to be noted at paragraph 22 of the  determination  in  particular
    that the appellant's representative confirmed in  their  letter  of  22
    January  2016  that  there  was  no  further  documentary  evidence  of
    cohabitation of her and the sponsor other than that provided  with  the
    application.  Little weight was attached to certain  letters  presented
    for the reasons as set out and the Judge upheld  the  concerns  of  the
    respondent expressed in the decision.  The Judge noted that  there  was
    an assertion that the appellant was "very hardworking" whereas in  fact
    she had not worked at all.  No evidence was provided by the sponsor  as
    to his claimed status nor was any evidence provided as to the status of
    [M].

17.  Apart from the issue as to social  services  and  court  ,Ms  Yong  was
    unable to point me to any other aspect of the evidence as  recorded  by
    the Judge, which could properly and fairly be attributable to a lack of
    understanding or difficulty of expression.   There  was  no  suggestion
    made that what is recorded as not having been said was in fact said  or
    vice versa.

18.  Recognising, as I do, that it is central to  the  hearing  that  it  be
    fair and that all parties understand the questions put and are able  to
    express themselves properly  in  the  answers,  it  would  seem  to  be
    apparent  to  the  Judge  and,  indeed  significantly  to  their  legal
    representative, Mr Waheed, that generally speaking they  were  able  to
    give the evidence which they wanted to and to respond to the  questions
    appropriately.  Nothing has been presented before me today to  indicate
    there  was  any  significant  omission   or   misunderstanding,   which
    contributed to the view of the Judge otherwise than of the misuse it is
    said of the word  'court'.   Even  on  the  basis  of  social  services
    involved with [M] that has not been clarified as to the nature of  that
    interest or indeed of the part played by the sponsor in that process.

19.  Overall the findings of the Judge were properly open to be made  and  I
    do  not  find  that  they   were   significantly   tainted   with   any
    misunderstanding or lack of ability to express.  I find therefore  that
    there was a fair hearing.  In those  circumstances  I  decline  to  set
    matters aside.

20.   In  the  circumstances  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal   is
    dismissed.  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall  stand,
    namely that the appeal of  the  appellant  stands  dismissed  on  human
    rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and in respect of  Human
rights.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed        [pic]
13 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge King









