
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03726/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 8 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                             syed muhammad ishaq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Sheeba Nisar (sponsor/wife)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Syed Muhammad Ishaq, was born on 3 April 1978 and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The  appellant  had  applied  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) Abu Dhabi for entry clearance for settlement as
    the spouse of Mrs Sheeba Nisar (the sponsor) who is a British  citizen.
    By a decision dated 7 August 2015, the  ECO  refused  the  application.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Eban)  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 4 January 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that this appeal should be allowed.  It is common ground between
    the parties that the appellant and sponsor could not  meet  the  income
    requirements of HC 395.  The judge, in a thorough decision,  considered
    that, although the income threshold could not be crossed at the date of
    the application, it was likely that, by the time the case  came  before
    him, the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the  necessary  requirements.
    Notwithstanding  that  fact,  he  considered  it  appropriate  for  the
    appellant to make a further application.  At [15], the judge considered
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the
    best interests of the two children of the sponsor and  appellant.   The
    children had lived all their lives in the  United  Kingdom.   They  are
    still quite young, having been born in January 2011 and  December  2012
    respectively.  They are separated from their father, the appellant, and
    see him only when they visit Pakistan.  The judge concluded  [16]  that
    it was in the best interests of the children to stay living with  their
    mother in whatever country she happened to be  living.   At  [18],  the
    judge considered whether it would be  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the family life of the  appellant  and  children  and  sponsor  to
    refuse entry clearance on these facts.  He anticipated there  would  be
    no lengthy  separation  since  any  application  would  be  dealt  with
    "promptly and allowed."  The judge also noted [19] that  the  appellant
    is an educated professional man (a doctor).

 3. I do not for one moment suggest that the judge erred in law by  failing
    to anticipate that, as has transpired, a further  application  made  by
    the appellant for entry clearance has been refused.  I was told at  the
    hearing that the refusal was based on a failure to supply the necessary
    documents.  However, the appellant claims  to  have  sent  in  all  the
    necessary documents which appear to  have  been  mislaid  by  the  ECO.
    There is the prospect of a further very  lengthy  appeal  process  and,
    very significantly, an extension of the  separation  of  the  appellant
    from his family, in particular his children.

 4. None of that is the responsibility of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    However, I do consider that this is a  case  where  the  judge  should,
    given the particular facts,  have  allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.  The sponsor and the children are  British  citizens  and  the
    children have lived all their lives in this country.  Whilst there  are
    no  impossible  obstacles  preventing  family  life  taking  place   in
    Pakistan, it was not open to the judge to  conclude  that  family  life
    could take place in any jurisdiction other  than  the  United  Kingdom.
    Given that factor and considering also that, by  the  time  the  appeal
    reached the First-tier Tribunal, it was clear that  the  appellant  was
    able to meet all the requirements of HC 395, I consider that the  judge
    should have reached a different outcome.  The  best  interests  of  the
    children do not "trump" all other considerations but,  whilst  I  agree
    with the judge that a primary interest of the  children  is  to  remain
    with their mother, another very important interest can only be  met  by
    terminating the lengthy separation of these children from their natural
    father.  On the very particular circumstances before  the  Tribunal,  I
    find that the judge erred in law and I set aside his decision.  In  the
    light of my observations set out above,  I  have  remade  the  decision
    allowing the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.



Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  4
    January 2017 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal  is
    allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 28 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

