
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03856/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2020                   |On 28 February 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  Tuan [N]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Haris Ali
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. THE APPELLANT'S HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam, born in 1988.  He claims to have
    entered the United Kingdom illegally in May 2014,  via  Dover.   On  16
    June 2016, he made an application for leave to remain.   The  appellant
    contended that he resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his  British
    partner, Dung [N], and had done so since July 2014.  The appellant said
    that he and his partner had a child, who is a British citizen, born  on
    30 December 2015.

 2. On 15 February 2017,  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim.  The respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner was genuine and subsisting.  Although the
    appellant said he had resided in the United Kingdom with his partner in
    a relationship  akin  to  marriage  since  July  2014,  the  respondent
    considered the appellant had failed to provide sufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that assertion.  Furthermore, the appellant had  not  shown
    that he had been living together with the  partner  for  at  least  two
    years prior to  the  date  of  application,  contrary  to  GEN.1.2.  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

 3. The respondent also considered that the appellant had failed to provide
    sufficient evidence to demonstrate that he had a genuine and subsisting
    parental relationship with the child or that he played an  active  role
    in her upbringing.  The respondent said  that  the  appellant  had  not
    explained why he would not be available at any time to look  after  the
    child,  who  was  being  looked  after  by  a  childminder,  under   an
    arrangement  with  the  mother.   There  was  no  indication  that  the
    appellant had been present during healthcare  visits  relating  to  the
    child.  In any event, if the appellant had to leave the United Kingdom,
    there was nothing to indicate that the child will also have to do so.



B. THE DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  the  refusal
    of his human rights claim.  The appeal was heard  at  Taylor  House  in
    April 2018 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger.  On that occasion,  the
    appellant was  represented  by  Counsel.   No  Presenting  Officer  was
    present on behalf of the respondent.

 5. The judge noted a DNA report, which showed that there was no  realistic
    doubt that the appellant was the father of the  child.   The  appellant
    attended and gave oral evidence, as did his  partner.   The  child  was
    also present.

 6. The appellant told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that they had  had  to
    get a childminder "as he did not feel able to cope with the  duties  of
    looking after a young child".  The appellant's partner  said  that  she
    came to the United  Kingdom  in  2002.   Her  daughter  was  a  British
    citizen.  The partner produced  her  passport,  showing  that  she  had
    visited  Vietnam  in  2012,  2015,  2016  and  twice  in   2017.    She
    nevertheless felt that she could not live there anymore.   The  weather
    made her feel sick.

 7. Having set out the relevant  caselaw,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    proceeded to a consideration of the evidence.  The judge concluded that
    the appellant was the father of the child and that  he  did,  in  fact,
    have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  her.   This  was
    evidenced by the DNA report of 13 March 2018, as well as being  evident
    "from seeing the appellant and the young child" at court.

 8. Although the appellant's partner had been granted asylum, there was  no
    evidence that she had suffered any difficulties on return  to  Vietnam,
    such that it would be unreasonable or unsafe to expect her  to  return,
    if the appellant were removed.

 9. Turning to the position of the child, the judge was satisfied  that  it
    was in her best interests to remain in the care of  both  her  parents.
    Given her young age and that she was fully dependent  on  her  parents,
    the judge concluded that it would not be adverse to her best  interests
    for her to leave the United Kingdom in order  to  join  her  family  in
    Vietnam.  On the contrary, it was reasonable to expect her  to  do  so.
    The parents had a choice of whether the  family  unit  would  join  the
    appellant in Vietnam.  The "fact of British citizenship is not a  trump
    card", the judge found, although  it  was  "an  important  and  weighty
    factor to be taken into consideration".  The judge reiterated that  the
    best interests of the child were to remain with her parents.  Both  had
    ties to Vietnam and a knowledge of Vietnamese culture.

10. At paragraph 49 of her decision,  the  judge  began  an  assessment  by
    reference to Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  The judge held that, pursuant to section 117B,  the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner was established at a time when he was  in
    the United Kingdom unlawfully.  Little weight, therefore,  fell  to  be
    attached to that relationship.  The judge made no reference to  section
    117B(6), in which it is stated that in a case of a person  who  is  not
    liable to  deportation,  the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
    person's removal where he/she has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.  It is, however, apparent
    from what we have recorded at paragraph 9 above that  the  judge  would
    not have found section 117B(6) assisted the appellant.

11. The  judge  applied  Chikwamba  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 40.  The judge found that  the  appellant  could
    not show that it would cause undue hardship or be  disproportionate  to
    expect the appellant to return to Vietnam to make  an  application  for
    entry clearance, if his family chose  not  to  accompany  him  to  that
    country.  Having considered all the relevant circumstances,  the  judge
    was not satisfied that the appellant had  proved  "that  any  temporary
    separation will interfere disproportionately with his protected  rights
    or that of others.  His partner can still  work  and  can  arrange  for
    alternative childcare in the UK and she can choose whether to accompany
    the appellant whilst he makes the application to join them"  (paragraph
    59).

12. The judge dismissed the human rights appeal.



C.  SUBSEQUENT EVENTS

13. Permission to appeal against the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    was sought by the appellant's solicitors in  May  2018.   The  grounds,
    which the solicitors compiled, submitted that the judge's  findings  as
    to ties with Vietnam were characterised by speculation  and  failed  to
    give any weight to the sponsor's evidence as to why  she  had  returned
    regularly to Vietnam.  It was submitted that, cumulatively, the factors
    tipped the balance in favour of the appellant.   The  relevant  factors
    included the  genuine  relationships  between  the  appellant  and  his
    daughter and partner.

14. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  in  August
    2018.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal
    themselves  described  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  as
    "carefully crafted".  The First-tier Tribunal agreed,  concluding  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings were clearly open to her.

15. A renewed application was made to the Upper Tribunal for permission  to
    appeal.  The grounds were, in essence, the same as  those  put  to  and
    rejected by the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In refusing permission to appeal, the Upper Tribunal Judge stated  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  considered  the  evidence  with  the
    required degree of anxious scrutiny.  The grounds of  challenge  failed
    to establish that the findings of the judge were in any way  irrational
    or contrary to the evidence.  They  were  within  the  range  of  those
    reasonably open to the judge on the evidence.

17. The appellant sought a judicial review of the Upper Tribunal's  refusal
    to grant permission to appeal.  In these grounds, for the  first  time,
    the appellant raised the issue of the respondent's policy: Family  Life
    (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life (22 February 2018).  This was
    the policy in force at the date of the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  In it, we find the following:-

         "Would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?"

         If the effect of refusal of the application would be, or is  likely
         to be, that the child would have to leave  the  UK,  the  decision-
         maker must go on to consider whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the UK.

         ...

         Where the child is a British citizen

         Where the child is a British citizen, it would not be reasonable to
         expect them to leave the UK with the applicant  parent  or  primary
         carer facing removal.  Accordingly, where this means that the child
         would have to leave the UK because, in  practice,  the  child  will
         not, or is not likely to, continue to live in the UK  with  another
         parent or primary carer, EX.1.(a) is likely to apply.

         In particular circumstances, it may be  appropriate  to  refuse  to
         grant leave to a parent or primary carer where their conduct  gives
         rise to public interest considerations of such weight as to justify
         their removal, where the British citizen child could remain in  the
         UK with another parent or  alternative  primary  carer,  who  is  a
         British citizen or settled in the UK or who has or has been granted
         leave to remain.  The  circumstances  envisaged  include  those  in
         which to grant leave could undermine our immigration controls,  for
         example the  applicant  has  committed  significant  or  persistent
         criminal offences falling below the thresholds of  deportation  set
         out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules or has  a  very  poor
         immigration history, having repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached
         the Immigration Rules..."

18. On 8 February 2019, the High Court granted permission to bring judicial
    review.  The High Court's observations were as follows:-

         "(1) It is at least arguable that the First-tier Tribunal  made  an
             error of law in failing to take into account the Secretary  of
             State's policy that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
             child who is a British citizen to leave the UK  together  with
             the claimant, and that  such  error  infected  the  Tribunal's
             consideration of the arguments under Article 8 ECHR.

         (2)  While the point  was  not  properly  taken  before  the  Upper
             Tribunal, it is arguable that permission to appeal should have
             been granted.

         (3)  There is a compelling reason to grant permission to apply  for
             judicial review given the extremity  of  the  consequences  of
             refusal upon the claimant and his family."

19. Subsequent to the grant of permission, the Upper Tribunal's refusal  of
    permission to appeal was quashed.

20. Following the proceedings in the High Court, the Vice President of  the
    Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) granted  permission  to
    appeal, by reference to the grounds of application  placed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  These grounds, of course,  did  not  raise  any  issue
    concerning the respondent's policy.



D.  PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

21. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 31 October 2019, Mr Wilford
    of Counsel appeared on behalf of  the  appellant.   After  hearing  his
    submissions, and those of Mr Bramble for  the  respondent,  the  Upper
    Tribunal concluded that it  was  appropriate  to  grant  the  appellant
    permission to amend his grounds of  appeal,  in  order  to  enable  the
    Tribunal to consider the obligation on a judge  to  have  regard  to  a
    published policy of the respondent, which has not  been  drawn  to  the
    judge's attention.

22. The amendment to the grounds was in the following terms:-

         "In the particular circumstances of this case, it was an  error  of
         law by the First-tier Tribunal to  fail  to  take  into  account  a
         policy not  relied  by  the  appellant  and  not  produced  by  the
         Secretary of State.

         That error of  law  means  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal should be set aside because, if the  judge  had  not  made
         that error, the outcome of the appeal might have been different and
         the decision in the appeal ought to be re-made in  the  appellant's
         favour because, notwithstanding any change in the  relevant  policy
         and/or clarification of the law, it would  be  disproportionate  to
         require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom."

23. The present relevant policy is contained in Family life (as  a  Partner
    or Parent), Private Life and Exceptional Circumstances) Version 5.0:

         "Is it reasonable for the child to leave the UK?

         Where you decide that the answer to this first stage is yes  -there
         is a genuine and subsisting relationship  to  a  child,  then  they
         (sic) must go on to consider secondly, whether, taking into account
         the child's best  interests  as  a  primary  consideration,  it  is
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  In  doing  so  you
         must  carefully  consider  all  the  information  provided  by  the
         applicant, together with any other relevant factor and  information
         of which you are aware.

         In  accordance  with  the  findings  in  the  case  of  AB  Jamaica
         (Secretary of State for the Home Department v AB (Jamaica)  &  Anor
         [2019] EWCA Civ 661), consideration of whether it is reasonable  to
         expect a child to leave the UK must  be  undertaken  regardless  of
         whether the child is actually expected to leave the UK.

         The  starting  point  is  that  we  would  not  normally  expect  a
         qualifying child to leave the UK.  It is normally in a child's best
         interest for the whole family to remain together,  which  means  if
         the child is not expected to leave, then the parent or  parents  or
         primary carer of the child will also not be expected to  leave  the
         UK.

         In the caselaw of  KO  and  Others  2018  UKSC53,  with  particular
         reference to the case of NS (Sri Lanka), the  Supreme  Court  found
         that "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real-world context
         in which the child  finds  themselves.   The  parents'  immigration
         status  is  a  relevant  fact  to  establish  that  context.    The
         determination sets out that if a child's parents are both  expected
         to leave the UK, the child is normally expected to leave with them,
         unless there is evidence that that it would not be reasonable.

         This assessment must take into account the child's  best  interests
         as a primary consideration.

         You must carefully consider all the relevant points raised  in  the
         application and carefully assess any evidence provided.   Decisions
         must not  be  taken  simply  on  the  basis  of  the  application's
         assertions  about  the  child,  but  rather  on  the  basis  of  an
         examination of all the evidence  provided.   All  relevant  factors
         need to be assessed in the round.

         There  may  be  some  specific  circumstances  where  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the qualifying child to leave the UK with  the
         parent(s).  In deciding such  cases  you  must  consider  the  best
         interests of the child and the facts relating to the  family  as  a
         whole. You should also consider any specific issues raised  by  the
         family or by, or on behalf of the child (or other children  in  the
         family).

         It may be reasonable for a qualifying child to leave  the  UK  with
         the parent or primary carer where for example:

         .    the parent or parents, or child, are a citizen of the  country
             and so able to enjoy the full rights of  being  a  citizen  in
             that country

         .     there  is  nothing  in  any  country  specific   information,
             including as contained in relevant country  information  which
             suggests that relocation would be unreasonable

         .    the parent or parents or child have existing  family,  social,
             or cultural ties with the  country  and  if  there  are  wider
             family or relationships with  friends  or  community  overseas
             that can provide support:

             o    you must consider  the  extent  to  which  the  child  is
                  dependent on or requires support from wider family members
                  in the UK in important areas  of  their  life  and  how  a
                  transition to similar support overseas would affect them

             o    a person who has extended family or a network of  friends
                  in the country should be able to rely on them for  support
                  to help (re)integrate there

             o    parent or parents or a child who have lived in or visited
                  the country before for periods of more than a  few  weeks.
                  should be better able to adapt, or the parent  or  parents
                  would be able to support the child in adapting, to life in
                  the country

             o    you must consider any evidence of exposure  to,  and  the
                  level of understanding  of,  the  cultural  norms  of  the
                  country

             o    for example, a period of  time  spent  living  amongst  a
                  diaspora from the country may give a child an awareness of
                  the culture of the country

             o    the parents or child can  speak,  read  and  write  in  a
                  language of that country, or are likely  to  achieve  this
                  within a reasonable time period



             o    fluency  is  not  required  -an  ability  to  communicate
                  competently with sympathetic interlocutors would  normally
                  suffice

         .    removal would not give rise  to  a  significant  risk  to  the
             child's health

         .    there are no other specific factors raised by or on behalf  of
             the child

         The parents' situation is a relevant fact to consider  in  deciding
         whether they themselves and therefore, their child is  expected  to
         leave the UK.  Where both parents are expected to leave the UK, the
         natural expectation is that the child would go with them and  leave
         the UK, and that expectation would be reasonable unless  there  are
         factors or evidence that means it would not be reasonable."



E.  DISCUSSION

24. For the appellant, Mr Dhanji relied heavily  upon  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision in SF and Others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT
    120 (IAC).  The italic words preceding the reported  decision  read  as
    follows:-

         "Even in the absence of a "not in accordance with the  law"  ground
         of appeal, the Tribunal ought to  take  the  Secretary  of  State's
         guidance into account if it points clearly to a particular  outcome
         in the instant case.  Only in that way can consistency be  obtained
         between those cases that do, and those  cases  that  do  not,  come
         before the Tribunal."

25. In SF, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had not been  persuaded  that  the
    child of the appellant and his partner was a British  citizen.   Before
    the Upper Tribunal, it was common ground that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision on that issue was wrong.  The child was British.

26. At paragraph 7 of the Upper Tribunal's decision, it was  recorded  that
    Mr Wilding, the Senior Presenting Officer appearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, drew its attention to an important guidance  document.   This
    was the Instruction entitled "Family life (as a Partner or Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10 Year Routes", from the edition of August 2015.  It was
    a policy in force at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  and
    decision.

27. The policy stated that, where a decision to refuse an application would
    require a parent or primary carer to return to a  country  outside  the
    EU, "the case must always be assessed on the basis  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to  leave  the  EU  with
    that parent or primary carer".

28. The Upper Tribunal concluded as follows:-

         "9.  It appears to us inevitable that if the guidance to  which  Mr
             Wilding has drawn  our  attention  had  been  applied  to  the
             present family, at any time after it was published, and on the
             basis that the  youngest  child  is  a  British  citizen,  the
             conclusion would have been that  the  appellants  should  have
             been granted a period of leave in order to enable the  British
             citizen child to remain in the United Kingdom with them.   The
             question is then whether that guidance  as  guidance  has  any
             impact on the First-tier Tribunal or on us.
         10.  It is clear that the appellants do not have available to  them
             a ground of appeal on the basis that the decision was  not  in
             accordance with the law such as before the amendments made  to
             the  2002  Act  by  the  2014  Act  they   might   have   had.
             Nevertheless it appears to us that the terms of  the  guidance
             are an important source of the Secretary of  State's  view  of
             what is to be regarded as reasonable in the circumstances, and
             it is important in our judgement  for  the  Tribunal  at  both
             levels to make  decisions  which  are,  as  far  as  possible,
             consistent with decisions made in other areas of  the  process
             of immigration control.
         11.  If the Secretary of State  makes  a  decision  in  a  person's
             favour on the basis of guidance of this  sort,  there  can  of
             course be no appeal, and the result will be that the  decision
             falls below the radar of consideration by a Tribunal.   It  is
             only possible for Tribunals to make decisions on matters  such
             as reasonableness consistently with those that are being  made
             in favour of individuals by the  Secretary  of  State  if  the
             Tribunal applies  similar  or  identical  processes  to  those
             employed by the Secretary of State.
         12.  On occasion, perhaps where it has more  information  than  the
             Secretary of State had or might have had, or perhaps if a case
             is exceptional, the Tribunal may find a reason  for  departing
             from such guidance.  But where there is clear  guidance  which
             covers a case where an assessment has to be  made,  and  where
             the guidance clearly demonstrates  what  the  outcome  of  the
             assessment would have been made by the Secretary of State,  it
             would, we think, be the normal practice for  the  Tribunal  to
             take such guidance into account and to apply it  in  assessing
             the same consideration in a case that came before it.
         13.  In our judgement, therefore, the way forward in this  case  is
             to conclude that, not for the reasons argued by Mr Eaton,  but
             for those, as it happens, argued by Mr Wilding, this is a case
             where it would be unreasonable to expect the youngest child to
             leave the United Kingdom.  We will  therefore  set  aside  the
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute a  decision
             allowing the appeals of all three appellants on  that  ground.
             The period of leave is  a  matter  to  be  determined  by  the
             Secretary of State."
29. Before us, Mr Dhanji submitted that SF, as a reported decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, should have been in the mind of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge in the present case.  Although Mr Dhanji did not go so far as  to
    say that any policy of the respondent should be known to  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, the policy concerning the reasonableness  or  otherwise
    of a British citizen child being expected to leave the  United  Kingdom
    was sufficiently well-known and encountered in practice  in  First-tier
    Tribunal appeals, that it should have been taken into  account  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, once the latter had concluded  (contrary  to
    the position of the respondent in the  letter  of  decision)  that  the
    appellant did have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    daughter.

30. There is nothing in the Upper Tribunal's decision in SF  that  suggests
    First-tier Tribunal Judges are expected  to  know  every  provision  of
    published Home  Office  policy  (not  being  contained  in  Immigration
    Rules), whether or not it is drawn to their  attention.   Although  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  is  a  specialist   tribunal,   it   is   plainly
    unreasonable to expect its judges to  carry  such  an  awesome  burden,
    given the  extensive  and  fast-changing  nature  of  the  respondent's
    policies,  whether  contained  in  Instructions   to   caseworkers   or
    otherwise.

31. Mr Dhanji, is, of course, right to point to the particular issue  which
    we are concerned;  namely,  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  British
    citizen children to leave the United Kingdom, as one  which  frequently
    arises in human rights appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.  The fact of
    the  matter  is,  however,  that  there  is  enormous   potential   for
    uncertainty if we were to accept Mr Dhanji's invitation to find that it
    was an error of law for the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  the  present
    case not to be aware of, and have  regard  to,  the  "British  citizen"
    child policy, as it was at the date of  the  hearing.  There  would  be
    bound to be differing views as to which policies are so  well-known  as
    to impose a legal duty on a judge to know of them, whether or not their
    existence is drawn to the judge's attention.    To  venture  down  that
    path would,  therefore,  threaten  the  important  principle  of  legal
    certainty.

32. There is strong authority for the proposition that a party  who  wishes
    to rely upon the terms of a policy of the respondent in the immigration
    sphere must establish the terms of that policy.  In SS (Jurisdiction  -
    Rule 62(7); Refugees family; Policy) Somalia [2005]  UKAIT  00167,  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal was concerned with the ways in which  a
    policy, said to bear upon  an  individual's  case,  might  assist  that
    individual in an appeal.  At that time, one of the grounds on which  an
    appeal fell to be allowed was where the Tribunal Judge found  that  the
    respondent's decision was "not in accordance with the law".   The  fact
    that the failure to have regard to a relevant policy  could  constitute
    such a decision was recognised by the Court of Appeal in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Abdi (DS) [1996] Imm AR 148.

33. At paragraph 28  of  its  determination,  the  AIT  observed  that  the
    respondent can publish a policy, pursuant to  her  "general  dispensing
    power", which  is  more  generous  than  the  policy  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  In such a case, a person might be able  to  contend
    that he/she falls within the ambit of the policy and  that  an  adverse
    decision was, therefore, "not in accordance with the law".

34. The AIT was in no doubt as to the primary burden on such a person:-

         "29. The first task for such a claimant would be to  establish  the
             terms of the policy at any relevant date.   If  he  cannot  do
             that readily, he may have  some  difficulty  in  showing  that
             there was a published policy in the sense  intended  by  Peter
             Gibson LJ in Abdi,  In any event, as we have indicated, it may
             not be easy to show whether a policy currently available  (for
             example, on the IND website) is relevant to  the  decision  in
             question."

35. In AG and Others (Policies; executive  discretion;  Tribunal's  powers)
    Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082, the AIT,  in  a  penetrating  decision  that
    repays  careful  reading,  explored  the   relationship   between   the
    respondent's policies and her obligations under the  Human  Rights  Act
    1998.  At paragraph 50 of its decision, the AIT was in no doubt that it
    was for "the claimant" to prove:-

         "...  the  precise  terms  of  the  policy,  which  ...  creates  a
         presumption, on the facts of his case, in favour of granting leave,
         and ... there is either nothing at all to displace the presumption,
         or  nothing  that  under  the  terms  of  the  policy,  falls   for
         consideration."

36. Although we find that  SS  and  AG  continue  to  represent  the  legal
    position, it is important to make the following points.  First, a judge
    might wish to bring to the attention of the parties,  at  the  hearing,
    the existence of a potentially relevant policy, of which the  judge  is
    aware.  It will then be necessary to establish the precise terms of the
    policy, as then in force, before the parties are given the  opportunity
    of considering its relevance and making any relevant submissions.

37. Secondly, as happened before the Upper Tribunal in SF, the respondent's
    Presenting Officer has a professional responsibility  to  draw  to  the
    attention of the judge any policy of which the officer is aware,  which
    he/she considers benefits the appellant.

38.  Helpful  judicial  behaviour  and  a   representative's   professional
    responsibilities towards the Tribunal are not, however, to be  confused
    with the issue of whether a judge  commits  an  error  of  law  in  the
    circumstances with which we are concerned.

39. Section 117B(6) is declaratory of the public interest question  in  the
    circumstances in which it operates.  Where it applies, section  117B(6)
    will normally be determinative of an Article 8 appeal because, whatever
    view a judge may take of whether Article 8 would otherwise be violated,
    in the circumstances of the particular case Parliament has decreed that
    it does not consider there to be a public interest in removal.  It  is,
    accordingly, immaterial whether, on the  facts  of  the  case,  section
    117B(6) mandates an outcome which  is  more  generous  than  Article  8
    demands.

40. The respondent's published policy regarding what she  considers  to  be
    reasonable, or otherwise, is, thus,  of  particular  significance.  The
    respondent is charged by Parliament with enforcing immigration controls
    under the Immigration Acts.  If a person can show that a relevant child
    is covered by the policy, so that it would in the respondent's view  be
    unreasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom, then the public
    interest question is resolved in that person's favour.  Conversely,  if
    the  application  of  the  respondent's  policy   produces   a   result
    unfavourable to the appellant, it will be necessary  for  the  judicial
    decision-maker to determine whether  that  result  is  compatible  with
    Article 8.

41. For the reasons we have given, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  the
    present case did not commit an error of law by failing to  have  regard
    to the respondent's policy, as then in force.  The appellant's Counsel,
    at the hearing, did not draw  the  judge's  attention  to  the  policy.
    Given it was the appellant's case that - contrary to  the  respondent's
    position - the appellant did have a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with a qualifying child, one would have expected Counsel to  have  been
    prepared to put to  the  judge  the  consequences  of  finding  in  the
    appellant's favour on  this  issue.   Since  there  was  no  Presenting
    Officer before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the latter  could  expect
    no assistance from the respondent in that regard.

42. Even if the First-tier Tribunal Judge had been aware of,  and  applied,
    the policy, in the version published on 22  February  2018,  the  judge
    would manifestly have reached the same conclusion.  Under the  question
    "Would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?", we  have
    seen that the policy required consideration of whether  the  effect  of
    refusal would be likely to result in the  child  having  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  As we now are aware, that  test  does  not  accurately
    describe the effect of section 117B(6)(b): see AB (Jamaica)  (paragraph
    23 above).  That fact is, however, immaterial, insofar as concerns  the
    challenge based on the failure of the judge to have regard to and apply
    the terms of the policy which existed at the date of her decision.   In
    view of the findings of the judge, it is clear that she did not  regard
    it likely the appellant's child would have to leave the United Kingdom.
     The thrust of the last part of the judge's decision is plainly to  the
    effect that the likely scenario would be that the child and her  mother
    would remain in the United Kingdom  while  the  appellant  returned  to
    Vietnam to make an entry clearance application.

43. But even if we are wrong, and the Upper Tribunal had to set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge because  the  application  of
    the then-extant policy  may  have  led  to  a  different  outcome,  the
    question for the re-making of the decision is whether,  as  at  today's
    date, requiring the appellant to leave the United Kingdom, or enforcing
    his removal, would violate Article 8 of the ECHR.

44. In answering that question, it is the present policy of the  respondent
    which requires to be considered.  As we have seen, that policy reflects
    the law as described in AB (Jamaica).  It identifies the starting point
    as one where the respondent "would not normally expect to a  qualifying
    child to leave the  UK".   Nevertheless,  the  list  of  bullet  points
    describing where it "may be reasonable for a qualifying child to  leave
    the UK with the parent or primary carer" is  clearly  relevant  in  the
    present case.  In the light of (i) the detailed findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge regarding the ability  of  the  appellant  and  his
    partner to return to Vietnam; (ii) the absence of any  indication  that
    it would be unreasonable for them  to  do  so;  (iii)  the  absence  of
    evidence that removal would pose a  significant  risk  to  the  child's
    health; and (iv) the fact there are no other specific factors raised by
    or on behalf of the child,  the  present  policy  does  not  avail  the
    appellant.  In so finding, we have  had  regard  to  the  supplementary
    witness statements of the appellant and  his  partner,  dated  November
    2019.

45. Furthermore, applying the policy in this way does not, we find, lead to
    a disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8  rights.
    The present policy, as a general matter,  does  not  adopt  a  position
    which is likely to bring it into conflict with Article 8; certainly not
    in the appellant's case.

46. Although it has not featured as a ground of challenge at any point,  we
    should say the following about the "Zambrano" issue.  As we have  seen,
    a much earlier version of the "British child" policy suggested that  it
    would be contrary to the principle in Zambrano [2012] QB 265 to  expect
    a British child to leave the United Kingdom and the EU.  The  issue  in
    Zambrano  is,  however,  separate  from  the  issue  that   falls   for
    consideration in section 117B(6).  The issue in section 117B(6)  is  to
    be determined on the hypothesis that the child would leave  the  United
    Kingdom: AB (Jamaica).  By contrast, the issue of whether a child would
    be deprived of his or her rights stemming from EU citizenship is to  be
    determined by reference to whether, in actual fact, the child would  be
    compelled to leave.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain an  error  on
a point of law.  The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


                           Signed                     Date 24 February 2020


                           The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                           President of the Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber





