
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/03253/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 6 October 2017                      |       On 16 October 2017           |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                           Ms Debbie-Ann Beckford
                       (anonymity directiON NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Telford promulgated on 16 January 2017.  The appellant is a national of
    Jamaica who claims she cannot return there as to do so would amount  to
    an infringement of her right to private  and  family.  Her  appeal  was
    dismissed.

2.   The grounds of appeal are  handwritten  and  make  complaint  that  the
    judge failed to apply established jurisprudence regarding Article 8 and
    did not give proper weight to relevant features when making the Article
    8 assessment.

3.   When granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Martin said this:

         "Although the appellant should not be overconfident of  success  in
         her appeal I am granting permission to appeal because the  Decision
         and Reasons is devoid of any reasoning or findings."

4.   There is  a  Rule  24  statement  which  states  in  summary  that  the
    Secretary of State  will  submit  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    directed themself appropriately.  The judge had regard to the  evidence
    presented to the  Tribunal  consisting  of  a  bullet  point  document,
    witness statements and other evidence.  The judge  does  not  make  any
    findings of credibility but merely says  that  the  appellant  has  not
    adduced evidence which would enable her  claim  to  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  There has been  no  challenge  to  the  appellant's
    immigration history and so the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    appellant was an economic and social migrant.

5.   The appellant has not attended today, and there is  no  record  of  any
    communication with the Tribunal as to why she is  not  here.   She  has
    solicitors on record, namely Samuel Louis of 17 Deptford Church Street,
    London SE8 4RX.

6.   Mr Tarlow invited me to hear the appeal  in  the  appellant's  absence.
    Placing reliance on the content of the Rule 24  statement,  he  further
    invited me to dismiss  the  appeal.   However,  entirely  properly,  Mr
    Tarlow submitted that the findings at paragraphs 7, 8  and  9  are  not
    such that the appellant is able to know the reason why her  appeal  was
    dismissed.  He is right. Those findings are gossamer thin.

7.   Justice requires this Tribunal to consider both the grounds  of  appeal
    and the Robinson obvious point that the judge's reasoning  is  woefully
    inadequate. Even though the appellant is  not  here  to  prosecute  her
    claim, nor  is  she  represented,  the  Upper  Tribunal's  duty  is  to
    scrutinise the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   Paragraphs 7, 8 and 9 are so lacking  in  substance  that  an  informed
    reader (particularly a party) cannot be satisfied that the  judge  gave
    the matter proper consideration. I am not even sure the judge  properly
    identified the issues in paragraph 5.

9.   I find myself in agreement with Mr Tarlow as to  the  quality  of  this
    decision. The easy option would be to conclude that  as  the  Appellant
    has not turned up to prosecute her appeal, any  error  of  law  can  be
    considered not to be material and that there was, in the  documentation
    before the First-tier Tribunal,  sufficient  material  to  justify  the
    findings to which the judge came. But it is not for the Upper  Tribunal
    to repair decisions of the First-tier Tribunal  decisions  where  there
    has been a wholesale failure of the judicial process.

10.  The appellant is entitled to have had her  appeal  properly  considered
    by the  First-tier  Tribunal.  That  has  been  denied  her.  In  those
    circumstances justice requires that I set aside the decision and  remit
    the appeal to be reheard by a  judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Telford. There is a distinct likelihood that the outcome  may  be
    precisely the same.  There  will  be  inconvenience  and  cost  to  the
    parties, but sometimes there is a price to be  paid  for  fairness  and
    justice.
11.  However, I am anxious not to waste the time of the First-tier  Tribunal
    if, in reality, the appellant has effectively abandoned her appeal.  My
    decision not to adjourn today for her to attend  was  a  pragmatic  one
    because on any reading, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  had  to  be
    set aside  and  the  matter  reheard.  I  therefore  propose  making  a
    direction that unless the appellant confirms in writing within 21  days
    that she wishes to continue  with  her  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal it shall be deemed struck out.

Notice of Decision

   1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
      set aside.


   2) The matter is remitted to be reheard by a Judge other than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Telford.


   3) Unless the appellant with within 21 days of the promulgation  of  this
      decision  confirms in writing that she wishes  to  continue  with  her
      appeal in the First-tier Tribunal, it shall be  deemed  to  be  struck
      out.


   4) No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     13 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC






