

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/03148/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6th February 2018                       |On 12th February 2018          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AC
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. Sellwood, instructed by Fadiga & Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Andonian promulgated on 28th November 2017 in which he
       allowed the appeal against the decision served by  the  Secretary  of
       State on 13th February 2017, to refuse a human rights claim  made  by
       AC.


    2. The appellant in the appeal before us is the Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department and the respondent to this appeal is AC.  However
       for ease of reference, in the course of this determination  we  shall
       adopt the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  We shall in this
       determination, refer to AC as the appellant,  and  the  Secretary  of
       State as the respondent.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order  and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.   We  emphasise  at
       the outset that no report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the appellant and his daughter.


    4. At the conclusion of the hearing before us, we announced that in our
       judgement, the decision of the FtT is infected by a  material  error
       of law and the decision of the FtT Judge is set aside.  We  directed
       that the matter is to be remitted to the FtT  for  hearing  de  novo
       with no findings preserved.  We said that we would give the  reasons
       for our decision in writing.  This we now do.


    5. It is useful to begin by setting  out  a  summary  of  the  relevant
       factual background.  The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Trinidad  and
       Tobago.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom with entry clearance
       as a visitor in January 2002. He then joined the British  Army,  and
       was granted leave to remain outside the immigration rules until 12th
       March 2011 or when his army service finished. He was discharged from
       the army in May 2008, and following an application made in May 2011,
       he was granted discretionary leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
       until 20th June 2014.


    6. In January 2014, the appellant was convicted  at  Snaresbrook  Crown
       Court of inflicting grievous bodily harm. On 1st August 2014, he was
       sentenced to an 18-month sentence of  imprisonment.  The  respondent
       seeks to deport the appellant and to that end, applying paragraph  A
       362 and paragraphs A398 to 399D of the immigration rules,  concluded
       that the appellant is unable to meet the  family  and  private  life
       exception to deportation.  The respondent concluded that  there  are
       no compelling circumstances which outweigh the  public  interest  in
       seeing the appellant deported, either on Article 8 or Article 3 ECHR
       grounds.


    7. The appellant relies upon the family life that he has with his three
       children in the UK, a son ("KC") born on 1st  October  2000,  a  son
       ("ACC"), and a daughter ("JC") born on 26th January 2014.  All three
       children are British citizens.  The focus before the FtT and  before
       us was the family life between the appellant and his daughter JC.


    8. The decision of the FtT Judge spans  some  117  paragraphs  over  25
       pages.  Before us, Mr Sellwood  candidly  accepts,  rightly  in  our
       judgement, that the decision of the FtT Judge could have  been  more
       structured and clearer.  There is no clear structure to the decision
       and even from a careful reading of the decision, it is difficult  to
       discern the evidence that the Judge was  considering,  the  findings
       that he made, and the conclusions that he reached.


    9. At paragraph [92], the Judge notes that there was one key  issue  in
       the appeal.  That is, whether the appellant's  deportation  breaches
       section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.   At  paragraph  [94],  the
       Judge records that the only matter in issue is whether it  would  be
       unduly harsh for the  appellant's  daughter  to  remain  in  the  UK
       without the appellant.


   10. At paragraph [104] of his decision, the  Judge  concludes  that  the
       appellant plays a crucial role in the upbringing of his daughter JC.
       The Judge states ".It is also clear to me that it  would  be  unduly
       harsh to expect [JC] to remain in the care of her mother without the
       substantial input that the  appellant  makes  in  her  life  as  her
       father.... He sees  JC  regularly,  daily  takes  her  to  and  from
       nursery, teaches her to read, bring structure  and  routine  to  her
       life, plays with her, manages her health and  general  welfare,  and
       makes decisions about her upbringing, exclusively  and/or  with  her
       mother.".


   11. At paragraph [105] of his decision, the Judge refers to  the  report
       of the independent  social  worker  that  was  relied  upon  by  the
       appellant which noted,  that  there  is  a  very  close  and  loving
       relationship between the appellant and JC, and that  the  appellant,
       JC, and her mother, are a complex and very  untypical  family  unit,
       with a high risk that JC's mother would have major  difficulties  in
       providing a consistent level of care for  JC  if  the  appellant  is
       deported.


   12. The Judge's overall conclusion is to be found at paragraph [117];


             "The burden of proof is on the  SSHD  to  show  on  the  civil
             balance of probabilities that deportation in  this  matter  is
             conducive to the public good. For all the reasons that I  have
             set out above, in this particular case I do  not  believe  she
             has discharged the burden of proof incumbent upon her  on  the
             civil standard. I do believe that this appellant deserves  one
             more chance. He was hugely remorseful before me, accepted  his
             offence and he told me that the stability found in his life is
             improving his  mental  health,  and  he  is  concentrating  on
             bringing up his daughter and that is what he wants to do.


The appeal to the Upper Tribunal


   13. The respondent advances three grounds of appeal.  First,  the  Judge
       has misdirected himself in law by reversing  the  burden  of  proof.
       The respondent refers to paragraphs [39] and [117] of  the  decision
       in which the Judge proceeds upon the premise that  it  was  for  the
       respondent to establish, on a balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
       deportation of the  appellant  is  conducive  to  the  public  good.
       Second, in reaching the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for
       the appellant's daughter to remain in the UK without the  appellant,
       the Judge failed to identify anything that is exceptional that would
       outweigh the compelling interest in the appellant's removal.  It  is
       said that the Judge has not considered whether the best interests of
       the child may nevertheless be outweighed by the public  interest  in
       the deportation of offenders.   Finally,  the  Judge  erred  in  his
       assessment of the  relevance  of  the  diagnosis  of  post-traumatic
       stress disorder.


   14. Permission to appeal was granted on 14th December 2017 by First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Saffer.  The matter  comes  before  us  to  determine
       whether the decision of the FtT contains a material error of law.


   15. Mr Bramble adopted the grounds of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
       Judge's error as to the burden of proof goes to  the  heart  of  the
       decision, and has infected the Judge's consideration of the evidence
       throughout.  He submits that in determining  whether  it  is  unduly
       harsh for the appellant's daughter to remain in the  UK,  the  Judge
       failed to consider the seriousness of  the  offence  for  which  the
       appellant has  been  convicted,  and  the  public  interest  in  the
       deportation of those convicted of offences that attract  a  sentence
       of between 12 months and 4 years, unless it can be established  that
       it would be unduly harsh for a child to remain in the UK without the
       person who is to be deported.


   16. The appellant has filed a rule 24 response dated 1st February  2018.
       As we have already noted, Mr Sellwood accepts that the  decision  of
       the Judge could have been clearer but he  submits  that  read  as  a
       whole, it is possible to discern the reasons why the Judge  came  to
       the conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for JC to remain in the
       UK without the appellant. Mr Sellwood  accepts  that  at  paragraphs
       [39] and [117] of his decision, the Judge suggests that  the  burden
       is upon the respondent to establish  that  the  deportation  of  the
       appellant is conducive to the public good and that on  the  face  of
       it, the Judge appears to have  reversed  the  burden  of  proof.  He
       submits that upon a careful reading of  paragraphs  [23],  [27]  and
       [94] of the decision, it is clear that the Judge  had  the  relevant
       legal principles in mind and it was open to the Judge, at paragraphs
       [104] to [105] of the decision, to conclude that it would be  unduly
       harsh to expect JC to remain in the care of her mother  without  the
       substantial input that the appellant  makes  in  her  life,  as  her
       father.  He submits that the Judge has  identified  the  exceptional
       circumstances that lead to that conclusion.


 Error of Law


   17. After retiring to consider our decision,  we  informed  the  parties
       that we find there to be a material error of law in the decision  of
       the Judge capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  The error
       of law lies in the approach adopted by the judge as to the burden of
       proof.


   18. At paragraph [39] of his decision, the Judge states:


             "I  therefore  take  issue  with  the  Secretary  of   State's
             contention  that  the  appellant  cannot  benefit   from   the
             exception to deportation based on family life  with  them  his
             daughter. I shall come back to this later  on  when  balancing
             that relationship with his daughter's best interests with  the
             appellant's previous conduct,  suffice  it  to  say  that  the
             burden of proof is on the SSHD  in  this  case  on  the  civil
             standard of the balance of probabilities to show that in  this
             particular case deportation is conducive to the public good. I
             strongly differ with the view of the SSHD that it would not be
             unduly harsh for the appellant's daughter  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom even though the appellant is to be deported."


   19. At paragraph [101], the FtT Judge concludes:


             "The appellant  has  responded  to  all  the  details  in  the
             respondent's contentions in his oral evidence before me and  I
             have also read the witness statements. It is  my  view  having
             regard to the circumstances that the respondent has not  shown
             to the civil standard that deportation here  is  conducive  to
             the public good."


   20. At paragraph [117], the Judge concludes:


             "The burden of proof is on the  SSHD  to  show  on  the  civil
             balance of probabilities that deportation in  this  matter  is
             conducive to the public good..."


    21. In fact, in such an appeal the burden of proof is upon the appellant
        to establish, upon the balance of probability that the exceptions to
        automatic deportation are met.   We  reject  the  submission  by  Mr
        Sellwood that any error is immaterial. We  are  satisfied  that  the
        misdirection as to the burden of proof was a material  misdirection,
        that has infected the Judge's consideration of the relevant  factors
        throughout his decision.  In our judgement, the  error  is  material
        because we cannot be satisfied  that  there  is  only  one  possible
        outcome.


    22. Acknowledging that the burden of proof rested  with  the  appellant,
        the FtT Judge was required to determine whether or not it  could  be
        said that it would be unduly harsh for JC, who is a British citizen,
        to remain in the United Kingdom without her father.  The  FtT  Judge
        was required to have regard to the considerations set out in Section
        117C of the 2002 Act. The public interest  required  the  claimant's
        deportation unless sub-section (5) of Section 117C could be said  to
        be met.  The  Tribunal  was  faced  with  the  requirements  of  the
        immigration rules and public interest  considerations  enshrined  in
        statute, that the deportation of the  appellant  is  in  the  public
        interest and, since he had been sentenced to a  period  of  eighteen
        months, it was only if the test of undue harshness was met, that the
        public interest in deportation would be outweighed.


    23. In our judgement, having erroneously misdirected  himself  that  the
        burden of proof is on the respondent to show that in this particular
        case, deportation  is  conducive  to  the  public  good,  the  Judge
        compounded that error because he  did  not  adequately  address  the
        relevant public interest considerations.  We are not satisfied  that
        a Tribunal properly directing itself as to the burden of proof would
        reach the same decision as  to  whether,  taking  into  account  the
        relevant public interest considerations, the undue harshness test is
        met.


    24. Having carefully read the decision of the FtT Judge we are satisfied
        that the decision of the FtT discloses a material error of  law  and
        should be set aside.


    25. As to disposal, we have decided that it is appropriate to remit this
        appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh, having taken into account
        paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement  of  25th
        September 2012.  In light of the nature of the error of law, none of
        the findings made by the Judge can be preserved and the  nature  and
        extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive. The
        parties will be advised of  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        hearing in due course.


 Notice of Decision


    26.  The  appeal  is  allowed.   The  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Andonian
        promulgated on 28th November 2017 is set aside,  and  we  remit  the
        matter for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


    27. An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 08 February 2018


Lord Boyd of Duncansby           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


FEE AWARD

There was no fee award by the FtT since no fee had been paid or is  payable.


Signed                                  Date 08 February 2018

Lord Boyd of Duncansby     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
