
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03894/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th December 2016                |On 17th January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                           Mr. CHRISTIAN IKEDIASHI
                        (NO ANONYITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


An Anonymity Direction is NOT made. There has been no request and  there  is
no apparent need.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown of Citizens Advice Bureau,Bolton.
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 16 January 1976. He
    came to the United Kingdom on 3 April 2006 on a visit Visa valid until
    3 August 2006. He overstayed. In 2010 he was joined by his partner and
    three children from Nigeria.

 2. On 14 December 2010 he submitted an application for leave to remain on
    the basis of article 8. This was rejected because the appropriate fee
    was not paid. There followed a series of applications similarly
    rejected. An application made in August 2011 was considered and refused
    with no right of appeal. He then requested reconsideration and in July
    2015 completed a statement of additional grounds. This application was
    refused and direction made for his removal. The appellant appealed.

 3. His application under the partner route of appendix FM failed because
    his partner was not a British national nor was she settled. Similarly,
    his application as a parent failed because his children were Nigerian
    citizens. They had not been here seven years. Furthermore he did not
    have sole responsibility for them.

 4. In relation to his private life and paragraph 276 ADE it was felt that
    he could reintegrate into life in Nigeria.

 5. The respondent saw no reason for granting leave on a free-standing
    article 8 basis.

The First tier Tribunal

 6. His appeal was heard by First-tier Judge Tobin at Manchester in April
    2016. The appellant was represented by Counsel. The decision indicates
    that issues more appropriate to an asylum claim were placed before the
    court n behalf of the appellant. There was reference to the appellant
    being at risk on return because of political activities. There was also
    a claimed fear of his daughter being subjected to female genital
    mutilation. Paragraph 17 records that the appellant's wife and children
    were granted discretionary leave to remain until September 2019. The
    judge did not find his claimed political fear credible. Similarly, the
    judge did not see any risk of his daughter being subjected to FGM and
    concluded this had been raised in an attempt to bolster his
    application.

 7. Although headed `The human rights issue'at paragraph 18 the judge
    refers to the appellant not having sole responsibility for his children
    and impliedly is indicating that he cannot succeed under the rules by
    the parent route. The decision then refers to free-standing article 8
    issues and refers to the provisions of section 117 B. Reference is made
    to little weight being given to the appellant's private life as he was
    someone who had been here unlawfully. The judge did not see any issue
    with the whole family returning to Nigeria. The appeal was dismissed
    under the rules and on article 8 grounds.

The Upper Tribunal

 8. Application for permission to appeal was made by the Counsel that
    appeared and who contended  the judge failed to give adequate reasons
    for not finding the appellant credible and for concluding that FGM had
    been outlawed in Nigeria. It was also said that the judge made a
    mistake of fact in that the appellant's wife and children had been
    granted leave until September 2018 not September 2019. Furthermore,
    this was a second grant of leave to them, the first being in 2013 until
    2016.

 9. It was submitted there was disparity of treatment between the appellant
    and his wife and children by the respondent. Reference was made to the
    length of time the children had been in the United Kingdom and the
    respondent's section 55 duties.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis the judge failed to
    consider the appellant's children if the appellant were removed.

11. The respondent has issued a reply under rule 24 opposing the appeal
    stating the judge dealt was a relationship between the appellant and
    his wife and children and that neither of the children had been in the
    United Kingdom for the necessary time in order to be considered
    qualifying children.

12. At hearing, the appellant's representative submitted that the judge had
    not dealt adequately with the position of the children. It was accepted
    that the appeal could not succeed under the immigration rules.

13. In response the presenting officer relied on the served response. The
    presenting officer advised that the appellant's wife had claimed
    protection for herself and her children which was refused but they had
    been given discretionary leave.

Consideration

14. The appellant came to the United Kingdom when he was 30 years of age in
    2006. He came on a visit Visa so he was aware his right to be here was
    limited to 6 months. Instead of returning he overstayed. From his
    statement he indicates his wife visited him in 2008 and 2009. On the
    last occasion she was accompanied by their two children, Ezekiel (dob
    8/1/05) and Raphael (20/7/2006).  At the time she was pregnant with
    their third child , Queen Elizabeth (20/6/09.) who was born in the
    United Kingdom shortly after her arrival. A fourth child, Enoch, has
    been born in the United Kingdom (3/9/20012). He then states she claimed
    asylum in early 2010 which was unsuccessful. She and the children
    however were granted discretionary leave. The appellant and his wife
    separated at times. When the First-tier appeal was heard in April 2016
    the children were aged 11, 9, 6 and 3. The two eldest were aged 5 and
    4. when they came here.

15. The judge referred to the reasons for refusal letter which highlighted
    the respondent's obligation under section 55 towards the children. It
    was pointed out that the children and their mother had only limited
    leave to remain and could return with the appellant to Nigeria. There
    he could support his family and the children could adapt to life there.
    Regarding their Christian beliefs, this could continue in Nigeria. The
    judge heard evidence from church pastors and documents from the
    children's schools.

16. At paragraph 40 the judge refers to the appellant being evasive and
    concluded that he has a large family in Nigeria albeit in different
    locations. The judge dealt with the question of female genital
    mutilation. The judge accepted he had a genuine parental relationship.
    The children were doing well at school. Reference was made however to
    the possibility of this continuing in Nigeria and the judge referred to
    the reasons for refusal letter. In that letter, from paragraph 34
    onwards, reference was made to the respondent's obligation under
    section 55. Paragraph 38 of the refusal letter deals with the Nigerian
    educational system. The refusal letter also says that the appellant has
    been living within the Nigerian community in the United Kingdom and
    consequently the children will have some awareness of Nigerian life. It
    is clear from the decision that the judge was incorporating these
    statements into the decision.

17. The judge had the benefit of a bundle of documents from the appellant's
    representative. The judge also bore in mind the respondent's comments
    about the welfare of the children in the refusal letter. The decision
    indicates the judge did have regard to the various issues arising,
    including the interests of the children. It is my conclusion these have
    been adequately considered and that the decision reached was one open
    to the judge. Consequently, I find no error of law. I find nothing
    material turns on the fact the judge refers to the appellant's wife and
    children having been granted a year longer than fact they had. The
    other issues in the leave application have not been pursued and they
    have no apparent merit.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal under the
immigration rules and on human rights grounds does not materially err in
law and shall stand.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Farrelly.

