
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/03706/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30 August 2017                      |  On 7 September 2017               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                          MACHIMKWU CHIMAOBIM AJOKU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Akinbolu, Counsel instructed by Vincent
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who entered the  United  Kingdom  a  visitor,  and  then
    applied for leave to remain as  the  partner  of  a  British  national,
    appeals against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge L Murray
    sitting at Newport on 2 October 2016) dismissing his  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse
    to grant him leave to  remain  either  as  the  partner  of  a  British
    national or as the parent of a British national child.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that  the  appellant  requires  anonymity  proceedings  in  the   Upper
    Tribunal.





The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

 2. The initial grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were settled  by  a
    member of the solicitor's firm who represented  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing before Judge Murray.  On 4  May  2017  Designed  Judge  Manuell
    refused permission to appeal for the following reasons:

       The  excessively  lengthy  grounds  are  misconceived  and  fail  to
       identify any arguable  material  error  of  law.   Headed  "Skeleton
       Argument", at best they seek to re-argue an appeal which  the  Judge
       had dismissed with full and clear reasons.  The Judge considered the
       best interests of the child in the course  of  her  Article  8  ECHR
       evaluation, where the relevant current  authorities  were  correctly
       applied.

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. The  appellant  instructed  a  new  firm  of  solicitors  who  in  turn
    instructed Counsel, Ms Akinbolu, to settle new grounds of appeal.

 4. On 11 July 2017 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan  granted  permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

       It is at least arguable that, despite the Judge's lengthy recitation
       of the case law, and in particular what was said  in  MA  (Pakistan)
       about the respondent's policy guidance, the  Judge  failed  to  take
       into account  the  respondent's  guidance  in  relation  to  British
       citizen  children  and  where  a  fair  balance  should  be  struck.
       Considering the Judge's findings at [36], it is  possible  that  the
       failure might be found to be  immaterial.   However,  the  point  is
       sufficiently arguable to be considered in more detail at a hearing.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Akinbolu developed the case  pleaded  in  the  new  grounds  of
    appeal. The respondent's published guidance made it clear that  in  all
    cases in which the interests of a British child are affected,  it  must
    be approached on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect  the
    British citizen child to leave the European Union.  The Judge  referred
    to Sanade [2012] UKUT 48, but appeared to conclude  that  the  decision
    represented an erroneous or outdated statement of  law,  since  it  was
    based upon a concession that had  subsequently  been  withdrawn.   This
    conclusion was legally incorrect.  The concession was  incorporated  in
    the published policy, and the Tribunal in Sanade gave judgment  to  the
    effect that the concession reflected the correct legal principle.

 6. In SF & Others (Guidance, post-2014  Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  00120
    (IAC),  the  Tribunal  had  again  confirmed  this  statement  of  law.
    Apparently, Judge Murray was unaware of the respondent's policy  or  of
    its relevance.  Had she been aware of the policy, it is  arguable  that
    she would have arrived at a different conclusion.

 7. Having found that there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    a British child, and that it  was  in  the  child's  best  interest  to
    remain, absent cogent evidence of criminality or an exceptionally  poor
    immigration history, the application of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act
    reduced the weight to be given to the public interest in the removal of
    the appellant to such an extent as to render removal disproportionate.

 8. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Isherwood adhered to  the  Rule
    24 response settled by a colleague opposing the appeal.  She sought  to
    distinguish SF on the facts, and she submitted that the policy guidance
    relied on by Ms Akinbolu did not apply in this  case,  as  neither  the
    respondent in the decision letter nor the Judge in  her  reasoning  had
    suggested that it was reasonable to expect the British citizen child to
    leave the United Kingdom with the appellant.  She  submitted  that  the
    policy was not engaged where the parents of the child in question had a
    reasonable choice as to where family life should be carried on.

Discussion

 9. As noted by the Tribunal in SF at paragraph [7],  the  IDIs  on  family
    migration - Appendix FM, section  1.0(b),  headed  "Family  life  as  a
    partner or parent and private life, 10 year routes", and  dated  August
    2015, contain at paragraph 11.2.3 guidance on the  following  question:
    "Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to  leave
    the UK?"  The relevant parts of the guidance are as follows:

       Save in cases involving criminality,  the  decision-maker  must  not
       take a decision in relation to the parent  or  primary  carer  of  a
       British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be  to
       force that British citizen to leave the EU, regardless of the age of
       that child.  This reflects the European Court of Justice Judgment in
       Zambrano ...

       Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent or
       primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the  case  must
       always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be  unreasonable  to
       expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent  or
       primary carer.

       In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave  to  the
       parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with the
       child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a genuine and
       subsisting parental relationship.

       It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave  where  the
       conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to  considerations
       of such weight as to justify separation, if a child could  otherwise
       stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in the  UK  or
       in the EU.

       The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

       -     Criminality falling below the threshold set out  in  paragraph
           398 of the Immigration Rules;

       -   a very poor immigration history, such as whether  a  person  has
           repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

       In considering whether refusal may  be  appropriate,  the  decision-
       maker must consider the impact on the child of  any  separation  (my
       emphasis).   If  the  decision-maker  is  minded   to   refuse,   in
       circumstances where separation would be the  result,  this  decision
       should normally be discussed with a  senior  caseworker  and,  where
       appropriate, advice may be sought from the office of the  children's
       champion on the implications for the welfare of the child, in  order
       to inform the decision.

10. Ms Akinbolu invites the Tribunal to adopt  a  broad  interpretation  of
    this policy with the consequence that, absent misconduct by the  parent
    of the gravity envisaged in the exception (criminality or "a very  poor
    immigration history"), the  Secretary  of  State  should  be  taken  as
    conceding, with reference to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, that  the
    public interest does not require the parent's removal where that parent
    has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with  the  British
    national child.

11. However, I do not consider that this broad interpretation of the policy
    is correct.  The  prohibition  stipulated  in  the  policy  is  against
    assessing a case on the basis that it would be reasonable to  expect  a
    British citizen child to leave the UK with the parent or primary  carer
    who  is  facing  removal.  There  is  no  express  prohibition  against
    assessing the case on the basis that it would be reasonable to expect a
    British citizen child to leave the UK with both  parents.   In  such  a
    scenario, there would be no separation, no break-up of the family unit,
    and so the need to justify separation would not arise.

12. It is important to distinguish between expectation and  choice.  It  is
    implicit from the Judge's findings at paragraph [33] that in  her  view
    the child's mother had the reasonable choice of relocating  to  Nigeria
    with the child and his father,  and  at  paragraph  [36]  she  made  an
    express finding to this effect (see below). This is  not  the  same  as
    finding that mother and child were expected to leave the UK in order to
    join the appellant in Nigeria.

13. The narrow construction of the policy  advocated  by  Ms  Isherwood  is
    consistent with Appendix FM, under which a person  in  the  appellant's
    position cannot take the benefit of EX.1(a) because he shares  parental
    responsibility for his British national child, rather than having  sole
    responsibility for the child.

14. The decision of the Tribunal in SF is also  consistent  with  a  narrow
    construction of the policy.  The appellants in SF were a mother and her
    two young children.  Each  of  them  had  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    unlawfully in 2012.  Prior to that, they had  lived  in  Albania.   The
    first appellant's husband had come to the  UK  much  earlier.   He  had
    obtained ILR and subsequently by  false  representations,  a  grant  of
    British citizenship.  He was currently serving a sentence of seven  and
    a  half  years'  imprisonment  for  offences  connected  with   people-
    trafficking.   After  the  appellant  arrived  in  the  UK,  the  first
    appellant gave birth to a further child.  The youngest child  was  born
    when the child's father had  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  and  as  a
    result, this youngest child was a British citizen.  On 29  April  2015,
    the appellants were served with notices refusing  their  asylum  claims
    and deciding that they  should  be  removed  from  the  UK  as  illegal
    entrants.

15. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeals on  all  grounds  raised.
    The issue that was pursued before the Upper Tribunal  was  an  argument
    that because of the nationality of the  youngest  child,  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect that child to leave the UK; and that this had an
    impact on the merits of the decision  that  the  appellants  should  be
    removed.

16. Mr Wilding drew the attention of the Upper Tribunal to the policy.   He
    accepted that this was not a case in which the conduct of the mother of
    the other three children was such as to give rise as to  considerations
    of such weight as to justify separation.  The  Tribunal  also  observed
    that it did not  appear  that  consideration  had  been  given  to  the
    possibility of the British citizen child staying with another parent or
    alternative primary carer in the EU.  The Tribunal held,  at  paragraph
    [9], that it appeared inevitable that  if  the  guidance  to  which  Mr
    Wilding had drawn their attention  had  been  applied  to  the  present
    family, at any time after it was published, the conclusion  would  have
    been that the appellant should have been granted a period of  leave  to
    remain in order to enable the British citizen child to remain in the UK
    with them.

17. As submitted by Ms  Isherwood,  the  facts  of  SF  were  significantly
    different from the facts of  the  present  case.   The  effect  of  the
    decision under appeal in SF was to compel a British  citizen  child  to
    leave the EU.  This was because his father was in prison, and his other
    parent and primary carer was facing removal.  So, the case plainly fell
    within the scope of the policy.  There was no question of choice.   The
    parents did not have the choice of voluntarily relocating to Albania to
    continue family life there with their children, as one of them  was  in
    prison. Thus it was unreasonable to expect the British citizen child to
    leave the EU with his mother, in circumstances where the conduct of the
    mother did not give rise to considerations of such weight as to justify
    separation from the father; and  in  any  event  the  child  could  not
    otherwise stay with his father in the UK or elsewhere in the EU.

18. Conversely, as rehearsed earlier in this  decision,  it  was  never  in
    contemplation in this case that the British citizen child should  leave
    the UK with the appellant, and so the reasonableness of  expecting  the
    child to do so did  not  arise  as  a  material  consideration  in  the
    proportionality assessment.  By the same  token,  the  policy  was  not
    engaged.

19. Accordingly, there was no error of law in the  Judge's  approach.   She
    engaged with the appellant's case as  it  was  presented  to  her.   No
    reliance was placed on the policy by the appellant.  So  there  was  no
    error by the Judge in not taking into account the policy when assessing
    proportionality.   At  the  beginning  of  paragraph  [34],  the  Judge
    correctly stated the law as follows: "It is not the position  under  UK
    or EU law that it is unreasonable per se for a British citizen child to
    relocate outside the EU".

20. Ms Akinbolu submits that the concession made in Sanade has  re-surfaced
    in the policy.  I reject this submission as the policy does not address
    the question of when it is reasonable for a British  citizen  child  to
    relocate abroad as part of a family unit.

21. The appellant's child was aged 23 months at the date  of  the  hearing.
    After extensive consideration of the relevant jurisprudence,  including
    ZH (Tanzania) -v- SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 and JW  (China)  -v-  SSHD  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 1526, the Judge reached the sustainable conclusion that  while
    it might be in the child's best interest to remain in the UK  to  enjoy
    the  benefits  of  UK  citizenship,  "it  is   only   marginally   so".
    Accordingly, this was a case in which the need to maintain  immigration
    control might well tip the balance against the appellant, following  MA
    (Pakistan)  and  Others  -v-  SSHD  [2016]  EWCA   Civ   705   and   EV
    (Philippines).  The Judge cited  extensive  passages  from  both  these
    authorities at paragraphs [28] and [29] of her decision.

22. At paragraph [36], the Judge said as follows:

       I find that there are powerful or cogent reasons  why  leave  should
       not be granted in this  case.   The  appellant  does  not  meet  the
       immigration rules by a significant margin.  He was only in the UK as
       a visitor and overstayed.  His son was  conceived  during  a  period
       when his stay was temporary and he had no legal basis to apply as  a
       partner inside the UK.  I find that there are strong  countervailing
       factors in this  case.   The  appellant's  son  is  very  young  and
       adaptable with no health issues, and I conclude that it would not be
       unreasonable for him to live in Nigeria.  It follows also,  from  my
       conclusions, that the requirements of section 117B(6) are  not  met.
       I have therefore conducted a wider public interest assessment.

23. At paragraph [38], the  Judge  observed  that  the  appellant  was  not
    financially independent. At paragraph [39], the  Judge  said  that  the
    appellant had arrived in the UK as a visitor in March 2015 and  it  was
    not  clear  when  leave  expired,  but  because  he   had   been   here
    precariously, she had to give little weight to his private  life.   His
    relationship with his qualifying partner had been established whilst he
    had been here in a temporary capacity in the knowledge  that  he  could
    not expect to remain unless he satisfied the immigration rules. She did
    not consider it was unreasonable for his partner  to  live  in  Nigeria
    "should she choose to join the appellant there."

24. The Judge was wrong in paragraph [36] to characterise the appellant  as
    becoming an overstayer. The  appellant  had  Section  3C  leave  as  he
    applied for leave to remain during the currency of his visit visa.  The
    Judge's error is not, however, material.  For the Judge returned to the
    issue of proportionality at paragraph [39], and she  proceeded  on  the
    correct premise that the appellant's status in the UK had at all  times
    been precarious, not unlawful.

25. In conclusion, in a decision which ran to 17 closely-typed  pages,  the
    Judge gave comprehensive and sustainable  reasons  for  dismissing  the
    appeal, and no error of law is made out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 2 September 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
