
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03288/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2018                           |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              MS NADIRA MOBEEN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Juss, Counsel instructed by Connaughts Law
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born on 11 July 1954 and who entered the UK as a
    visitor in 2014, appeals from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing her appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  ("the
    Department") to refuse to grant her leave to remain in  the  UK  as  an
    adult dependant relative.  The appellant did  not  claim  to  meet  the
    requirements of E-ECDR.2.4, which are that the  applicant  must  (as  a
    result of age, illness or disability) require long-term  personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks.  She relied on family life with her children
    in the UK which, it was argued, had endured since the  last  child  had
    left Pakistan to settle in the UK  in  2011.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found that family life had not been established in  the  UK  that
    was protected by Article 8 ECHR.  In the alternative, he found that the
    decision of the Department was proportionate in all the  circumstances,
    and that neither Article 3 ECHR nor Article 8 ECHR would be violated on
    medical grounds, as her history showed that  she  had  been  under  the
    regular care of her doctor in Pakistan, and there  was  no  reason  why
    that care could not continue on her return.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 25 October 2018 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juliet  Grant-Hutchison
    granted the appellant to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that the Judge  has  misdirected  himself  for  the
         following reasons:- (a) by finding that the appellant does not meet
         the low threshold of having a family life with her  three  children
         in the  UK  and  when  she  lived  in  Pakistan,  and  (b)  by  not
         considering the social, emotional and  psychological  support  that
         the appellant receives from her said children."

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The appellant was a frequent visitor to the UK from 10  September  2007
    onwards. The appellant last entered the UK as a visitor on 7 June 2014.
     She submitted an application for leave to remain on  22  January  2015
    which was refused with no  right  of  appeal  on  17  March  2015.   An
    application for a judicial review was received on 31 March 2015 and her
    judicial review claim was struck out on 27 June 2016.  On 15 July  2017
    the appellant made a further application for leave to remain.

 4. In a covering letter, Farani Taylor Solicitors outlined her claim. They
    submitted that it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the UK
    on account of her circumstances.  Her husband had passed away in  2006.
    Until 2011 the appellant  had  resided  with  her  daughter,  [HB],  in
    Pakistan.  [HB] had then got married and moved to the UK.   Since  2011
    the appellant had been residing alone in Pakistan.  In January 2013 the
    family home had burned  down  due  to  faulty  wiring.   The  appellant
    therefore no longer had a home and she had been living with her  niece.
    But her niece had now refused to continue to accommodate her.  It would
    be too costly to rebuild her home, as it would have to be re-built from
    scratch.  She had three children, all of whom resided in the UK.   [HB]
    was a Doctor.  All three children were financially independent.

 5. The appellant suffered from arthritis and  high  blood  pressure.   She
    felt extremely lonely and alienated in Pakistan where she was  entirely
    alone.  She was entirely dependent upon her children in the UK, and she
    was particularly dependent upon her son, [FB], a British  national  who
    had been financially supporting her.  [HB] was also extremely dependent
    upon her mother.  Having recently given birth, she intended to go  back
    to work on 10 July 2017, but that might not be possible if  her  mother
    was not there to  support  her.   The  appellant  had  private  medical
    insurance in place, and would not be relying on  public  funds  or  NHS
    services.

 6. On 11 January 2018 the Department gave their reasons for  refusing  the
    application.  She stated in section 10 her application  form  that  she
    had distant friends and relatives in Pakistan.  Accordingly, she  could
    reconnect with them on her return.  She  could  also  maintain  regular
    contact with her UK-based family via modern forms of communication, and
    it would be open to them to visit her in Pakistan.

 7. She said that her house had burned down, and she had nowhere to  return
    to in Pakistan as her niece could no longer accommodate  her.  However,
    in section  5  of  her  application  form,  she  stated  that  her  son
    financially supported her in the UK.   Accordingly, there was no reason
    why he could  not  continue  to  support  her  in  Pakistan,  including
    providing her with accommodation.

 8. She stated that she had a very close bond with her family and  did  not
    wish to return to Pakistan while they remained in the UK.  However, she
    had only entered the UK as a family visitor, which was not a  route  to
    settlement.  She was therefore aware that this did not entitle  her  to
    remain in the UK indefinitely.  She had previously remained in Pakistan
    whilst her children were based in the UK, and so she could continue her
    relationship with them via modern means of communication and visits.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brewer
    sitting at Taylor House on 14  September  2018.   Mr  Juss  of  Counsel
    appeared on behalf of the appellant.

10. In his subsequent decision, the Judge summarised the oral  evidence  at
    paragraph [24].  The appellant was a widow, who did not wish to  return
    to Pakistan.  It was her preference to remain with her children in  the
    UK.  She lived with her son. (He also said  that  she  lived  with  her
    daughter, but this was a mistake. The evidence was  that  her  daughter
    lived separately with her spouse: see paragraph  9  of  [HB]'s  witness
    statement.)

11. Her arthritis gave her pain in her hands.  Her daughter  had  qualified
    as a doctor in Pakistan, but was not practising as a doctor in the  UK.
    She regularly monitored the appellant's blood pressure and reminded her
    to take her medication.  When her mother was in Pakistan, she  used  to
    call her from the UK to remind her to take her  medication.   Food  was
    cooked for the appellant and shopping was done for her.  She  was  left
    alone during the day when her son was at work.  She went  swimming  and
    essentially looked after herself.

12. Although the children could afford to house their  mother  in  Pakistan
    and to provide care assistance,  servants  would  not  be  trusted  and
    Karachi was a dangerous city in which to live.

13. The Judge made the following findings of  fact  about  the  appellant's
    material history.  She suffered from hypertension and arthritis in  her
    knees and back.  In 2015 she was diagnosed with mild  depression.   Her
    hypertension was diagnosed in, and had been  treated  from,  2007.   In
    2003 she was treated for Hepatitis C.  The latest medical evidence  was
    25 June 2018.  It seemed that the only medication she was  on  was  for
    her high blood pressure.  The report stated that the arthritis affected
    her household duties including cleaning, vacuuming and heavy  shopping.
    The appellant went swimming and painted watercolours.  Before she  came
    to the UK, the appellant lived in the marital  home,  but  that  burned
    down in 2014.  After that the appellant moved in with  her  niece,  but
    that could not continue as her room was required for use by the niece's
    father-in-law.

14. At paragraphs [26]-[33], the Judge gave his reasons for dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal under the Rules.  Mr Juss had submitted  that  there
    would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant  returning  to
    Pakistan.  The Judge found that the appellant was  educated,  and  that
    she had not given evidence of any difficulties that she might  face  on
    return other than needing somewhere to live, not being  able  to  trust
    anyone who was hired to help care for her, and the fact  that  she  had
    some medical issues.   The  Judge  found  that  the  evidence  did  not
    disclose anything that went beyond inconvenience and  mere  difficulty,
    and he concluded that the requirements of Rule 276ADE(1)(vi)  were  not
    met.

15. The Judge went on to consider whether Article 8(1) was engaged  from  a
    family life perspective.  At  paragraphs  [38]-[41],  the  Judge  cited
    extensive passages  from  the  authorities  on  this  issue,  including
    paragraph [46] of Gurung & Others, R (on the application of)  -v-  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8, where the Court of Appeal approved an observation of
    the Upper Tribunal in Gissing that, "the different  outcomes  in  cases
    with superficially similar features emphasises to  us  that  the  issue
    under Article 8(1) is highly fact sensitive."

16. At paragraph [42] the Judge held as follows:

        The appellant has been living in the UK since 2014.  Prior to  that,
        she had been living in Pakistan all her life.  Her children  decided
        to make lives in the UK, the last of them  arriving  in  2011.   The
        appellant has made regular visits to the UK to see her children.  It
        seems to me that  if  one  is  looking  for  more  than  the  normal
        emotional ties which a family inevitably has, it is difficult to say
        that family life, in the sense required by an Article 8 claim,  does
        exist in this case.  While the appellant's children gave evidence of
        the extent to which they look after their mother,  it  seems  to  me
        they do that because she is present in the UK.   Before her  arrival
        they cared for her but from a distance, and I see no reason why that
        could not continue if the appellant was to return  to  Pakistan.   I
        find that the appellant does not enjoy family life in the UK  beyond
        that which she enjoyed when in Pakistan other than she now  has  the
        convenience of co-location with her children and what that  entails.
        If the appellant was in Pakistan, her children could  still  provide
        for her, they can house her, pay for carers, check she is taking her
        medication, and in effect either directly or indirectly  do  all  of
        the things they currently do.

17. At paragraph [43], the Judge said that, for the sake  of  completeness,
    he would consider the remaining Razgar questions, should it  be  argued
    that the family life which did exist was  protected  by  Article  8(1),
    ECHR.  He  went  on  to  find  that  the  threatened  interference  was
    proportionate.



The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Juss developed the case put forward in the grounds of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  In reply, Mr Bramble adopted the Rule 24  response
    settled by a colleague, which was to the effect  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal settled by Mr Juss were no more than  an  eloquent  disagreement
    with findings that were reasonably open to the Judge on  the  evidence.
    Mr Bramble submitted in the alternative that  even  if  the  Judge  had
    erred in finding that Article 8 was not engaged, there was no  material
    error as he had given adequate reasons for holding that the refusal was
    nonetheless proportionate.  Mr Juss' rejoinder was, as he  had  pleaded
    in the grounds of appeal, that the error in respect of the  finding  on
    family life could not be cured by the Judge  assessing  proportionality
    on the hypothetical basis that family life was  in  fact  protected  by
    Article 8(1) ECHR.

Discussion

19. There are two dimensions to the  Judge's  finding  on  family  life  in
    paragraph [42].  The first is that the family life which the  appellant
    enjoys with her children in the UK is not such as to meet the  criteria
    of Kugathas.  The second and related finding is that  the  family  life
    which the appellant enjoys with the children  in  the  UK  can  to  all
    intents and purposes be replicated in Pakistan.

20. These are bold findings.  On the face of it, the  mere  fact  that  the
    appellant has resided under the same roof as one  of  her  sons,  [FB],
    since 2014 as a cohabiting dependant, is enough to  justify  a  finding
    that the  Kugathas  criteria  are  met.   Similarly,  while  the  Judge
    envisaged the children in the UK providing  support  to  the  appellant
    from a distance, as they had  done  between  2011  and  2014  when  the
    appellant was "alone" in Pakistan, the amount of emotional support that
    they would be able to provide from a distance was going be considerably
    less than if the appellant was residing in  the  same  country  as  her
    children.

21. On the other hand, the Judge had the benefit of receiving oral evidence
    from the appellant and two of her children, and he  was  not  bound  to
    take at face  value  the  appellant's  evidence  that  she  needed  her
    children's  support  in  many  respects,  "including  moral,  physical,
    emotional and financial support": or her son's evidence that his mother
    required care, "both emotionally and physically."

22. Mr Juss submits that the Judge  failed  to  acknowledge  evidence  from
    three medical professionals, two in the UK and one in  Pakistan,  which
    supported the case that the appellant was emotionally dependent on  her
    children.  The doctor who had been treating the appellant  in  Pakistan
    opined that she needed to be in close  proximity  to  her  children  to
    function normally.  Dr Staples in  the  UK  opined  that  socially  the
    appellant needed help, and that this social help was not  available  in
    Pakistan, whereas in England her children would be able  to  help  her.
    Dr Halari, the appellant's Clinical Psychologist in the UK,  said  that
    the appellant  felt  tense  and  unhappy  in  Pakistan,  and  found  it
    difficult to sleep at night, because she was missing her  children  and
    worrying that if something happened to  her  she  would  be  alone  and
    without her children. She opined that it was in her best  interests  to
    remain in the UK where she would be able to access the necessary family
    support - whereas living in Pakistan,  particularly  over  time,  would
    have a significant negative impact  upon  the  appellant's  social  and
    emotional wellbeing.

23. While it is true that the Judge did not acknowledge the evidence  cited
    above, the obvious limitation in its probative value is that the  views
    expressed are based upon the appellant's self-reporting of her symptoms
    and of her social situation in Pakistan.  A key factual finding by  the
    Judge which is not challenged as being erroneous is that the  appellant
    was only asked to leave the niece's accommodation because her room  was
    required for the niece's father-in-law.  So, on the  face  of  it,  the
    only barrier to the appellant resuming family life with her niece was a
    practical one, and it was a barrier which  could  be  overcome  by  the
    appellant's children funding accommodation in  Karachi  which  was  big
    enough to accommodate the appellant, her niece, her niece's  father-in-
    law and any other family members who form part of  the  niece's  family
    unit.

24. In conclusion, I am not persuaded that the findings made  at  paragraph
    [42] are perverse or inadequately  reasoned,  particularly  when  these
    findings are set alongside the earlier findings of  fact  made  by  the
    Judge which I have summarised at [13] above.

25. I am reinforced in this conclusion by  the  undeniable  fact  that  the
    appellant is only living with one of her three children; and  that  the
    thrust of the evidence was that the appellant  was  wholly  financially
    dependent upon the son with whom she was living, whereas the  claim  of
    emotional  dependency  was  principally  centred  on  the   appellant's
    daughter, who is living elsewhere with her settled spouse in a separate
    family unit.

26. Even if the Judge erred in not finding  that  "the  low  threshold"  of
    family life was met with regard to one or more of the children  in  the
    UK, I am not persuaded that the error was material to  the  outcome  of
    the  proportionality  assessment.   Although  the  appellant  was   not
    eligible to make an in-country application for leave to  remain  as  an
    adult dependant relative  under  Appendix  FM,  there  was  nothing  to
    prevent  Mr  Juss  from  running  an  argument  that  the   substantive
    requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 were met, as indeed  was  asserted
    by Farani Taylor Solicitors  in  the  covering  letter  sent  with  the
    application. I infer that Mr Juss did not run such an  argument  as  he
    rightly recognised that the evidence fell short  of  establishing  that
    the substantive requirements were met. Hence, he only advanced  a  case
    under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi); and there is no error of law challenge to the
    Judge's finding that there are not very significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's reintegration into life  and  society  in  the  country  of
    return.

27. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor, and she  did  not  therefore
    have a legitimate expectation of being able to remain in the UK on  the
    grounds of either having enduring family life with her children  or  on
    the basis of having established family life with her children since her
    arrival as a visitor.  It was open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
    evidence tendered  in  support  of  the  appeal  was  not  sufficiently
    compelling to justify the appellant  being  granted  Article  8  relief
    outside the Rules.   It  was  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  that  the
    Department's decision was proportionate in all the circumstances.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not
consider that such a direction is warranted for  these  proceedings  in  the
Upper Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

