
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03190/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On:              3 October 2018      |On: 16 October 2018                 |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  KABUL [B]
                       (anonymity not direction made)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation

For the Appellant:      Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant:  Mr G Mavrantonis, Counsel instructed by Legis Chambers



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Povey  in  which  he
    allowed the  appeal  of  the  Claimant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State  to  refuse  his  application,  with  his  wife  and
    daughter as his dependants, for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on human rights grounds.


 2. The application under appeal  was  refused  on  9  January  2018.   The
    Claimant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appeal came before Judge Povey on 4 June 2018 and was allowed on  human
    rights grounds. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.   The  application  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chamberlain on 23 August 2018 in the following terms

       The grounds assert that the Judge failed  to  assess  correctly  the
       burden of proof in line with the case of SM and Qadir (ETS-Evidence-
       Burden of Proof) [2016]. Further he had elevated the best  interests
       of the child to "the" rather than "a" primary consideration.


       I have carefully considered the decision. It is  arguable  that  the
       Judge has erred in finding that  the  Respondent  had  not  met  the
       evidential burden. He finds that there was nothing specific  to  the
       Appellant, but at G1 to G2 of the Respondent's  bundle  is  evidence
       relating to the Appellant.  Although  he  finds  that  even  if  the
       Respondent had shifted the burden, he found the Appellant's evidence
       compelling, it is arguable that inadequate reasons have  been  given
       for this finding given the caselaw. The finding that  deception  was
       not  used  will  inevitably  affected  consideration  of   paragraph
       276ADE(1)(iv) in relation to the Appellant's child.




Background


 3. The history of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Claimant  (the
    Appellant in the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal)  is  a  citizen  of
    India born on 13 January 1981. He arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  5
    November 2009 with a visa valid until  11  August  2010  and  this  was
    subsequently extended until 30 July 2016. This leave was  curtailed  to
    expire on 21 May 2016. The curtailment was issued because  the  licence
    of Appellant's sponsor, [ ~ ] Sikh Temple, had been revoked. On 19  May
    2016 the Claimant submitted an application for further leave to  remain
    on human rights grounds. This application was refused on 9 January 2018
    and is the subject of this appeal.


 4. The basis of the  refusal  was,  essentially,  two-fold.  Firstly,  the
    Secretary of State considered that the Claimant had fraudulently used a
    proxy during a TOEIC speaking test on 18 June 2013 in connection with a
    previous application to extend leave to remain. The Secretary of  State
    considered that  as  a  result  he  therefore  failed  the  suitability
    requirement of the Immigration Rules. Secondly the Secretary  of  State
    considered that the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules was not met since neither the Claimant or his dependent wife  and
    child met the residence requirements. At the time of the  decision  the
    Claimant's child had been living in the United Kingdom for 6 years  and
    10 months.


 5. The appeal came before Judge Povey and was  allowed.  The  Judge  found
    firstly that the Claimant did  not  use  a  proxy  during  the  English
    language test and did take and pass all of the TOEIC  tests.  Secondly,
    he found that the Claimant's daughter, 10 years old at the time of  the
    hearing, had been living in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  seven
    years and that it would not be reasonable to expect her  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom and that her best interests lay in remaining in a family
    unit with her parents.




Submissions


 6. At the hearing before me Mr Tarlow appeared on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State and Mr  Mavrantonis  represented  the  Claimant.  No  rule  24
    response was filed.


 7. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds and referred to a supplementary  bundle
    containing a statement from Mr Hibbs which referred to the Home  Office
    'look up tool' which he said contained more specific  information  than
    that contained in annex G of the Secretary of State's bundle before the
    First-tier Tribunal. There was no copy of this bundle on the court file
    and Mr Mavrantonis did not have a copy.


 8. I did not ask Mr Mavrantonis to address me. I said that I was satisfied
    that the Judge had taken account of all  relevant  evidence,  including
    the public interest, and had reached a sustainable  conclusion  on  the
    facts before him and  I  gave  an  extempore  decision  dismissing  the
    Secretary of State's appeal.



Decision

 9. This is a TOEIC decision where the Judge  has  clearly  identified  the
    issues.  He self-directed in a quite painstaking manner throughout  the
    initial parts of this decision.  In particular he self-directed  to  SM
    and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC).  He
    has looked at the Appellant's immigration history.  He  has  looked  at
    the evidence as provided by the Respondent.  Whereas the Judge did  not
    find that this evidence passed the initial threshold he, in any  event,
    went on to consider the Claimant's innocent explanation and  the  Judge
    found the Claimant to be a plausible,  credible  and  reliable  witness
    whose evidence stood up to cross-examination.

10. Dealing with the grounds of  appeal  the  Secretary  of  State  firstly
    asserts that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  correctly  assess  the
    burden of proof. It  is  suggested  that  the  witness  statements  and
    spreadsheet extract provided met the initial burden and that thereafter
    the Tribunal relied upon the Claimant's  English  language  ability  to
    reach the finding that he had not used deception.

11. In my judgment this assertion is flawed in  three  ways.  Firstly,  the
    Judge gives clear reasons in paragraphs 26 and 27 for finding that  the
    initial burden was not met. SM and  Qadir  does  not  prevent  a  Judge
    making his own findings on the evidence that  was  before  him.  In  my
    finding the supplementary bundle was not before the First-tier Tribunal
    but even if it had been it would not in  my  judgement  have  made  any
    difference to the Judge's decision.  Secondly  and  in  any  event  the
    Judge has gone on  to  consider  the  Claimant's  innocent  explanation
    making any error that there may have been in finding that  the  initial
    burden had not been satisfied immaterial. Thirdly  the  Judge  has  not
    'relied' upon the Claimant's English language ability and other English
    qualifications to reach his  conclusion  that  the  Claimant  took  and
    passed the test. This was only one factor. The  Judge  notes  that  the
    Claimant was able to recall the location and nature of the  tests  and,
    most importantly, that his  evidence  stood  up  to  cross  examination
    before reaching  his  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  a  plausible,
    credible and reliable witness.

12. Secondly it is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal elevated the  best
    interests of the child from "a" primary consideration to "the"  primary
    consideration.

13. In my judgement this assertion cannot  be  sustained.  The  Judge  very
    clearly self directs to MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  and,  at
    paragraph 19, notes  that  whilst  a  primary  consideration  the  best
    interests of the child will not always be  determinative.  He  assesses
    the child's best interest at paragraph 36 onwards noting that being  in
    the country for seven years "establishes a starting  point  that  leave
    should be granted unless there are powerful reasons  to  the  contrary"
    and finds that there are no such powerful reasons.

14. In all these circumstances there is in my  judgment  on  error  of  law
    material to  the  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  and  therefore  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Summary


15. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Signed:                                 Date: 8 October 2018
[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

