
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03943/2018
                                                               HU/03944/2018
                                                               HU/03945/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 December 2018                |On 15 January 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                 DALJEET [G]
                                  SANT [G]
                                   [S K G]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy (for City Heights Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the appeals of Daljeet [G], and her daughters Sant  (born  21
    November 1998) and [SKG] (born 5 November 2011), all citizens of India,
    against the dismissal of their appeals of 4 September 2018,  themselves
    brought against the Respondent's decision of 19 January 2018 to  refuse
    their human rights claims. For convenience I will refer  to  individual
    family members by their first names.

 2. The immigration history supplied by the Respondent states that  Daljeet
    entered the UK on 20 October 2010 as a student, with leave as a student
    extended until 17 May 2014. An application of 14 May 2014  was  refused
    on 7 July 2015. She applied for an EEA residence  card  as  the  family
    member of an EU national, in applications made in June and August 2015,
    refused in August 2015 and April 2016. This latter matter is  something
    that it will be necessary for me to revert to in due course.

 3. Their applications were brought on grounds of the  private  and  family
    life that they had  established  in  the  UK,  in  circumstances  where
    Daljeet's husband had  been  abusive  and  subjected  her  to  domestic
    violence before leaving the UK. The applications were  refused  on  the
    basis that Daljeet had not rebutted the Respondent's  belief  that  she
    had acted dishonestly in  relying  on  English  language  test  results
    procured by use of a proxy tester. The family's UK connections were not
    considered sufficient to make their departure from the UK unjustifiably
    harsh or otherwise exceptional.

 4. Daljeet and Sant had allegedly suffered domestic abuse at the hands  of
    Sant's father, who had been removed from the UK in March  2016,  whilst
    attempting to enter the country on a Spanish  passport  which  did  not
    belong to him. They had last had contact with him  when  Sant  received
    her A-level results in  2017,  before  which  period  they  had  spoken
    monthly. During their time together in the UK he had inflicted domestic
    abuse on them, particularly on Daljeet, but  including  an  assault  on
    Sant resulting in a black eye.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal considered the allegation of  English  language
    fraud, noting that reports indicated that 69% to 90% of  the  tests  at
    Elizabeth College had been deemed  invalid.  A  criminal  investigation
    into the  college  bore  this  out.  Daljeet's  past  English  language
    qualifications did not establish  that  she  would  not  have  involved
    herself in proxy testing, as had  been  noted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    giving  guidance  on  the  issue  in  MA,  and  her  English   language
    proficiency at the hearing was an unreliable indicia of her ability six
    years earlier. She had been vague  as  to  the  location  of  the  test
    centre, and her claim that nobody else had known she  was  sitting  the
    test and that she had paid for the rail tickets in cash appeared to  be
    convenient explanations for the lack  of  corroborative  evidence  that
    might reasonably be expected to be available. Whilst the test had taken
    place some time ago, she had had  an  opportunity  to  reflect  on  her
    recollection of events, her mind  presumably  focussed  by  the  appeal
    proceedings, yet her evidence was nevertheless nebulous. The First-tier
    Tribunal  considered  itself  satisfied,  in   the   light   of   these
    considerations, that the Appellant had used a proxy tester to help with
    her results.

 6. The Judge went on to consider the human rights claims. The  allegations
    of  domestic  violence  were  considered  implausible:  there  was   no
    explanation why  they  would  stay  in  contact  with  an  abusive  man
    following his removal from the UK, and given he had apparently rejected
    Sant, who was not his biological child, it was not  plausible  that  he
    would want to keep in touch with her school progress. The evidence from
    a GP  was  predicated  on  the  GP's  unsurprising  acceptance  of  his
    patient's account.

 7. The evidence that Daljeet was not on good  terms  with  her  sister  in
    India was undermined by the fact that the sister had contacted her with
    news of their mother's death in January 2018. Generally the Appellants'
    evidence had the air of concoction, being  designed  to  bolster  their
    human rights claims to remain in the UK.

 8. There was no reason to think that the Appellants would not receive  the
    support of family members on a return to India. Daljeet's husband could
    be assumed to be available to help them, the evidence  of  his  abusive
    behaviour having been rejected.

 9. Sant was now a young adult and her non-cohabiting relationship with her
    boyfriend was not a barrier  to  her  return  to  India;  it  could  be
    maintained during academic breaks if they wished  to  do  so,  and  via
    modern  means  of  communication.  Her  relationship  attested  to  her
    independence and she would have reasonable prospects  of  pursuing  her
    studies in dentistry or pharmacy, which she had so far been  unable  to
    pursue in the UK given her precarious immigration status, in  India  as
    in the UK.

10. [SKG] had lived in the UK for almost seven years, but the jurisprudence
    on "near misses" showed that this did  not  mean  her  case  should  be
    treated as if she had been resident here longer. It was  in  any  event
    wholly reasonable to expect her to return to India with her mother  and
    sister.

11. The family had consistently been present in  the  UK  on  a  precarious
    basis,  and  though  they  spoke  English  and  might  be   financially
    independent, those were essentially neutral factors. At this  point  it
    is readily apparent that the direction  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    thinking was all one way; having rejected all material connections with
    the UK as sufficient to render departure disproportionate,  and  having
    found that course of action to be in the public interest in the context
    of the Secretary of State having established dishonesty in the mother's
    immigration history, the appeal would inevitably fall for dismissal.

12. However, at this point the Judge added a coda to her  decision,  noting
    that  the  immigration  history  featured  two  applications  for   EEA
    residence cards in circumstances where the Appellants  could  not  have
    reasonably been thought entitled to  such  documents.  Then  the  Judge
    expressed her final  conclusion,  i.e.  that  the  appeal  fell  to  be
    dismissed.

13. Grounds of appeal  contended  that  the  decision  was  legally  flawed
    because

      a) The Judge had  directed  themselves  that  family  life  should  be
         discounted on the basis that residence in the  UK  was  precarious,
         whereas the  legislation  only  required  private  life  to  be  so
         treated;

      b) The Judge had speculated that there may have been some  impropriety
         regarding the EEA residence card applications so giving rise to  an
         appearance of bias;

      c) There was nothing implausible about a victim of  domestic  violence
         remaining in contact with a  former  abuser  given  the  well-known
         patterns of that kind of abuse;

      d) There was no reason to  doubt  the  First  Appellant's  honesty  in
         relation to the English language  fraud  allegation  based  on  her
         evidence, and the reasons given, i.e. a lack of evidence of  buying
         a train ticket for cash and her  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  test
         centre's location, were inadequate.

14. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  9
    November 2018 on the basis that the Judge's speculation about  the  EEA
    residence card applications might  arguably  have  affected  his  other
    conclusions. It was difficult  to  see  that  the  other  grounds  were
    arguable given there were no strong family life connections in the  UK.
    The finding of the implausibility of ongoing contact  with  an  abusive
    husband was not only driven by the questionable theory  that  a  victim
    could readily quit  their  abuser's  influence,  but  was  additionally
    predicated on the proposition that  it  was  odd  that  he  would  have
    retained an interest in the progress of a child who he was said to have
    rejected.

15. Before me, Ms Sriharan  argued  that  the  strong  adverse  credibility
    findings that featured throughout the decision below  could  only  have
    been motivated by the Tribunal's overall view of the mother's  honesty,
    and  one  could  not  be  confident  that  that  conclusion  was  truly
    independent of the concern expressed regarding her possible involvement
    in fraudulent EEA applications. She maintained that the  other  grounds
    of appeal were viable, though did not develop them in  any  detail.  Mr
    Bramble maintained that the thinking  expressed  on  the  historic  EEA
    residence card applications was  an  aside  which  had  not  materially
    impacted on the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal.

Findings and reasons

16. It seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal's decision overall  is  not
    flawed by any material error of law. There was little by way of private
    and family life ties outside the family unit.  The  younger  daughter's
    ties did not fall to be assessed via the rubric  of  reasonableness  as
    she lacked a sufficient period of residence in this country, but in any
    event, do not cover a period over which she had  any  independent  life
    outside the family unit.  There was  scant  evidence  of  any  domestic
    abuse  from  the  former  partner,  and  the   findings   as   to   the
    implausibility  of  the  asserted  relationship   and   the   lack   of
    corroborative  evidence  to  answer  those   concerns   are   perfectly
    reasonable ones, to which the Judge was entitled to  come.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to find that the  First  Appellant  had  not
    rebutted the concerns raised by the Secretary of State based on English
    language fraud.

17. The digression into the question of the EEA residence card applications
    was, in the overall  context,  ill-advised.  Indeed  it  promoted  this
    otherwise unnecessary appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  But  I  do  not
    consider that it showed bias; the reasonably  well  informed  objective
    bystander would not think any worse of a Judge  who  made  observations
    about the possibility of a person's immigration history raising  issues
    that might prompt additional suspicions than those so far raised by the
    Secretary of State.

18. However, I do not consider that this digression had any material impact
    on the reasoning of the Judge. The Judge expressly recognised that  the
    concern being raised was based at least partly on speculation, and  the
    comment is clearly compartmentalised, expressed quite independently  of
    the material reasoning on the rest of the case. Indeed it  follows  the
    conclusions on the proportionality of removal of  the  family,  and  is
    located well after the material findings on the primary facts to  which
    questions of credibility and honesty were relevant.

19. I accordingly find there was no material error of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal. The references to the EEA applications that
    form part of the First Appellant's immigration history  should  not  be
    taken into account by any future decision maker, as they  were  founded
    on speculation rather than evidence.  Whether  or  not  the  matter  is
    looked into further is a matter for the Respondent.

Decision

The appeals are dismissed.


Signed      Date 2 January 2019
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

