
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/03014/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 August 2019                     |On 13 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                RADDAPORN [N]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr V Sharma, of The Chamber Practice, Aberdeen,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In a response to a notice served on her under section 120 of  the  2002
    Act, the appellant, a citizen of Thailand, sought to remain in  the  UK
    as the mother of her two  UK  citizen  children.   A  letter  from  her
    representative dated 10 December 2016 founded on her meeting the  three
    conditions of section  117B(6)  of  that  Act:-  not  being  liable  to
    deportation, having a genuine and subsisting parental relationship, and
    it not being reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

 2. By a decision dated  10  February  2017,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application.  Under reference to the immigration rules, the
    respondent  found  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  sole  parental
    responsibility, and there was no evidence of formal access rights or of
    an active role in the upbringing of the children.

 3. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  By the time  of  the  hearing,  the
    appellant's older son was an adult.  In his decision promulgated on  27
    February 2018, Judge Doyle held that the appellant had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her younger son, and that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK, but that the interference  by
    the respondent was proportionate.  He dismissed the appeal.

 4. The FtT and UT refused permission to appeal to the UT.

 5. The appellant sought judicial review of the UT's refusal of permission.
     The parties entered into a joint minute:

         "... standing the facts found by the  FtT  ...  and  the  terms  of
         section 117B(6) ... the UT erred in law when refusing permission to
         appeal from the FtT to the UT by giving  insufficient  reasons  for
         its decision ..."

 6. On 26 June 2019, the Vice President of the UT  granted  permission,  in
    light of the interlocutor of the Court.

 7. Mr Govan referred to the immigration  rules  and  to  the  respondent's
    policy on family life and exceptional circumstances.  However,  he  was
    unable to present any argument by which, applying  section  117B(6)  to
    the FtT's findings, the appeal could rationally have been dismissed.

 8. The only decision open to the FtT was to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

 9. The statute speaks for itself, but see also Macdonald's Immigration Law
    and Practice, 9th ed., second supplement, vol 1, at 7.106.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted: the appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed.



11. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      Dated 2 August 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




