
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/31517/2015
     HU/03892/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 June 2017                               |On 3 July 2017                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Kayode Shafi Amuni
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ogunbiyi, Counsel, instructed by Spring
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This an appeal against the decision promulgated on 14 November 2016  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge M R  Oliver.   The  decision  considered  the
    appellant's claim that he was entitled to settlement on  the  basis  of
    ten years' lawful continuous long residence and that he was entitled to
    permanent residence as the  former  spouse  of  an  EEA  national  with
    retained rights of residence.

 2. In order to consider the error of law decision here it is necessary  to
    set out the appellant's immigration history in a  little  detail.   The
    appellant came to the UK from Nigeria with entry clearance as a student
    on 16 August 2005.  He was granted leave  to  enter  until  31  October
    2006.  He obtained further leave as a student until  31 October  2007.
    He then obtained a further grant of leave until 31 July 2008.

 3. On 21 July 2008 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a student.
     The application was rejected on 29 July 2008 because the fee  was  not
    correctly paid.

 4. On 2 August 2008 the appellant  applied  again  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a student.  That application was  rejected  on  15  September
    2008 as a mandatory section of the application form was not  completed.



 5. On 20 September 2008 the appellant applied again for further  leave  to
    remain as a student.  That application was rejected on 25 November 2008
    as it was made on an out of date application form.

 6. On 3 December 2012 the appellant applied for further leave to remain as
    a student.  This application was accepted as valid and he  was  granted
    leave to remain on 24 March 2009 until 31 December 2009.

 7. On 21 May 2009 the appellant applied for a Certificate of  Approval  to
    marry an EEA national.  That Certificate was issued to him  on  6  July
    2009.  He then married [MS] on 7 September 2009.  It  is  not  disputed
    that [MS] is a national of France.

 8. On 18 December 2009 the appellant applied for a residence permit as the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  On 6 June 2010 the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  that  application.   The  appellant  was
    successful on appeal however and on 5 November 2010 he was issued with
    a residence card showing his status as the spouse of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights until 5 November 2015.

 9. On 15 December 2014 the appellant and [MS] divorced.   On  16  December
    2014 the appellant applied for a residence card  showing  that  he  had
    permanent residence, claiming that he had a retained right of residence
    after the termination  of  the  marriage.   On  7  September  2015  the
    respondent refused that  application  maintaining  that  there  was  no
    evidence that the spouse was working as of the date of divorce.

10. On 27 October 2015 the appellant made a further application, this  time
    for settlement based on long residence.  That application  was  refused
    on 27 January 2016 as it was found that the period in 2008 during which
    he made the multiple applications for further leave which were rejected
    as invalid meant that he did not  have  ten  years'  continuous  leave.
    Further, the period in the UK as the spouse of an EEA national did  not
    amount to leave for the purposes  of  the  long  residence  Immigration
    Rules.

11. Both appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver on 13 October
    2016.  At [14] Judge Oliver found that the applicant had shown books of
    invoices for his wife's earnings from June 2010 to September 2013.   He
    goes on to state as follows in [15]

         "It follows from the evidence that at the date of his  divorce,  15
         December 2014, the appellant had resided in the United Kingdom  for
         a continuous period of five years.  I  am  satisfied  that  he  had
         resided in accordance  with  the  Regulations  during  that  period
         because, although they had not been residing together  since  "some
         time in 2013", it is the date of divorce that counts in EEA law and
         he  has,  albeit  late,  shown,  by  her  earlier  wage  slips  and
         subsequent invoices, that she was a qualified worker throughout the
         five-year period.  The marriage had lasted for at least three years
         and they had lived together in the United Kingdom for at least  one
         year.  The appellant is entitled to permanent residence  under  the
         EEA Regulations. "

12. Judge Oliver also made a decision on the long residence application  in
    [16]:

         "16. In respect of the appellant's application under long-term non-
         EEA residence the respondent has relied  upon  the  breaks  in  his
         leave when applying for extension of his  student  leave.   I  note
         that  in  the  refusal  the  respondent  accepts  that  these  were
         'rejected' and does not use  the  word  'refused'.   I  accept  the
         distinction which was argued at the hearing.   Although  the  whole
         process took some considerable time, most of this passage  of  time
         occurred because of the time it took the respondent  to  deal  with
         each of the three submissions.  It seems that  the  respondent  may
         also have accepted the difference between 'rejected' and 'refused',
         because when the final objection was met the appellant was  granted
         leave.  It follows that  I  find  the  periods  between  the  first
         rejection and the subsequent grant of further leave were covered by
         Section 3C leave under the Immigration Act 1971.

         17.  That helps the appellant only to an extent, however, since the
         time spent in the United Kingdom under the  EEA  Regulations  is  a
         right to reside and not the same as leave to enter.  By  itself  it
         cannot count in the computation of  time.   As  a  matter  of  law,
         therefore, the appeal must fail.

         18.  That, however,  is  not  an  end  of  the  matter,  since  the
         respondent's guidance states that in precisely these  circumstances
         the exercise  of  discretion  is  to  be  undertaken.   Since  this
         exercise has not hitherto been undertaken, therefore, I refuse this
         application under the Rules but  remit  the  decision  for  further
         consideration by the respondent."

13. Having made  those  findings  on  the  EEA  application  and  the  long
    residence application, apparently satisfied with the  evidence  on  the
    former but not the latter, Judge Oliver goes on to say this  under  the
    heading "Notice of Decision":

         "The appeal under the Rules is allowed.

         The  appeal  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
         Regulations 2006 is  refused  but  the  decision  is  remitted  for
         further consideration."

14. Two material errors of law are alleged by the  respondent  and  I  find
    both are made out.

15. Firstly, the substantive contents of [15] to [18] make  it  clear  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not find that the  application  under
    the Immigration Rules could be allowed. The appellant  cannot  show  10
    years' continuous lawful residence. The  immigration  history  set  out
    above shows that he had no leave from 29 July 2008 until 24 March 2009.
    He did not have Section 3C leave during that time.

16. Mr Ogunbiyi sensibly conceded this error of law, that this part of  the
    appeal had to be re-made and  also  that  in  the  re-making  the  long
    residence application had to fail.

17. The second error of law is in the finding of fact and conclusion of the
    EEA retained right of residence decision.  The test the  applicant  had
    to  meet  here  included  establishing  that  his  former  spouse   was
    exercising Treaty rights at the date of the divorce. That is the  clear
    meaning of Regulation 10 (5) (a) of the EEA Regulations which  requires
    that the person "ceased to be a family member of a qualified person  on
    the termination of the marriage (my italics)."

18. It is undisputed that the evidence before Judge Oliver showed only that
    the spouse had been working up until September 2013. It  did  not  show
    her exercising Treaty rights thereafter and not as of the divorce on 15
    December 2014.

19. In addition, the final wording of the decision goes on  to  refuse  the
    EEA  appeal  but  also  states  that  it  was  "remitted  for   further
    consideration". Following the changes to the statutory appeal regime in
    the Immigration Act 2014, there is no jurisdiction for  an  Immigration
    Judge to find that a decision is not in accordance  with  the  law  and
    remit a case to the respondent.

20. These matters amounted to a further error  on  a  point  of  law  which
    required the EEA decision to be set aside and remade.

21. I proceeded to hear evidence from Mr Amuni. He explained the  steps  he
    had taken to try to get evidence  to  show  his  ex-wife  continued  to
    exercise Treaty rights up until the time of the divorce. He stated that
    she refused to answer his telephone calls after she  left  their  home.
    Her number eventually did not respond at all. He approached a friend of
    hers who told him that she did not know where his wife was. He rang her
    brother in France who told him he did not know where [MS]  was  either.
    The appellant stated that he was on good terms with the brother so  did
    not think he would  lie  to  him  about  this.  He  had  contacted  the
    accountants who had assisted with evidence in support  of  the  earlier
    EEA residence card. They stated only  that  the  company  she  ran  was
    closed down in 2011; see [54] of the bundle.

22. It was argued for the appellant that he had taken all reasonable  steps
    to find out what he could and in those circumstances, following her own
    guidance, the respondent was under an obligation to make  enquiries  of
    her own. He relied  in  particular  on  page  20  of  the  respondent's
    guidance dated 7 February 2017. That page is headed "Applicants who are
    unable to provide all the evidence of their EEA Sponsor". It states:

         "In cases where there has been  a  breakdown  in  the  relationship
         between the applicant and their EEA national  sponsor  it  may  not
         always be possible for them to get the documents that are needed to
         support their application.

         ...

         Another example would be the  applicant's  relationship  has  ended
         under difficult circumstances but they have  provided  evidence  to
         show that they have made  every  effort  to  provide  the  required
         documents. Such  as,  attempting  to  make  contact  with  the  EEA
         national sponsor during divorce proceedings.

         When dealing with these cases you must take  a  pragmatic  approach
         and:

          - consider each case on its merits

          - if you are satisfied the  applicant  cannot  get  the  evidence
            themselves, make enquiries  on  their  behalf  where  possible,
            getting agreement from your senior caseworker before doing so."

23. I did not find that the evidence before me showed  that  the  appellant
    had made "every effort to provide the  required  documents".  I  accept
    that he contacted  the  accountants  who  had  prepared  his  ex-wife's
    business accounts. That is not sufficient to show that  "every  effort"
    was made. The appellant made no mention in his witness statement  dated
    22 March 2015 of making any attempts to contact his ex-wife. He made no
    reference to it in his statement dated 12 September 2016.  He  made  no
    reference to the very specific evidence he gave at  the  hearing  about
    contacting her friend and her brother. I found  the  omission  of  this
    evidence from the statement to undermine the  appellant's  credibility.
    The bundle of materials shows at [12]-[15] that he was receiving  legal
    advice at that time so could be expected to be aware  of  the  need  to
    evidence his attempts to contact his wife.

24. I also did not find it credible that where the couple had been  married
    from 2009 to 2013 that there were only two  people  known  to  him  who
    might know where his wife could be or assist him to contact her.

25. Where the appellant has not shown that he had  made  "every  effort  to
    provide the required documents" the  respondent's  guidance  on  making
    enquiries on his behalf does not come into play.

26. I did not find that the appellant had shown that as of the date of  the
    divorce his wife was exercising Treaty rights. Regulation 10 (5) of the
    EEA Regulations is not met.  The  appeal  against  refusal  of  an  EEA
    residence card showing retained rights of residence is refused.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law in both appeals and is set aside.

28. The appeal under the Immigration Rules on  long  residence  grounds  is
    refused.

29. The appeal under the EEA Regulations against  refusal  of  a  residence
    card showing retained rights of residence is refused.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 30 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
