
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03382/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th November 2017                         |On 17th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Danyyila Vynnytska
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative, litigant in person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghaffar promulgated on 9th May 2017 allowing the  appeal
    of the Appellant on the basis of her application on the  basis  of  her
    human rights claim in respect of Article 8 of the  European  Convention
    of Human Rights following a refusal by the Secretary of State  on  21st
    January 2016.  The Secretary of State appealed  against  that  decision
    and was granted permission  to  appeal  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pickup on 21st September 2017, the grounds  upon  which  permission  to
    appeal were arguable are framed in the following terms:

         "The application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was
         not received until 20.7.17 and so is  substantially  out  of  time.
         The explanation is that subsequent to the decision, the  Respondent
         received important information, dated 19.6.17, but only received by
         the  Respondent  on  17.7.17.   It  comprises  a  letter  from  the
         Appellant's husband, completely contradicting the Appellant's  case
         before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  the  circumstances,  I  extend
         time in the interests of fairness and justice.

         It is arguable that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
         made on a false premise, or at least that the evidence was  tainted
         so that the decision was made in error of law."

 2. I was not provided with a  Rule  24  reply  but  was  provided  with  a
    statement from the Appellant which arrived  under  cover  of  a  letter
    dated 2nd October 2017 and numbered some seven pages and bore the  same
    date alongside the Appellant's husband's statements  of  21st  November
    2015 and 10th March 2017 and photos of  the  Appellant's  self-designed
    clothing collection.

 3. Given that the Appellant was a litigant in person I asked the Secretary
    of State's representative to make her submissions in  extremely  simple
    terms and I canvassed with the Appellant whether she understood all  of
    the arguments made and ensured that she comprehended the procedure, the
    complaints against the First-tier Tribunal's decision, and was able  to
    ventilate her reasons in reply as to why that decision  was  free  from
    error and was able to make any other submissions she saw fit.

Error of Law

 4. At the close of the hearing I reserved my decision which  I  shall  now
    give.  I do find that there has been a procedural irregularity  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that  it  should
    be set aside.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

 5. As is  clear  from  the  grant  of  permission  by  Judge  Pickup,  the
    application by the Secretary of State to appeal was made out  of  time,
    however an extension of time was granted  and  the  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's  husband  was  taken  into  account  in   determining   the
    arguability of the Grounds of Appeal.  For the sake of  completeness  I
    have looked at the evidence from the Appellant by way of her  statement
    of 2nd October 2017 and also that of the husband by way  of  the  typed
    document dated 9th June 2017 annexed to the Grounds  of  Appeal,  which
    both constitute evidence that was not before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but which I have admitted pursuant to Rule 15 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal)  Procedure  Rules  2008  in  order  to  assist  me  in
    considering  the  extremely  unusual  scenario  that  this  appeal  has
    revealed.

 6. It is said by the Secretary of State in her Grounds of Appeal that  the
    reason for bringing the statement from the Appellant's husband  to  the
    attention  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  because  it   was   considered
    "inappropriate to refuse to implement a Tribunal determination  without
    a challenge".  Whilst this may not have been the best course of  action
    as this evidence postdates the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    this evidence cannot in of itself necessarily reveal a  material  error
    in law unless it highlights a material mistake of fact.

 7. In my view whilst this evidence from the Appellant's husband  and  from
    the Appellant in reply does not highlight a mistake of fact per se,  it
    does to my mind however highlight that the evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was incomplete and the picture given of the  relationship
    between the Appellant and her husband was more complex and nuanced than
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  told  -  both  by  the  Appellant's
    husband and by the Appellant.  I have chosen my words carefully  as  it
    is not for me to make any decision upon that  relationship,  but  I  am
    satisfied, having seen the evidence from the  Appellant's  husband  and
    the Appellant that there are matters which ought to have  been  brought
    to  the  attention  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  putting   it
    neutrally, which was not done by the Appellant's husband  at  the  very
    least, particularly if he harboured doubts about that relationship.

 8. Given my view of the evidence I exercise the Tribunal's powers pursuant
    to Rule 43(1) of the 2008 Rules and set aside the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal as I consider it in the interests of  justice  to  do  so
    under sub-paragraph (1)(a) of Rule 43 and as in my  view  sub-paragraph
    (2)(d) applies to this  scenario,  namely  that  there  has  been  some
    procedural irregularity in the proceedings which is what one  can  only
    describe of the present scenario where the Appellant's husband has  not
    revealed the full facts of his relationship with the Appellant  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  again  putting  it  neutrally,  and  where  this
    evidence may have affected the Tribunal's view as to  the  'loving  and
    caring relationship' described by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at
    paragraphs 12 and 16 of the decision.

 9. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I was told  by
    the Appellant that she wished the matter to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe for the Secretary of State did  not
    indicate any opposition to that request  and  given  that  this  matter
    requires fresh findings of fact and will necessitate  consideration  of
    the evidence from the Appellant's husband of 19th June  2017  and  from
    the Appellant of 2nd October 2017, besides any other material that  the
    Appellant or the Secretary of State wish to produce, my view is that it
    is sensible and fair and just to remit this matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. Although the Upper Tribunal will no longer be apprised of this  appeal,
    in my view this appeal should be  directed  to  the  attention  of  the
    Resident Judge at IAC Taylor House. In my view it would  also  be  only
    fair and just for a direction to be made that the  Appellant's  husband
    attend any future hearing at the First-tier  Tribunal  (notwithstanding
    his disabilities) in order that he be  deposed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  so  that  he  can  give  a  comprehensive  account   of   his
    relationship with the Appellant next time around but so he can also  be
    susceptible to  cross-examination  by  the  Appellant  (or  any  future
    representative), should it prove necessary in her view  in  furtherance
    of her appeal.





Notice of Decision

11. The appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed.   The  making  of  the
    previous decision involved a procedural irregularity in the proceedings
    and has been set aside in the interests of justice pursuant to Rule  43
    of the Procedure Rules 2008.

Directions

12. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a differently constituted bench.

13. As discussed above, this appeal is to be directed for the attention  of
    the Resident Judge at IAC Taylor House for any further case management,
    and so that any suitable  directions  can  be  made  for  securing  the
    attendance of the Appellant's husband.

14. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini


