
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03656/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2019                    |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr alex antonio evans
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Clark, Counsel, instructed by J M Wilson


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 15 May 2019 of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fowell which allowed the appeal of  Mr  Evans  on  human
    rights grounds in the context of deportation.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I refer to Mr Evans as the appellant
    and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  as  the
    respondent, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Mr Evans is a national of Jamaica, born on 2 September 1998.

 4. Mr Evans came to the UK in 2002 at the age of 4.  He came  on  a  visit
    visa with his father and overstayed.  His  status  was  regularised  in
    August 2010 when he was granted leave to remain as a dependant  of  his
    mother.  He was granted a further period of three years'  discretionary
    leave to remain.

 5. By the time of the second grant of leave, Mr Evans had  been  convicted
    of the first of a number of criminal offences.  On 23 December 2013  he
    was convicted at Birmingham Juvenile Court of robbery and on 21 January
    2014 he was given a twelve month referral order for twelve months.

 6. On 7 November 2014 the sentence was varied to  a  youth  rehabilitation
    order and a curfew requirement for three months with tagging.

 7. Also in 2014, Mr Evans was excluded from school.

 8. On 17 October 2014 the appellant was convicted of  attempt/theft  of  a
    cycle and on 7 November 2014 he was sentenced to a youth rehabilitation
    requirement and a curfew requirement for three months of tagging.

 9. On 23 January 2015 he was convicted of failing to surrender to  custody
    at an appointed time and of theft - shoplifting.  He was fined a  total
    of �70.

10. On 4 December 2015  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  Birmingham  and
    Solihull Juvenile Court of theft from a person and on  8  January  2016
    was  given  a  supervision  requirement  for  twelve  months,  a  youth
    rehabilitation order for twelve months and  a  curfew  requirement  for
    twelve weeks with electronic tagging.

11. On 5 April 2016 he was convicted of robbery at Birmingham  Crown  Court
    and on 6  May  2016  at  the  same  court  was  sentenced  to  a  youth
    rehabilitation  order  with  ISSP  for  eighteen  months   and   curfew
    requirement for six months with electronic tagging.

12. On 26 July 2017 he was convicted at Birmingham Crown Court  of  robbery
    and on 7 December 2017 was sentenced to 21 months' detention in a Young
    Offender Institution.

13. On 22 November 2018 Mr Evans was convicted at Birmingham  and  Solihull
    Magistrates' Court  of  possessing  a  controlled  drug  -  class  B  -
    cannabis/cannabis resin.  He was  given  a  conditional  discharge  for
    twelve months.

14.  In  light  of  those  matters  the  respondent  commenced  deportation
    proceedings against the appellant.  He was informed on 15 December 2017
    that he was liable to deportation under Section 32 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2007.  On 7 February 2019 the respondent  wrote  to  the  appellant
    informing him that he was  the  subject  of  a  deportation  order  and
    finding that the decision to deport him did not breach his rights under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

15. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  appeared  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell in Birmingham on 1 May 2019.

16. In paragraph 32 of the decision, Judge Fowell found that the  Appellant
    did not have a relationship with a qualifying partner.  He  also  found
    that the question was academic as the  claimed  relationship  had  been
    formed whilst the appellant's immigration status  was  precarious.  The
    First-tier Tribunal judge concluded that the appellant did not meet the
    provisions of paragraph 399(b)(i) of the Immigration Rules.

17. In paragraph 33 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal found that  the
    Appellant had not shown that his daughter was British.  As a result  he
    could not meet the provisions of paragraph 399(a)(i) of the Immigration
    Rules.

18. Further, in paragraphs 34 to 36 of the decision, the judge went  on  to
    consider whether, even if it had been shown that the child was British,
    the evidence showed that the appellant's deportation would  be  "unduly
    harsh" for her.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded  that  the  evidence
    did not support such a finding,  an  additional  reason  why  paragraph
    399(a)(i) was not met.

19. The First-tier  Tribunal  then  turned  in  paragraphs  37  and  38  to
    consideration of paragraph 339A of the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge
    found that the appellant had not been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
    most of his life.  In paragraph 37 he identified that by  the  date  of
    the decision under challenge, the appellant has been lawfully  resident
    for 44% of his life, had spent 80% of his life in the UK and  that  the
    period of unlawful residence was whilst he was a child.

20. In paragraph 38 he found that the appellant was socially and culturally
    integrated in the UK, stating:

         "The second aspect is that he is socially and culturally integrated
         in the UK.  Although it is said that his record of offending  shows
         that he is not, the test is only ever applied  to  those  who  have
         committed at least one offence.   That  is  not  therefore  a  good
         reason to find against him.  Given the length of his stay in the UK
         and the lack of any strong claim from any other society or culture,
         I have no difficulty in concluding that this test is met."

21. In paragraphs 39 to 43  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    appellant could not show that there would be very significant obstacles
    to his reintegration in Jamaica.

22. In paragraphs 45 to 57 the judge went on to consider whether there were
    very compelling circumstances shown over and above  those  set  out  in
    paragraphs 399  and  399A,  the  same  provisions  being  reflected  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2 of Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

23. In paragraph 46 of the  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sets  out
    paragraphs 30 and 31 of NA (Pakistan) v SSHD and Others [2016] EWCA Civ
    662.  It is not wholly  clear  why  paragraph  30  is  included  as  it
    concerns the approach to serious offenders, that is, someone who has  a
    sentence of 4 years or more, rather than a "medium"  offender  such  as
    this appellant with his 21 month sentence.

24. The judge went on in paragraphs 47 to 51 to return to the provisions of
    paragraph 399A and Exception 1 of s.117C. In  paragraph  47  he  states
    that if those provisions were not met "an exception may be  allowed  to
    someone who  narrowly  failed  one  of  them,  or  even  two,  but  did
    outstandingly well in the other." It is not clear where he  draws  that
    principle from. He found  that  the  appellant's  length  of  residence
    andnot being responsible for his illegal residence as a child should be
    weighed in his favour.  He  found  that  ther  would  be  "significant"
    obstacles  to  reintegration  even  if  they   would   not   be   "very
    significant". He went to conclude in paragraph 51:

         "Mr Evans abundantly meets the substance, if not the letter, of the
         first limb of the test about length of residence, abundantly  meets
         the second requirement of being  integrated,  and  there  would  at
         least be significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Jamaica.
         Given the weight that has to be given to the First-tier aspects,  I
         conclude that the shortfall in the third aspect is counterbalanced,
         and so there are the necessary compelling circumstances here."

25. The judge goes on in paragraph 52 to find "the Rules are met." He  then
    states that although "It is not strictly necessary to go on to consider
    the wide balancing exercise under Article 8, but I shall do so  briefly
    for completeness."  What follows is  a  further  consideration  of  the
    "very  compelling  circumstances"  test.  The  judge   considered   the
    requirements of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 but considered they had little impact.  He  placed  weight  on
    the appellant's family life with his parents and  his  mother  who  was
    "desperately anxious" that the appellant remained in the  UK  and  also
    referred to his relationship with his daughter. In paragraph 56 of  the
    decision the judge referred to the appellant having  committed  all  of
    the offences as a juvenile and referred to the principles in  the  case
    of Maslov v Austria [2008] GC ECHR 1638/03. He concluded  in  paragraph
    57 that "deportation would be disproportionate."

26. The respondent was granted permission to appeal against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal in a decision dated 5 June 2019.

27. The respondent's grounds argued that having found  that  the  appellant
    could not meet any of the provisions of paragraphs 399 or 399A  or  the
    mirroring provisions in Exceptions 1 and  2  of  Section  117C  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  that  was,  without
    anything significant, fatal to the very compelling circumstances  test.
    The appellant's relationship with his parents and his offending  having
    occurred mainly whilst he was a juvenile simply  could  not  show  very
    compelling circumstances sufficient to outweigh the public interest.

28.  Further,  the  Respondent  challenged  the  finding  at  paragraph  38
    concerning social and cultural integration which appeared to have  been
    made on the basis that the appellant's offending behaviour  was  not  a
    relevant factor.

29. As set out above, the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the  provisions  of  paragraphs  399  and  399A  or  the
    Exceptions in s.117C. The correct  approach  in  the  "very  compelling
    circumstances assessment" that follows for  someone  with  a  21  month
    sentence is set out in paragraph 32 of NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA
    Civ 662:

         "32. Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  "near  miss"
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   "very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2". He would need to have a far stronger case than that by
             reference to the interests protected by  Article  8  to  bring
             himself within  that  fall  back  protection.  But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2. The decision maker, be it the
             Secretary of State or a tribunal, must look at all the matters
             relied upon collectively, in order to determine  whether  they
             are  sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh  the  high  public
             interest in deportation."

30. Having failed to meet the provisions of Exception 1  and  Exception  2,
    the appellant had to show features that "have such  great  force"  that
    they could amount to very compelling circumstances. This appellant  was
    not even at the "near miss" level identified  in  paragraph  32  of  NA
    (Pakistan). He did not meet the residence requirements  and  could  not
    show very significant obstacles to reintegration in Jamaica.  Following
    paragraph 32 of NA (Pakistan), he therefore had to show "a far stronger
    case" than is required by paragraphs 399 and 399A and Exceptions 1  and
    2 of Section 117C in order to meet the "very compelling  circumstances"
    test.  There are cases, in principle, which might meet  those  criteria
    but this was not one of them. Two of  the  qualifying  provisions  from
    paragraph 399A were not  met.  He  was  found  to  "have  a  reasonable
    opportunity to be accepted and to operate on  a  day-to-day  basis"  in
    Jamaica. Even allowing for the  appellant's  illegal  residence  having
    occurred whilst he was a minor and not responsible, this was not the "a
    far stronger case" required to amount to very compelling circumstances.
    That remains so even if his profile under paragraphs 399  and  399A  is
    taken together with a close  relationship  with  his  parents  and  his
    having offended as  a  child.  It  was  irrational  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to find otherwise in paragraphs 53 to 57.

31. Further, the respondent's submission that the reasoning in paragraph 38
    of the decision on the  appellant  having  shown  social  and  cultural
    integration in the UK has merit.  Numerous cases from the higher courts
    have indicated that  criminal  offending  is  a  relevant  matter  when
    considering social and  cultural  integration;  see,  for  example,  AM
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 774 at paragraphs 70 to  75.  Criminal
    offending is not determinative of being unable to establish social  and
    cultural  integration  but  it  remains  a  relevant  factor  in   that
    assessment.  The First-tier Tribunal here was in error in proceeding on
    the basis that the appellant's criminal offending was  not  a  relevant
    factor when  assessing  his  social  and  cultural  integration.   That
    conclusion is  in  error  and  must  be  set  aside.  It  also  further
    undermines the findings in paragraph 51 that the appellant  could  show
    very compelling circumstances as it is not correct that  the  appellant
    could show "abundantly" that he was socially and culturally integrated.



32. For these reasons, it is my conclusion that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal must be set aside for the decision on the  provisions  of
    paragraph 399A(b) concerning social and cultural  integration  and  the
    very compelling circumstances assessment to be remade.

33. The presumption in paragraph 7 of Part  3  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012 is that any  re-making  will
    take place in the Upper Tribunal. I  found  nothing  to  displace  that
    presumption here and decided that the re-making of appeal  should  take
    place in the Upper Tribunal.

34. Prior to the hearing the appellant  was  sent  a  direction  indicating
    that, in the event of an error of law being found, the  Tribunal  would
    proceed to remake the decision.  Nothing was received from either party
    suggesting any other course of action was appropriate.

35. Further, there was no  cross  appeal  or  Rule  24  response  from  the
    appellant. There is therefore no challenge to the findings of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  on  paragraph  399  and  they  are   preserved;   Smith
    (appealable decisions; PTA requirements; anonymity) [2019]  UKUT  00216
    (IAC) applied.

36. The legal representatives were without all of the materials  that  were
    before the First-tier  Tribunal.  They  were  provided  with  the  full
    materials and afforded time to consider those documents. They then made
    oral submissions and the decision was reserved.

37. It is clear from the matters set out above that  the  appellant  cannot
    show that he meets the residence requirements of paragraph 399A(a).  He
    has not been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life.

38. Further, it is my view that this appellant cannot not show that  he  is
    socially and culturally integrated into the UK.  His criminal  history,
    for someone  of  such  a  young  age,  is  properly  described  by  the
    respondent as persistent.  It began when the  appellant  was  aged  15.
    The index offence was committed when  he  was  an  adult.   Even  after
    having been sentenced to imprisonment in a Young Offenders' Institution
    for 21 months for robbery, he went on to obtain  a  further  conviction
    for possession of cannabis.  His  behaviour  shows  disregard  for  the
    social and cultural values and wellbeing of those  living  in  the  UK.
    The appellant seeks to rely on having been educated in the UK in  order
    to show social and cultural integration but he was excluded from school
    in 2014.  This was a further indication that he was  not  socially  and
    culturally integrated into the UK.

39. As above, the appellant cannot show that he will face very  significant
    obstacles to reintegration in Jamaica.

40. He therefore does  not  meet  the  provisions  of  paragraph  399A  and
    Exception 2 of s.117C by some margin. He does not meet  the  provisions
    of paragraph 399 and Exception 1 of s.117C by some margin.   He  cannot
    show a "near miss" regarding those provisions. It is my conclusion that
    there are no other circumstances here which  could  amount  to  "a  far
    stronger case" that could amount to very compelling  circumstances.  In
    reaching that conclusion I place weight in his favour given that he was
    a minor when he was here unlawfully and cannot be held responsible  for
    that. I accept that his deportation will be hard for him, his  parents.
    However, the material here does not show a seriousness for any of those
    concerned  that  could  amount  to  a  finding   of   very   compelling
    circumstances, certainly not one capable of meeting the high  threshold
    for a finding of very compelling circumstances.

41. I also accept that most of  the  appellant's  offences  were  committed
    whilst he was a minor and that some weight attracts to his  case  where
    that is so. It is of concern, however, that having  been  convicted  of
    robbery whilst aged 17 years' old he committed the same offence  as  an
    adult less than a year later. The criminal court clearly viewed this as
    very  serious  where  he  was  given  a  lengthy  custodial   sentence.
    Following s. 117C(2), the seriousness of the offence adds weight to the
    public interest in his deportation.  His previous offences  also  weigh
    against him as does the further, albeit minor,  offence  that  followed
    the serious index offence.

42. In my judgment, the factors weighing in the  appellant's  favour,  even
    taken at their highest and cumulatively, are not sufficiently strong so
    as to outweigh the public interest in deportation.

43. For these reasons, it is my conclusion that the evidence  here  is  not
    capable of showing that very compelling circumstances  over  and  above
    the provisions of paragraphs 399 and 399A or the Exceptions  in  s.117C
    will arise if the appellant is deported. The appeal must  therefore  be
    refused.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade.

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed [pic]                                     Date 20 August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

