
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03330/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 January 2020                  |On 29 January 2020                  |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    C.S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                                  DECISION

Introduction

 1. Attendant to the grant of permission to appeal dated 23  December  2019
    directions were issued to the effect that, unless submissions were made
    to the contrary  by  either  party,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 19 February 2019 would be set aside on the  ground  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  concluding  that  it  did  not
    enjoy jurisdiction.

 2. There has been no response to those directions within the  time  period
    allotted.

 3. For the reasons set out in the permission  to  appeal  decision,  I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision should  be  set  aside,
    and this matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.

 5. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any judge other than JFtT Hussain.

 6. No findings of fact are preserved.

 7. An anonymity order was previously made by the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    reasons for making such an order are presently unclear and  so  at  the
    present time I do not set it aside. The First-tier Tribunal is directed
    to consider the appropriateness of the order continuing, and if  it  is
    to continue the Tribunal is to provide reasons.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 23 January 2020

