
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)   Appeals: HU/03665/2017
                                                               HU/03668/2017
                                                               HU/03672/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decisions & Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                   |
|on 4 January 2019                          |on 16 January 2019            |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     EO
                                     HO
                                     RO
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


            DETERMINATION AND REASONS, and notice of withdrawal.

 1. Designated FtT Judge Macdonald dismissed the appellants' appeals  by  a
    decision promulgated on 13 December 2017.  The FtT  refused  permission
    to appeal on 22 December 2017.  On a further set  of  grounds,  the  UT
    granted permission on 17 September 2018.


 2. The matters raised in the first set of grounds are:

      i) Failure to attach significant weight to the length of residence  of
         the third appellant, a "qualifying child" (under  reference  to  MA
         and others [2016] EWCA Civ 7058).

     ii) Failure to attribute the increased weight required to the length of
         residence (under reference to Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197).

    iii) Failure to give weight to the health conditions of  the  first  and
         second appellants, with  indications  of  non-availability  of  HIV
         medication in Ghana, and consequences for the child's welfare.

 3. The second set of grounds adds:

      i) Application of the  incorrect  and  more  exacting  test  of  "very
         significant obstacles", rather than reasonableness.

     ii) Failure to apply the correct test to  the  best  interests  of  the
         child, as set out in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 00088.

    iii) Justifying refusal of permission by reference  to  the  immigration
         history of the first and second appellants.

 4. Mr Ndubuisi submitted along the lines of the  grounds,  and  added  the
    following.  It was significant that the third appellant had been  close
    to registering as a British citizen; the judge should have applied  the
    presumption that leave was to be granted, absent  powerful  reasons  to
    the contrary; there were  no such reasons; the medical evidence did not
    reach the standard of article 3, but the judge overlooked its relevance
    to article 8; it had not been shown that  no  HIV  treatment  would  be
    available in Ghana, but there was uncertainty, which  impacted  on  the
    child's well-being and so on the reasonableness of return; the decision
    of the FtT should be set aside; taking  the  evidence  before  the  FtT
    together with the fact that  the  third  appellant  is  now  a  British
    citizen, the appeals of the  first  and  second  appellants  should  be
    allowed.  (Mr Ndubuisi,  sensibly,  withdrew  the  case  of  the  third
    appellant, which has been superseded by his citizenship.)

 5. Answering the submissions for the respondent, Mr  Ndubuisi  added  that
    the  judge  "convoluted"  the  distinct  tests  of  obstacles  and   of
    reasonability, and erred fundamentally by referring to the  immigration
    history of the first two appellants while assessing the best  interests
    of the child, who was not to be blamed for their shortcomings.  He said
    finally that "due weight had not been given to very weighty factors".

 6. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    the appellants have not shown that the making of the  decision  of  the
    FtT involved the making of any error on appoint of law,  such  that  it
    ought to be set aside.

 7. The grounds (particularly the first set) and the submissions are mainly
    insistence, and disagreement about the weight attached  to  matters  by
    the FtT, not propositions of error on points of law.

 8. The appellants do not show that the judge mixed up two tests.  At  [31]
    he clearly finds that the case  fails  on  both  tests:  there  was  no
    background material to suggest it would not be reasonable to expect the
    appellants to leave  the  UK,  and  there  were  no  "very  significant
    obstacles" to integration into Ghana.

 9. The judge might have framed  his  decision  differently  at  [33]  with
    reference to the public interest and the immigration history, if he had
    the benefit at the time of KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2018] UKSC 53, [2018] 1 W.L.R. 5273,  [2018]  10  WLUK
    380.   That would be a matter of  form  only.   He  clearly  posed  the
    central question as whether in all the circumstances it was  reasonable
    to expect the family to go to Ghana;  see  e.g.  [27].   The  important
    context, in light of KO, would be this: against  a  background  of  the
    parents having no right to remain in the UK, the natural expectation is
    that the child would go with them.

10. It is clear when reading the FtT's decision as a  whole  that  it  took
    account of all relevant considerations, including  the  length  of  the
    child's residence.  Even if it might be in the child's  best  interests
    to remain in the UK with his parents, there was nothing  to  show  that
    such advantage was more than marginal, or that it was unreasonable  for
    the child to leave as part of the family.

11. The appellants sought an anonymity direction, and  the  respondent  did
    not oppose that application.   It  may  be  doubted  whether  there  is
    anything in the case to justify departure from the  principle  of  open
    justice, but the point is marginal, and this decision is anonymised.

12. The appeals of the first and  second  appellants  are  dismissed.   The
    appeal of the third appellant is recorded as withdrawn.



    [pic]


    7 January 2019
    UT Judge Macleman


