
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/03895/2015
                                                               HU/03896/2015
                                                               HU/03897/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25 August 2017                     |On 8 September 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            BB (First Appellant)
                            NB (Second Appellant)
                            SB (Third Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Mustafa, Counsel, instructed by Kalam
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh.   They  are  father,  mother
    and son.  The third appellant was born in November 1999.  It is not  in
    dispute that he suffers from autism, autistic  spectrum  disorder,  OCD
    and agoraphobia.  The first appellant arrived  in  the  UK  in  October
    2006, the second and  third  appellants  entered  in  July  2007.   The
    decision under challenge in this case is that made by the respondent on
    24 July 2015 refusing to grant them  leave  to  remain  on  family  and
    private life grounds.  Their appeal  against  that  decision  had  been
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  Abebrese  in  September
    2016, but the latter's decision was set aside for legal error by Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral on 4 July  2017.   Thus  their  case  comes
    before me to re-make the decision against the appellants'  appeal.   In
    doing so I must also take into account a letter of 10 August 2017  from
    the third appellant's surgery and a letter dated 10 August 2017 from Dr
    Priti Patel, a Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist.

2.   In the proceedings before Judges Abebrese and Bagral the central  issue
    was whether the third  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by  virtue  of   it   being
    unreasonable to expect him to leave the UK and live in Bangladesh.  The
    appellants' argument has consistently been  that  the  third  appellant
    satisfies the reasonableness test because his case is on all fours with
    the sixth appellant (AZ) in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705.   Elias
    LJ allowed AZ's appeal in the following terms at paragraphs 95-104:

         "95. The  judge  considered  extensive  evidence  relating  to  the
             child's autism, which had resulted in him being identified  as
             a child with special educational  needs.  He  has  significant
             problems with language, social interaction  and  communication
             and displays stereotyped behavior and mannerisms. Very  active
             steps have been  taken  to  deal  with  his  problems  through
             regular therapy and specialist teaching.  The  judge  accepted
             that there would be very little prospect that the child  would
             receive support at this level in Pakistan since  the  evidence
             was  that  there  is  simply  not  the  degree  of   expertise
             available. The judge considered the  best  interests  of  this
             child and concluded that they would be to remain in the UK. He
             treated this as the  'strongest  element'  in  favour  of  the
             appeal.


         ...


         102. With all due respect to the careful analysis of the judge,  in
             my judgment this was not a conclusion open to  him  given  the
             overwhelming and permanent harm which would be caused to  this
             child's way of life if  he  were  to  return  to  Pakistan.  I
             recognize that the child  is  relatively  young  and  has  not
             developed significant social and cultural ties in the UK,  and
             but for this autism, there would be a strong case  for  saying
             that it would not be unreasonable to expect him to  leave  and
             live with his parents and younger brother  in  Pakistan.   But
             the  consequences  for  him   would   be   little   short   of
             catastrophic. The judge observed that allowing him  to  remain
             would be treating him as a citizen of the UK.  It  is  perhaps
             pertinent to note that qualifying children are UK citizens  or
             those with seven years' residence. It is  not  so  surprising,
             therefore, that they might be treated in a similar way.


         103. In my judgment, the observation of the  judge  to  the  effect
             that people who come on a temporary basis can be  expected  to
             leave cannot be true of the child. The purpose underlying  the
             seven year rule is that this kind of reasoning ought not to be
             adopted in their case. They are not to be blamed for the  fact
             that their parents  overstayed  illegally,  and  the  starting
             point is that their status should be legitimized unless  there
             is good reason not to do so. I accept that the position  might
             have been otherwise without the seven  years'  residence,  but
             that is a factor which must weigh heavily in  this  case.  The
             fact that the parents are overstayers and  have  no  right  to
             remain in their own right can thereafter  be  weighed  in  the
             proportionality balance against allowing the child to  remain,
             but that is after a recognition that the child's  seven  years
             of residence is a significant factor pointing the other way.


         104. I would therefore allow this appeal and since, in my view, the
             only conclusion open to the judge on the  facts  was  that  it
             would not be reasonable to require the child to leave the  UK,
             I would substitute  a  finding  that  the  appellants'  appeal
             should be allowed.


             ..."

3.   It is common ground that if the third appellant meets the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), then the first and  second  appellants  are
    also entitled to succeed in their appeals on the basis of s. 117B(6) of
    the NIAA 2002 as parents of a qualifying child who cannot reasonably be
    expected to leave the UK.

4.   I have set out the findings of the Court of Appeal  in  MA  as  regards
    the case of AZ because it is clearly central to the  issue  I  have  to
    decide whether there is a valid  basis  for  distinguishing  the  third
    appellant's case from that of AZ.

5.   In the course of very brief submissions Mr  Staunton  said  that  there
    was a  valid  basis  for  distinction,  namely  that  the  country  was
    different (Bangladesh, not Pakistan) and the relevant COI  in  relation
    to there being an Institute in Dhaka for the treatment of autism  which
    was set out by FtT Judge Abebrese in paragraph 26 of his decision.

6.   In response Mr Mustapha sought to rely on two main points.  First,  the
    fact that there was this Institute in Dhaka did not mean  it  would  be
    accessible to the third appellant as he had  agoraphobia  and  all  the
    treatment and education he received was in his parents' home  and  that
    would be the case in Bangladesh as well.  Second, he submitted that the
    existence of this Institute did not in itself establish  that  autistic
    children would not face very significant difficulties.   He  relied  in
    particular on The Link Magazine - Issue No. 60 December 2013  published
    by Autism - Europe and the following passages:

         "...


         In Bangladesh, children with autism who  are  fortunate  enough  to
         access medical services at  all  are  frequently  misdiagnosed  and
         given antipsychotic drugs due to the lack of knowledge about autism
         among doctors and professionals.   People  with  autism  and  their
         families often suffer  from  the  stigma  associated  with  autism.
         Parents are often frustrated and in a state  of  anguish  over  the
         lack of information and services that could  enable  them  to  help
         with their children.


         The mainstream education system  in  Bangladesh  rarely  meets  the
         needs of children with autism and other disabilities,  despite  the
         fact that the country has ratified the United Nations Convention on
         the Rights of Persons with  Disabilities  and  that  the  right  to
         educate is enshrined in its constitution.   And  the  situation  is
         much worse for children in rural and slum areas.


         Currently, around  500  disability  organisations  are  working  to
         provide services for people with disabilities in Bangladesh, mainly
         concentrated in the capital city, Dhaka.  There  are  now  numerous
         schools for children  with  disabilities  throughout  the  country,
         including around 20 schools in Dhaka.


         ...


         Autism awareness in Bangladesh and its challenges - 11  April  2016
         published  by  the  Independent,  a  national  English   newspaper,
         provides as follows:


         ...


         Due to lack  of  trained  professionals  we  are  unable  to  reach
         autistic children.  They don't have easy access to a tertiary level
         hospital.  Not all  doctors  at  Upazila  and  district  level  are
         educated on autism.  So misdiagnosis and mistreatment still occurs.


         Another  challenge  that  has  to  be  overcome  is  in  education.
         Autistic children have difficulties entering normal  schools,  even
         if they are  capable  intellectually  and  have  relatively  'good'
         behaviour.  Most schools are reluctant to have  autistic  students,
         they foresee many difficulties in handling  and  teaching  autistic
         children.


         There are no curriculums  for  training  of  teachers  of  autistic
         children, by government and private institutions.  Even there is no
         facility for short-term training for teachers of autistic children.
          Late diagnosis of autism in children occurs due to poor  awareness
         regarding autism among many doctors.  And  even  of  those  doctors
         screening children with autism, many do not know to whom  to  refer
         their patients.   The  cast  is  more  acute  for  under-privileged
         autistic children.


         We now have many adolescents on the spectrum who are not  going  to
         school, there is no occupational training for them, so most of them
         stay home and live with their parents, which creates a  big  stress
         for the family.  New babies are still being born who  later  get  a
         diagnosis of autism.  Without knowing the possible causes of autism
         we cannot stop the autism known.  No research is being done in this
         field either."

7.   Having considered the evidence and submissions, I consider that  I  can
    give my decision quite shortly.  The principal  reasons  why  Elias  LJ
    allowed the appeal of AZ were (1) that in the case of a child  who  had
    resided in the UK for more than seven  years  "there  must  be  a  very
    strong expectation that the child's best interests will be to remain in
    the UK with his parents as part of a family unit" ([46]) and that "very
    significant weight" needs to be given to the seven  year  residence  in
    the proportionality exercise ([49];)  and (2) that the  eldest  son  AZ
    had resided in the UK for over seven years and was  an  autistic  child
    with special needs.  The given facts regarding AZ were as  set  out  at
    paragraph 95.  Significantly Elias LJ considered that the  consequences
    of removal for AZ "would be  little  short  of  catastrophic"  ([102]).
    What is apparent from a comparison of the third  appellant's  and  AZ's
    circumstances is that the  former's  are,  if  anything,  significantly
    worse than AZ's.  In addition to autism he has OCD and agoraphobia  and
    as a result is effectively housebound.  His condition is also  said  to
    be worsening.  I have not been provided with the COI  relating  to  the
    facilities for treatment of autism in Pakistan  that  were  before  the
    Court of Appeal in MA, but leaving aside that I very  much  doubt  they
    are inferior to those in Bangladesh, the important fact  in  the  third
    appellant's case is that he is housebound so whether his  parents  were
    to live 60 miles away (as they claimed they would have to or nearby  to
    the Institute, this Institute's treatment would not  be  accessible  to
    him (the respondent has not  suggested  that  this  Institute  provides
    treatment for autistic children in their own homes).

8.    There  is  a  further  respect  in   which   the   third   appellant's
    circumstances are worse than AZ's, namely that one of the parents  (the
    second  appellant)  also  has  health  problems:   she   suffers   from
    depression, anxiety and suicidal ideation.

9.   In light of the above considerations, it would be  perverse  to  arrive
    at a different conclusion in the third appellant's case than that which
    was reached by the Court of Appeal in the AZ case.  Like  cases  should
    be treated alike  and  the  third  appellant's  circumstances  were  if
    anything worse than those of AZ.  There is  no  tenable  distinguishing
    feature in terms of the likely  catastrophic  effect  of  his  removal.
    Given that the third appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) in full, there can be no public interest outweighing  his
    right to protected family life.  Given that it is in his best interests
    to remain in the UK with his parents, the  appeals  of  the  first  two
    appellants must also succeed.

Notice of Decision

10.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside  for  material
    error of law.

     The decision I re-make is to allow the  appellants'  appeals  on  human
    rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:                                 Date: 6 September 2017
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

