
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03576/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25 September 2017                     |On 3 October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL MONSON


                                   Between

                           Entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ABDUL TURAY
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr A Kamara, Bestway Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Specialist Appeals Team appeals on behalf  of  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (post reference: SHEFO/177805) from the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Kevin Moore, sitting at Taylor House on  23  March
    2017) allowing the claimant's appeal against the decision to refuse  to
    grant him entry clearance for the purposes  of  settlement  under  Rule
    297.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction,  and
    I do not consider  that  the  claimant  requires  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The claimant is a national of Sierra Leone, who was  born  on  12  June
    1998.  Eight weeks prior to his 17th birthday,  he  applied  for  entry
    clearance to join his  father  on  a  permanent  basis  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  On 23 July 2015, the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO")  refused
    the application under Rule 297(i)(e).  He was not  satisfied  that  one
    parent  was  present  and  settled  in  the  UK  who   had   had   sole
    responsibility for his upbringing.

 3. His reasoning was that the claimant stated in his application that  his
    mother had passed away in May 2006, and since that  time  that  he  had
    resided in the care of his uncle.  In support of this  claim,  a  death
    certificate issued by the Ministry of Health had been  submitted.   But
    it was  dated  two  months  prior  to  the  date  of  application.   No
    explanation had been provided to explain the delay in  registering  his
    mother's death or why his father  had  waited  until  now  to  make  an
    application for him to join him in the  UK.  This  indicated  that  his
    father was satisfied  that  he  was  being  adequately  cared  for  and
    maintained in  Sierra  Leone.   For,  there  had  been  no  immigration
    restrictions on his father's ability to sponsor a dependent child  from
    Sierra Leone.  Given the timing of the application, and the  fact  that
    he had now completed his secondary education,  the  ECO  was  satisfied
    that the decision for him to join his father  in  the  UK  was  one  of
    choice rather than "a core responsibility and necessity."

 4. Although he claimed to have lost his mother in May 2006, there  was  no
    evidence to demonstrate that his father had played an integral role  in
    his life since  his  mother's  alleged  passing.   While  the  ECO  was
    satisfied that his father  had  supported  him,  this  was  limited  to
    financial responsibility only.  There was no evidence that  his  father
    had played any other role in his  life  in  terms  of  decision-making,
    emotional support and the general care and support  a  parent  provides
    for their child.

The Hearing before, and the decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing of the claimant's  appeal,  both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  Mr Bahja of Counsel appeared on behalf of  the  claimant.
    The Judge received oral evidence from the sponsor, Mr Sheku Turay.  The
    Judge's finding of facts and conclusions were  set  out  at  paragraphs
    [18]-[26] of his subsequent decision.

 6. He was satisfied that substantial reliable and  credible  evidence  had
    been provided to show that the sponsor had kept in regular contact with
    his son in Sierra Leone since the sponsor came to the UK in  2006.   He
    was further satisfied that since that time the  sponsor  had  exercised
    sole responsibility with regard to his son,  notwithstanding  that  the
    claimant had been living with the uncle  on  the  instructions  of  the
    sponsor since 2006.  The Judge went on to explain how  he  had  reached
    this conclusion in paragraphs [20]-[25].

 7. At paragraph 25, he said: "I have no concerns with regard to the  death
    certificate of the [claimant's] mother which I find to be  genuine  and
    authentic and the fact that registration was delayed was not  an  issue
    of concern in this case.  I am satisfied that at the present time,  due
    to the condition of the uncle, he would not be in a condition  to  look
    after the [claimant] albeit the [claimant] is nearing adulthood."

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal on behalf of the ECO arguing that  the  Judge  had
    failed to give adequate reasons for a finding on a material matter.  At
    paragraph [25], the Judge had given no reasons  for  finding  that  the
    death certificate was genuine and authentic.   In  the  light  of  this
    error, the Judge's finding on sole responsibility was also flawed, such
    that the decision should be set aside.

 9. Permission to appeal on this narrow ground was granted  by  Judge  Paul
    Doyle on 26 July 2017.  He observed that at paragraph [9] the Judge had
    correctly considered the guidance given  in  TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e):
    Sole responsibility) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.  However, the Judge  had
    not said why he found the appellant's mother's death certificate to  be
    genuine, or  explained  why  the  delay  in  the  registration  of  the
    appellant's mother's death was not an issue of  concern  in  the  case.
    The Judge further observed as follows: "Article 8 ECHR is not raised in
    the grounds of appeal.  The Judge's decision allows  the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules only.  The parties may  want  to  consider  their
    respective positions now that permission to appeal is being granted."

The Rule 24 Response

10. Mr Bahja of Counsel settled an extensive Rule 24 response opposing  the
    appeal.  The issue of the death certificate had not featured  with  any
    prominence at the hearing.  The case advanced by the Presenting Officer
    at the hearing was that the responsibility for the  claimant  had  been
    shared between the uncle in Sierra Leone and the  sponsor  in  the  UK.
    The Judge's finding at paragraph [25] was in effect a finding  that  he
    accepted that the claimant's  mother  was  dead.   There  were  "silent
    facts" with regard to the death of the claimant's mother in 2006  which
    supported the Judge's conclusion that the mother was probably dead.  Mr
    Bahja went on to list the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  Judge  in
    paragraphs [18] to [24] which, he submitted, supported this inference.

Discussion

11. The headline guidance given in TD (Yemen) is as follows:

         "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be  decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  has  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life.  However, where both parents are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it would be exceptional that one of  them  will
         have sole responsibility.

12. The question  of  sole  responsibility  arises  under  Rule  297(i)(e).
    However, the facts asserted in the application disclosed an alternative
    basis on which the claimant qualified for  entry  clearance  under  the
    Rule, namely that one parent was present and settled in the UK and  the
    other parent was dead, which is the alternative gateway requirement set
    out in Rule 297(i)(d).

13. The position taken in the refusal decision with regard to the  asserted
    death of the claimant's mother was not one of outright  disbelief,  but
    of scepticism, particularly with regard to the asserted date of  death.
    For, on the face of it, his mother's death had been registered  some  9
    years after the event.

14. In his witness  statement  signed  on  5  February  2017,  the  sponsor
    asserted that the claimant's mother had died on 20 May 2016.   He  said
    that he had  obtained  a  replacement  death  certificate  because  the
    original  death  certificate  was  missing.   He  explained  that   the
    replacement death certificate was issued to him  bearing  the  date  of
    issue - not the date of original registration.

15. If, as part of his reasoning, the  Judge  had  expressly  accepted  the
    credibility of this explanation, his reasoning would have  been  beyond
    reproach.  However, his failure to  make  an  express  finding  on  the
    credibility of this explanation does  not  translate  into  a  material
    error of law.  For, in finding that the death certificate was  "genuine
    and authentic", the Judge was accepting the evidence  of  the  sponsor,
    recorded earlier at paragraph [11], that the claimant's mother had died
    in 2006.  The Judge had had the benefit of receiving oral evidence from
    the sponsor, and the Presenting Officer had had the opportunity to test
    such evidence  in  cross-examination.   The  Judge  found  the  sponsor
    credible in his account of what had happened in 2006, and subsequently,
    with regard to the claimant's upbringing. Against this background,  the
    finding in paragraph [25] that the claimant's mother died in  2006  was
    both fully sustainable and adequately reasoned.

16. As the appeal is governed by the new  regime,  an  appeal  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance for the purposes of settlement could only be
    pursued on the basis that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  thereby
    refused a human rights claim,  and  the  decision  was  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  By the same token,  the  Judge
    should have formally allowed the appeal  on  human  rights  (Article  8
    ECHR) grounds, rather than allowing it under the Rules.

17. However, as Mr Tufan conceded, the claimant was pursuing a deemed human
    rights appeal; and, in allowing the appeal under the Rules,  which  are
    presumptively human rights-compliant, the Judge is to be understood  as
    allowing the appeal on the ground that the decision is  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 2 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

