
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/03256/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 February 2016                      |On 15 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             mrs hanaa albalili
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J S Law (the judge), promulgated on 28 November 2015, in
    which he dismissed the appeal.  The appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had been against a refusal of entry clearance dated 15 July 2015.   The
    application for entry clearance had been based upon the family  reunion
    provisions of the Immigration Rules, namely paragraph 352A (the sponsor
    is a refugee in this country).


 2. The judge dealt with  the  appeal  under  Rule  19  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's Procedure Rules 2014.  This provides that the  Tribunal  may
    decide an appeal without a hearing if:
         "a party has failed to comply with a provision of these Rules or  a
         direction of the Tribunal and the Tribunal is satisfied that in all
         the circumstances including the  extent  of  the  failure  and  any
         reasons for it, it is appropriate to determine the appeal without a
         hearing."


 3. The judge proceeded on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    submit grounds of appeal.  He was of the view that no  explanation  had
    been provided for the failure. He  therefore  exercised  his  power  to
    decide the appeal without a hearing.  Having done so he then  concluded
    that the Appellant had failed to make out her case in  respect  of  the
    Respondent's decision under the Rules and therefore the appeal  failed.




 4. The Appellant appealed the judge's decision on the basis that  in  fact
    grounds of appeal had been lodged together with the notice  of  appeal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    21 January 2016.

The hearing before me
 5. Having considered the relevant papers Mr Whitwell took  the  very  fair
    and sensible view that grounds of appeal had in fact been sent in  with
    the notice of appeal and that therefore the judge  was  wrong  to  have
    dealt with the appeal on the basis that he  did.   Mr  Whitwell  agreed
    that the only proper means of disposal was to remit this appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.


Decision on error of law
 6. It is clear to me that the Appellant  did  in  fact  lodge  grounds  of
    appeal together with the notice of appeal.  I have in the papers before
    me a copy of the notice of appeal dated 11 August  2015.   Attached  to
    this notice of appeal are the grounds of appeal.  Both  documents  have
    at the top of their respective pages the same transmission  date,  that
    being 11 August 2015, together with the fax number of  the  Appellant's
    legal representative.


 7. Further, in  a  prompt  response  to  a  request  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it is also clear that the  Appellant's  legal  representative
    then re-submitted the grounds of appeal. Evidence of this is  contained
    in the legal representative's email to the First-tier Tribunal dated  8
    September 2015.  For some reason the judge was unaware of the fact that
    the grounds of appeal had been lodged (and then  're-lodged')  when  he
    made his decision on 24 November 2015.  That is unfortunate.

 8. It is quite obvious that there was a  procedural  irregularity  in  the
    determination of this appeal.  It is also  clear  that  the  error  was
    material and therefore I set aside the judge's decision.



Disposal
 9. This appeal clearly needs to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The effect of the judge's error has been the Appellant has not had  any
    hearing at all.


10. Therefore I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a  complete
    re-hearing and I issue relevant directions below.

11. I was informed by Mr Moran that the Appellant is now pregnant  and  due
    to give birth in the fairly near future. We have endeavoured to  fix  a
    date for the remitted hearing as soon as possible. It must of course be
    borne in mind that the appeal will  only  be  able  to  deal  with  the
    factual situation as it pertained  to  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision.

Anonymity
12. No direction has been made thus far, and none has been sought from  me.
    I make no direction.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


No anonymity direction is made.


Directions to the parties

    1. The Appellant shall file and serve on the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
       Respondent and further evidence relied upon no later  than  21  days
       prior to the next hearing;


    2. Both parties shall comply with any further directions issued by  the
       First-tier Tribunal.


Directions to Administration

    1. This appeal is remitted to the Taylor House hearing  centre,  to  be
       heard afresh on 10 June 2016, not before First-tier Tribunal Judge J
       Law;


    2. An Arabic interpreter is required;

    3. There is a 1 hour time estimate.

Signed                                  Date: 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

