

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/03236/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 October 2019                    |On 04 November 2019                  |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                               MOUZAOUI KAMEL
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr M. Murphy, instructed by Inayat Solicitors
For the respondent:          Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  29  January
    2019  to  refuse  a  human  right  claim  based  on  the  private  life
    requirement of 20 years' long residence under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)
    of the immigration rules.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Nixon ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 30 May  2019.  She  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had been continuously resident in the UK since 2000 (a period
    of 18-19 years) [17]. The judge was not  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's period  of  residence  from  1997-1999  was
    sufficient to show  that  he  was  continuously  resident  during  that
    period. She made the following findings:

                 "18.  I am not satisfied however, even on the low  standard
                 of proof necessary, that he has shown that he has  been  in
                 the UK continuously for 20 years or  more  as  required  by
                 paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii). I have seen a  letter  from  Rail
                 Gourmet UK Ltd dated 22nd December 1997 that  he  had  been
                 working for them part time since March 1997 and I have seen
                 some payslips from 1997, 1998 and 1999. As conceded  by  Mr
                 Murphy there are some missing and indeed, doing the best  I
                 can  from  what  I  have  seen,  I  am  unable,  doing  the
                 calculations from the amounts of taxable gross  pay  shown,
                 to find that he has shown that he did not leave the country
                 for any periods of time.


                    19.      The appellant has stated that  he  remained  in
                 the UK from the time of his arrival and did not  leave.  In
                 the absence of supporting evidence to this effect, I am not
                 prepared to take his word for it. It is clear that he is  a
                 man who has used dishonesty to enter the  country  under  a
                 false name and using a false passport and he has  continued
                 to work and register for free medical treatment using those
                 false details. I find that such long lasting dishonesty has
                 an adverse effect on his credibility,  notwithstanding  his
                 plausible explanation for continuing with the deception, as
                 he did not want to be found out. I have seen a short letter
                 from Sofiane Merakchi dated 26th April 2017 stating that he
                 has known the appellant from March  1997  but  he  did  not
                 attend the hearing. His letter does not  state  where  they
                 met, how often they saw each  other  and  how  long  passed
                 between meetings. I therefore cannot rely on this  document
                 to 'fill the gap' and show that the appellant  remained  in
                 the UK. I find therefore that the appellant has  failed  to
                 show   that   he   meets   the   criteria   of    paragraph
                 276ADE(1)(iii)."

3.    The judge went  on  to  make  findings  with  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules. She concluded that it might  be
    difficult for him to re-establish himself in Algeria, but he  continued
    to have linguistic, cultural and familial  connections.  She  concluded
    that there would not be 'very significant obstacles' to his integration
    [20]. The judge then conducted a wider assessment of Article 8  outside
    the rules. She stated that the appellant had lived in the  UK  "for  at
    least 17 years" and accepted that it was likely that he had established
    a private life in the UK. She accepted that removal in  consequence  of
    the decision would interfere with that private life but concluded  that
    it would be proportionate having taken into account the public interest
    considerations in section 117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002") [21].

4.    The original grounds of appeal made general submissions but  were  not
    clearly particularised. At the hearing, Mr Murphy distilled the grounds
    into the following two points:

       i) The hearing was procedurally unfair because the judge  failed  to
          put the issue of whether the appellant had left  the  country  in
          the period 1997-1999 to him at the hearing given that  there  was
          no Home Office Presenting Officer at the and that specific  issue
          had not been raised in the decision letter.

      ii) The judge made inconsistent findings  regarding  the  appellant's
          length of residence. At [17] she made a clear finding that he had
          been in the UK for a period of 18-19 years, but  then  only  took
          into account 17 years of residence at [21] in assessing Article 8
          outside the rules.

Decision and reasons

5.    The first ground of appeal has no merit. The question  of  whether  he
    had been continuously resident was not a new issue that  needed  to  be
    put to the appellant  in  the  absence  of  a  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer. The burden of proof was on the appellant to show that  he  had
    been continuously resident in the UK for a period of at least 20 years.
    The judge accepted that the combination of evidence, including evidence
    from a witness who attended the hearing, was sufficient to show that he
    had been continuously resident since 2000.

6.    The judge considered the fact that there was  some  evidence  to  show
    that the appellant was working at some stages during  the  period  from
    1997-1999. It was open to her to note that the documentary evidence did
    not cover the period sufficiently well for her to be satisfied  to  the
    required standard of proof  that  he  was  continuously  resident.  She
    considered other evidence from a friend that  might  have  supplemented
    the rather patchy evidence relating to his employment, but was entitled
    to conclude that little weight  could  be  given  to  the  letter  from
    Sofiane Merakchi because he did not attend  to  give  evidence  and  it
    contained little detail. Mr Murphy repeatedly  argued  that  the  judge
    failed to put to the appellant that he  might  have  left  the  country
    during that period, but I do not agree that fairness required her to do
    so. The appellant's evidence was that he remained in the UK  throughout
    the period. The judge gave adequate reasons to explain why she was  not
    prepared to accept his oral evidence on face value. Those findings were
    unarguably open to her to make on the evidence  given  the  appellant's
    long-standing use of false documents  and  deception  [19].  The  judge
    carried out the task of assessing whether the appellant had  discharged
    the burden of proof. It is understandable that the appellant  disagrees
    with the decision, but her findings were within a range  of  reasonable
    responses to the evidence. If the appellant obtains further and  better
    evidence for the relevant period from 1997-1999 he can put  it  to  the
    Secretary of State in a fresh application.

7.    The second ground is equally unarguable. I  accept  that  the  judge's
    finding at [17] is clear and unambiguous. She was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had been continuously resident since 2000. When she conducted
    her assessment outside the rules her finding that he had been  resident
    for 17 years was inconsistent  with  her  earlier  finding.  Mr  Murphy
    sought to persuade me  that  inaccuracy  of  two  years  could  make  a
    material difference because the  closer  to  20  years'  residence  the
    appellant was, the more weight should be placed on his private life. He
    referred to what was said at [56] in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ
    387.

8.    It is trite law that there is no principle of 'near miss'  although  I
    accept that in a human rights assessment the facts of each case must be
    evaluated properly and appropriate weight should be given to a person's
    length of residence and  the  strength  of  any  ties  that  they  have
    established during that time. However, it is important to note that the
    underlying immigration decisions in SS (Congo) were made at a time when
    the public interest factors contained in section 117B NIAA 2002 had not
    been introduced.

9.    In this case, the judge was obliged  to  give  little  weight  to  the
    appellant's private life established at a time when he was remaining in
    the UK unlawfully. I was not referred to any evidence that showed  that
    the difference between 17 years or 19 years residence would  have  made
    any material difference to the judge's overall conclusion. Either  way,
    she considered the fact that the appellant had been resident in the  UK
    for a  significant  period.  She  had  found  that  his  removal  would
    interfere with his private life but was  obliged  by  statute  to  give
    little weight to it in the balancing exercise given that the  appellant
    had failed to produce sufficient evidence  to  show  that  he  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the rules and there were no
    other compelling factors, such as family or children in  the  UK,  that
    might render his removal disproportionate.

10.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  The
    decision shall stand.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law


Signed   [pic]   Date   30 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








